GAMING
(230 ILCS 10/) Illinois Gambling Act.
    (230 ILCS 10/1) (from Ch. 120, par. 2401)
    Sec. 1. Short title. This Act shall be known and may be cited as the Illinois Gambling Act.
(Source: P.A. 101-31, eff. 6-28-19.)

    (230 ILCS 10/2) (from Ch. 120, par. 2402)
    Sec. 2. Legislative intent.
    (a) This Act is intended to benefit the people of the State of Illinois by assisting economic development, promoting Illinois tourism, and increasing the amount of revenues available to the State to assist and support education, and to defray State expenses.
    (b) While authorization of riverboat and casino gambling will enhance investment, beautification, development and tourism in Illinois, it is recognized that it will do so successfully only if public confidence and trust in the credibility and integrity of the gambling operations and the regulatory process is maintained. Therefore, regulatory provisions of this Act are designed to strictly regulate the facilities, persons, associations and practices related to gambling operations pursuant to the police powers of the State, including comprehensive law enforcement supervision.
    (c) The Illinois Gaming Board established under this Act should, as soon as possible, inform each applicant for an owners license of the Board's intent to grant or deny a license.
(Source: P.A. 101-31, eff. 6-28-19.)

    (230 ILCS 10/3) (from Ch. 120, par. 2403)
    Sec. 3. Gambling authorized.
    (a) Riverboat and casino gambling operations and gaming operations pursuant to an organization gaming license, as defined in this Act, are hereby authorized to the extent that they are carried out in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
    (b) This Act does not apply to the pari-mutuel system of wagering used or intended to be used in connection with the horse-race meetings as authorized under the Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975, lottery games authorized under the Illinois Lottery Law, bingo authorized under the Bingo License and Tax Act, charitable games authorized under the Charitable Games Act or pull tabs and jar games conducted under the Illinois Pull Tabs and Jar Games Act. This Act applies to gaming by an organization gaming licensee authorized under the Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975 to the extent provided in that Act and in this Act.
    (c) Riverboat gambling conducted pursuant to this Act may be authorized upon any water within the State of Illinois or any water other than Lake Michigan which constitutes a boundary of the State of Illinois. Notwithstanding any provision in this subsection (c) to the contrary, a licensee that receives its license pursuant to subsection (e-5) of Section 7 may conduct riverboat gambling on Lake Michigan from a home dock located on Lake Michigan subject to any limitations contained in Section 7. Notwithstanding any provision in this subsection (c) to the contrary, a licensee may conduct gambling at its home dock facility as provided in Sections 7 and 11. A licensee may conduct riverboat gambling authorized under this Act regardless of whether it conducts excursion cruises. A licensee may permit the continuous ingress and egress of passengers for the purpose of gambling.
    (d) Gambling that is conducted in accordance with this Act using slot machines and video games of chance and other electronic gambling games as defined in both this Act and the Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975 is authorized.
(Source: P.A. 101-31, eff. 6-28-19.)

    (230 ILCS 10/4) (from Ch. 120, par. 2404)
    Sec. 4. Definitions. As used in this Act:
    "Board" means the Illinois Gaming Board.
    "Occupational license" means a license issued by the Board to a person or entity to perform an occupation which the Board has identified as requiring a license to engage in riverboat gambling, casino gambling, or gaming pursuant to an organization gaming license issued under this Act in Illinois.
    "Gambling game" includes, but is not limited to, baccarat, twenty-one, poker, craps, slot machine, video game of chance, roulette wheel, klondike table, punchboard, faro layout, keno layout, numbers ticket, push card, jar ticket, or pull tab which is authorized by the Board as a wagering device under this Act.
    "Riverboat" means a self-propelled excursion boat, a permanently moored barge, or permanently moored barges that are permanently fixed together to operate as one vessel, on which lawful gambling is authorized and licensed as provided in this Act.
    "Slot machine" means any mechanical, electrical, or other device, contrivance, or machine that is authorized by the Board as a wagering device under this Act which, upon insertion of a coin, currency, token, or similar object therein, or upon payment of any consideration whatsoever, is available to play or operate, the play or operation of which may deliver or entitle the person playing or operating the machine to receive cash, premiums, merchandise, tokens, or anything of value whatsoever, whether the payoff is made automatically from the machine or in any other manner whatsoever. A slot machine:
        (1) may utilize spinning reels or video displays or
    	
both;
        (2) may or may not dispense coins, tickets, or tokens
    	
to winning patrons;
        (3) may use an electronic credit system for receiving
    	
wagers and making payouts; and
        (4) may simulate a table game.
    "Slot machine" does not include table games authorized by the Board as a wagering device under this Act.
    "Managers license" means a license issued by the Board to a person or entity to manage gambling operations conducted by the State pursuant to Section 7.3.
    "Dock" means the location where a riverboat moors for the purpose of embarking passengers for and disembarking passengers from the riverboat.
    "Gross receipts" means the total amount of money exchanged for the purchase of chips, tokens, or electronic cards by riverboat patrons.
    "Adjusted gross receipts" means the gross receipts less winnings paid to wagerers.
    "Cheat" means to alter the selection of criteria which determine the result of a gambling game or the amount or frequency of payment in a gambling game.
    "Gambling operation" means the conduct of gambling games authorized under this Act upon a riverboat or in a casino or authorized under this Act and the Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975 at an organization gaming facility.
    "License bid" means the lump sum amount of money that an applicant bids and agrees to pay the State in return for an owners license that is issued or re-issued on or after July 1, 2003.
    "Table game" means a live gaming apparatus upon which gaming is conducted or that determines an outcome that is the object of a wager, including, but not limited to, baccarat, twenty-one, blackjack, poker, craps, roulette wheel, klondike table, punchboard, faro layout, keno layout, numbers ticket, push card, jar ticket, pull tab, or other similar games that are authorized by the Board as a wagering device under this Act. "Table game" does not include slot machines or video games of chance.
    The terms "minority person", "woman", and "person with a disability" shall have the same meaning as defined in Section 2 of the Business Enterprise for Minorities, Women, and Persons with Disabilities Act.
    "Casino" means a facility at which lawful gambling is authorized as provided in this Act.
    "Owners license" means a license to conduct riverboat or casino gambling operations, but does not include an organization gaming license.
    "Licensed owner" means a person who holds an owners license.
    "Organization gaming facility" means that portion of an organization licensee's racetrack facilities at which gaming authorized under Section 7.7 is conducted.
    "Organization gaming license" means a license issued by the Illinois Gaming Board under Section 7.7 of this Act authorizing gaming pursuant to that Section at an organization gaming facility.
    "Organization gaming licensee" means an entity that holds an organization gaming license.
    "Organization licensee" means an entity authorized by the Illinois Racing Board to conduct pari-mutuel wagering in accordance with the Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975. With respect only to gaming pursuant to an organization gaming license, "organization licensee" includes the authorization for gaming created under subsection (a) of Section 56 of the Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975.
(Source: P.A. 100-391, eff. 8-25-17; 101-31, eff. 6-28-19.)

    (230 ILCS 10/5) (from Ch. 120, par. 2405)
    Sec. 5. Gaming Board.
    (a) (1) There is hereby established the Illinois Gaming Board, which shall have the powers and duties specified in this Act, and all other powers necessary and proper to fully and effectively execute this Act for the purpose of administering, regulating, and enforcing the system of riverboat and casino gambling established by this Act and gaming pursuant to an organization gaming license issued under this Act. Its jurisdiction shall extend under this Act to every person, association, corporation, partnership and trust involved in riverboat and casino gambling operations and gaming pursuant to an organization gaming license issued under this Act in the State of Illinois.
    (2) The Board shall consist of 5 members to be appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate, one of whom shall be designated by the Governor to be chairperson. Each member shall have a reasonable knowledge of the practice, procedure and principles of gambling operations. Each member shall either be a resident of Illinois or shall certify that he or she will become a resident of Illinois before taking office.
    On and after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 101st General Assembly, new appointees to the Board must include the following:
        (A) One member who has received, at a minimum, a
    	
bachelor's degree from an accredited school and at least 10 years of verifiable experience in the fields of investigation and law enforcement.
        (B) One member who is a certified public accountant
    	
with experience in auditing and with knowledge of complex corporate structures and transactions.
        (C) One member who has 5 years' experience as a
    	
principal, senior officer, or director of a company or business with either material responsibility for the daily operations and management of the overall company or business or material responsibility for the policy making of the company or business.
        (D) One member who is an attorney licensed to
    	
practice law in Illinois for at least 5 years.
    Notwithstanding any provision of this subsection (a), the requirements of subparagraphs (A) through (D) of this paragraph (2) shall not apply to any person reappointed pursuant to paragraph (3).
    No more than 3 members of the Board may be from the same political party. No Board member shall, within a period of one year immediately preceding nomination, have been employed or received compensation or fees for services from a person or entity, or its parent or affiliate, that has engaged in business with the Board, a licensee, or a licensee under the Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975. Board members must publicly disclose all prior affiliations with gaming interests, including any compensation, fees, bonuses, salaries, and other reimbursement received from a person or entity, or its parent or affiliate, that has engaged in business with the Board, a licensee, or a licensee under the Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975. This disclosure must be made within 30 days after nomination but prior to confirmation by the Senate and must be made available to the members of the Senate.
    (3) The terms of office of the Board members shall be 3 years, except that the terms of office of the initial Board members appointed pursuant to this Act will commence from the effective date of this Act and run as follows: one for a term ending July 1, 1991, 2 for a term ending July 1, 1992, and 2 for a term ending July 1, 1993. Upon the expiration of the foregoing terms, the successors of such members shall serve a term for 3 years and until their successors are appointed and qualified for like terms. Vacancies in the Board shall be filled for the unexpired term in like manner as original appointments. Each member of the Board shall be eligible for reappointment at the discretion of the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate.
    (4) Each member of the Board shall receive $300 for each day the Board meets and for each day the member conducts any hearing pursuant to this Act. Each member of the Board shall also be reimbursed for all actual and necessary expenses and disbursements incurred in the execution of official duties.
    (5) No person shall be appointed a member of the Board or continue to be a member of the Board who is, or whose spouse, child or parent is, a member of the board of directors of, or a person financially interested in, any gambling operation subject to the jurisdiction of this Board, or any race track, race meeting, racing association or the operations thereof subject to the jurisdiction of the Illinois Racing Board. No Board member shall hold any other public office. No person shall be a member of the Board who is not of good moral character or who has been convicted of, or is under indictment for, a felony under the laws of Illinois or any other state, or the United States.
    (5.5) No member of the Board shall engage in any political activity. For the purposes of this Section, "political" means any activity in support of or in connection with any campaign for federal, State, or local elective office or any political organization, but does not include activities (i) relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action (as those terms are defined in Section 2 of the Lobbyist Registration Act), (ii) relating to collective bargaining, or (iii) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official State duties or governmental and public service functions.
    (6) Any member of the Board may be removed by the Governor for neglect of duty, misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office or for engaging in any political activity.
    (7) Before entering upon the discharge of the duties of his office, each member of the Board shall take an oath that he will faithfully execute the duties of his office according to the laws of the State and the rules and regulations adopted therewith and shall give bond to the State of Illinois, approved by the Governor, in the sum of $25,000. Every such bond, when duly executed and approved, shall be recorded in the office of the Secretary of State. Whenever the Governor determines that the bond of any member of the Board has become or is likely to become invalid or insufficient, he shall require such member forthwith to renew his bond, which is to be approved by the Governor. Any member of the Board who fails to take oath and give bond within 30 days from the date of his appointment, or who fails to renew his bond within 30 days after it is demanded by the Governor, shall be guilty of neglect of duty and may be removed by the Governor. The cost of any bond given by any member of the Board under this Section shall be taken to be a part of the necessary expenses of the Board.
    (7.5) For the examination of all mechanical, electromechanical, or electronic table games, slot machines, slot accounting systems, sports wagering systems, and other electronic gaming equipment, and the field inspection of such systems, games, and machines, for compliance with this Act, the Board shall utilize the services of independent outside testing laboratories that have been accredited in accordance with ISO/IEC 17025 by an accreditation body that is a signatory to the International Laboratory Accreditation Cooperation Mutual Recognition Agreement signifying they are qualified to perform such examinations. Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, the Board shall consider the licensing of independent outside testing laboratory applicants in accordance with procedures established by the Board by rule. The Board shall not withhold its approval of an independent outside testing laboratory license applicant that has been accredited as required under this paragraph (7.5) and is licensed in gaming jurisdictions comparable to Illinois. Upon the finalization of required rules, the Board shall license independent testing laboratories and accept the test reports of any licensed testing laboratory of the system's, game's, or machine manufacturer's choice, notwithstanding the existence of contracts between the Board and any independent testing laboratory.
    (8) The Board shall employ such personnel as may be necessary to carry out its functions and shall determine the salaries of all personnel, except those personnel whose salaries are determined under the terms of a collective bargaining agreement. No person shall be employed to serve the Board who is, or whose spouse, parent or child is, an official of, or has a financial interest in or financial relation with, any operator engaged in gambling operations within this State or any organization engaged in conducting horse racing within this State. For the one year immediately preceding employment, an employee shall not have been employed or received compensation or fees for services from a person or entity, or its parent or affiliate, that has engaged in business with the Board, a licensee, or a licensee under the Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975. Any employee violating these prohibitions shall be subject to termination of employment.
    (9) An Administrator shall perform any and all duties that the Board shall assign him. The salary of the Administrator shall be determined by the Board and, in addition, he shall be reimbursed for all actual and necessary expenses incurred by him in discharge of his official duties. The Administrator shall keep records of all proceedings of the Board and shall preserve all records, books, documents and other papers belonging to the Board or entrusted to its care. The Administrator shall devote his full time to the duties of the office and shall not hold any other office or employment.
    (b) The Board shall have general responsibility for the implementation of this Act. Its duties include, without limitation, the following:
        (1) To decide promptly and in reasonable order all
    	
license applications. Any party aggrieved by an action of the Board denying, suspending, revoking, restricting or refusing to renew a license may request a hearing before the Board. A request for a hearing must be made to the Board in writing within 5 days after service of notice of the action of the Board. Notice of the action of the Board shall be served either by personal delivery or by certified mail, postage prepaid, to the aggrieved party. Notice served by certified mail shall be deemed complete on the business day following the date of such mailing. The Board shall conduct any such hearings promptly and in reasonable order;
        (2) To conduct all hearings pertaining to civil
    	
violations of this Act or rules and regulations promulgated hereunder;
        (3) To promulgate such rules and regulations as in
    	
its judgment may be necessary to protect or enhance the credibility and integrity of gambling operations authorized by this Act and the regulatory process hereunder;
        (4) To provide for the establishment and collection
    	
of all license and registration fees and taxes imposed by this Act and the rules and regulations issued pursuant hereto. All such fees and taxes shall be deposited into the State Gaming Fund;
        (5) To provide for the levy and collection of
    	
penalties and fines for the violation of provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder. All such fines and penalties shall be deposited into the Education Assistance Fund, created by Public Act 86-0018, of the State of Illinois;
        (6) To be present through its inspectors and agents
    	
any time gambling operations are conducted on any riverboat, in any casino, or at any organization gaming facility for the purpose of certifying the revenue thereof, receiving complaints from the public, and conducting such other investigations into the conduct of the gambling games and the maintenance of the equipment as from time to time the Board may deem necessary and proper;
        (7) To review and rule upon any complaint by a
    	
licensee regarding any investigative procedures of the State which are unnecessarily disruptive of gambling operations. The need to inspect and investigate shall be presumed at all times. The disruption of a licensee's operations shall be proved by clear and convincing evidence, and establish that: (A) the procedures had no reasonable law enforcement purposes, and (B) the procedures were so disruptive as to unreasonably inhibit gambling operations;
        (8) To hold at least one meeting each quarter of the
    	
fiscal year. In addition, special meetings may be called by the Chairman or any 2 Board members upon 72 hours written notice to each member. All Board meetings shall be subject to the Open Meetings Act. Three members of the Board shall constitute a quorum, and 3 votes shall be required for any final determination by the Board. The Board shall keep a complete and accurate record of all its meetings. A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business, for the performance of any duty, or for the exercise of any power which this Act requires the Board members to transact, perform or exercise en banc, except that, upon order of the Board, one of the Board members or an administrative law judge designated by the Board may conduct any hearing provided for under this Act or by Board rule and may recommend findings and decisions to the Board. The Board member or administrative law judge conducting such hearing shall have all powers and rights granted to the Board in this Act. The record made at the time of the hearing shall be reviewed by the Board, or a majority thereof, and the findings and decision of the majority of the Board shall constitute the order of the Board in such case;
        (9) To maintain records which are separate and
    	
distinct from the records of any other State board or commission. Such records shall be available for public inspection and shall accurately reflect all Board proceedings;
        (10) To file a written annual report with the
    	
Governor on or before July 1 each year and such additional reports as the Governor may request. The annual report shall include a statement of receipts and disbursements by the Board, actions taken by the Board, and any additional information and recommendations which the Board may deem valuable or which the Governor may request;
        (11) (Blank);
        (12) (Blank);
        (13) To assume responsibility for administration and
    	
enforcement of the Video Gaming Act;
        (13.1) To assume responsibility for the
    	
administration and enforcement of operations at organization gaming facilities pursuant to this Act and the Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975;
        (13.2) To assume responsibility for the
    	
administration and enforcement of the Sports Wagering Act; and
        (14) To adopt, by rule, a code of conduct governing
    	
Board members and employees that ensure, to the maximum extent possible, that persons subject to this Code avoid situations, relationships, or associations that may represent or lead to a conflict of interest.
    Internal controls and changes submitted by licensees must be reviewed and either approved or denied with cause within 90 days after receipt of submission is deemed final by the Illinois Gaming Board. In the event an internal control submission or change does not meet the standards set by the Board, staff of the Board must provide technical assistance to the licensee to rectify such deficiencies within 90 days after the initial submission and the revised submission must be reviewed and approved or denied with cause within 90 days after the date the revised submission is deemed final by the Board. For the purposes of this paragraph, "with cause" means that the approval of the submission would jeopardize the integrity of gaming. In the event the Board staff has not acted within the timeframe, the submission shall be deemed approved.
    (c) The Board shall have jurisdiction over and shall supervise all gambling operations governed by this Act. The Board shall have all powers necessary and proper to fully and effectively execute the provisions of this Act, including, but not limited to, the following:
        (1) To investigate applicants and determine the
    	
eligibility of applicants for licenses and to select among competing applicants the applicants which best serve the interests of the citizens of Illinois.
        (2) To have jurisdiction and supervision over all
    	
riverboat gambling operations authorized under this Act and all persons in places where gambling operations are conducted.
        (3) To promulgate rules and regulations for the
    	
purpose of administering the provisions of this Act and to prescribe rules, regulations and conditions under which all gambling operations subject to this Act shall be conducted. Such rules and regulations are to provide for the prevention of practices detrimental to the public interest and for the best interests of riverboat gambling, including rules and regulations regarding the inspection of organization gaming facilities, casinos, and riverboats, and the review of any permits or licenses necessary to operate a riverboat, casino, or organization gaming facility under any laws or regulations applicable to riverboats, casinos, or organization gaming facilities and to impose penalties for violations thereof.
        (4) To enter the office, riverboats, casinos,
    	
organization gaming facilities, and other facilities, or other places of business of a licensee, where evidence of the compliance or noncompliance with the provisions of this Act is likely to be found.
        (5) To investigate alleged violations of this Act or
    	
the rules of the Board and to take appropriate disciplinary action against a licensee or a holder of an occupational license for a violation, or institute appropriate legal action for enforcement, or both.
        (6) To adopt standards for the licensing of all
    	
persons and entities under this Act, as well as for electronic or mechanical gambling games, and to establish fees for such licenses.
        (7) To adopt appropriate standards for all
    	
organization gaming facilities, riverboats, casinos, and other facilities authorized under this Act.
        (8) To require that the records, including financial
    	
or other statements of any licensee under this Act, shall be kept in such manner as prescribed by the Board and that any such licensee involved in the ownership or management of gambling operations submit to the Board an annual balance sheet and profit and loss statement, list of the stockholders or other persons having a 1% or greater beneficial interest in the gambling activities of each licensee, and any other information the Board deems necessary in order to effectively administer this Act and all rules, regulations, orders and final decisions promulgated under this Act.
        (9) To conduct hearings, issue subpoenas for the
    	
attendance of witnesses and subpoenas duces tecum for the production of books, records and other pertinent documents in accordance with the Illinois Administrative Procedure Act, and to administer oaths and affirmations to the witnesses, when, in the judgment of the Board, it is necessary to administer or enforce this Act or the Board rules.
        (10) To prescribe a form to be used by any licensee
    	
involved in the ownership or management of gambling operations as an application for employment for their employees.
        (11) To revoke or suspend licenses, as the Board may
    	
see fit and in compliance with applicable laws of the State regarding administrative procedures, and to review applications for the renewal of licenses. The Board may suspend an owners license or an organization gaming license without notice or hearing upon a determination that the safety or health of patrons or employees is jeopardized by continuing a gambling operation conducted under that license. The suspension may remain in effect until the Board determines that the cause for suspension has been abated. The Board may revoke an owners license or organization gaming license upon a determination that the licensee has not made satisfactory progress toward abating the hazard.
        (12) To eject or exclude or authorize the ejection or
    	
exclusion of, any person from gambling facilities where that person is in violation of this Act, rules and regulations thereunder, or final orders of the Board, or where such person's conduct or reputation is such that his or her presence within the gambling facilities may, in the opinion of the Board, call into question the honesty and integrity of the gambling operations or interfere with the orderly conduct thereof; provided that the propriety of such ejection or exclusion is subject to subsequent hearing by the Board.
        (13) To require all licensees of gambling operations
    	
to utilize a cashless wagering system whereby all players' money is converted to tokens, electronic cards, or chips which shall be used only for wagering in the gambling establishment.
        (14) (Blank).
        (15) To suspend, revoke or restrict licenses, to
    	
require the removal of a licensee or an employee of a licensee for a violation of this Act or a Board rule or for engaging in a fraudulent practice, and to impose civil penalties of up to $5,000 against individuals and up to $10,000 or an amount equal to the daily gross receipts, whichever is larger, against licensees for each violation of any provision of the Act, any rules adopted by the Board, any order of the Board or any other action which, in the Board's discretion, is a detriment or impediment to gambling operations.
        (16) To hire employees to gather information, conduct
    	
investigations and carry out any other tasks contemplated under this Act.
        (17) To establish minimum levels of insurance to be
    	
maintained by licensees.
        (18) To authorize a licensee to sell or serve
    	
alcoholic liquors, wine or beer as defined in the Liquor Control Act of 1934 on board a riverboat or in a casino and to have exclusive authority to establish the hours for sale and consumption of alcoholic liquor on board a riverboat or in a casino, notwithstanding any provision of the Liquor Control Act of 1934 or any local ordinance, and regardless of whether the riverboat makes excursions. The establishment of the hours for sale and consumption of alcoholic liquor on board a riverboat or in a casino is an exclusive power and function of the State. A home rule unit may not establish the hours for sale and consumption of alcoholic liquor on board a riverboat or in a casino. This subdivision (18) is a denial and limitation of home rule powers and functions under subsection (h) of Section 6 of Article VII of the Illinois Constitution.
        (19) After consultation with the U.S. Army Corps of
    	
Engineers, to establish binding emergency orders upon the concurrence of a majority of the members of the Board regarding the navigability of water, relative to excursions, in the event of extreme weather conditions, acts of God or other extreme circumstances.
        (20) To delegate the execution of any of its powers
    	
under this Act for the purpose of administering and enforcing this Act and the rules adopted by the Board.
        (20.5) To approve any contract entered into on its
    	
behalf.
        (20.6) To appoint investigators to conduct
    	
investigations, searches, seizures, arrests, and other duties imposed under this Act, as deemed necessary by the Board. These investigators have and may exercise all of the rights and powers of peace officers, provided that these powers shall be limited to offenses or violations occurring or committed in a casino, in an organization gaming facility, or on a riverboat or dock, as defined in subsections (d) and (f) of Section 4, or as otherwise provided by this Act or any other law.
        (20.7) To contract with the Department of State
    	
Police for the use of trained and qualified State police officers and with the Department of Revenue for the use of trained and qualified Department of Revenue investigators to conduct investigations, searches, seizures, arrests, and other duties imposed under this Act and to exercise all of the rights and powers of peace officers, provided that the powers of Department of Revenue investigators under this subdivision (20.7) shall be limited to offenses or violations occurring or committed in a casino, in an organization gaming facility, or on a riverboat or dock, as defined in subsections (d) and (f) of Section 4, or as otherwise provided by this Act or any other law. In the event the Department of State Police or the Department of Revenue is unable to fill contracted police or investigative positions, the Board may appoint investigators to fill those positions pursuant to subdivision (20.6).
        (21) To adopt rules concerning the conduct of gaming
    	
pursuant to an organization gaming license issued under this Act.
        (22) To have the same jurisdiction and supervision
    	
over casinos and organization gaming facilities as the Board has over riverboats, including, but not limited to, the power to (i) investigate, review, and approve contracts as that power is applied to riverboats, (ii) adopt rules for administering the provisions of this Act, (iii) adopt standards for the licensing of all persons involved with a casino or organization gaming facility, (iv) investigate alleged violations of this Act by any person involved with a casino or organization gaming facility, and (v) require that records, including financial or other statements of any casino or organization gaming facility, shall be kept in such manner as prescribed by the Board.
        (23) To take any other action as may be reasonable or
    	
appropriate to enforce this Act and the rules adopted by the Board.
    (d) The Board may seek and shall receive the cooperation of the Department of State Police in conducting background investigations of applicants and in fulfilling its responsibilities under this Section. Costs incurred by the Department of State Police as a result of such cooperation shall be paid by the Board in conformance with the requirements of Section 2605-400 of the Department of State Police Law.
    (e) The Board must authorize to each investigator and to any other employee of the Board exercising the powers of a peace officer a distinct badge that, on its face, (i) clearly states that the badge is authorized by the Board and (ii) contains a unique identifying number. No other badge shall be authorized by the Board.
(Source: P.A. 100-1152, eff. 12-14-18; 101-31, eff. 6-28-19.)

    (230 ILCS 10/5.1) (from Ch. 120, par. 2405.1)
    (Text of Section before amendment by P.A. 101-652)
    Sec. 5.1. Disclosure of records.
    (a) Notwithstanding any applicable statutory provision to the contrary, the Board shall, on written request from any person, provide information furnished by an applicant or licensee concerning the applicant or licensee, his products, services or gambling enterprises and his business holdings, as follows:
        (1) The name, business address and business telephone
    	
number of any applicant or licensee.
        (2) An identification of any applicant or licensee
    	
including, if an applicant or licensee is not an individual, the names and addresses of all stockholders and directors, if the entity is a corporation; the names and addresses of all members, if the entity is a limited liability company; the names and addresses of all partners, both general and limited, if the entity is a partnership; and the names and addresses of all beneficiaries, if the entity is a trust. If an applicant or licensee has a pending registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, only the names of those persons or entities holding interest of 5% or more must be provided.
        (3) An identification of any business, including, if
    	
applicable, the state of incorporation or registration, in which an applicant or licensee or an applicant's or licensee's spouse or children has an equity interest of more than 1%. If an applicant or licensee is a corporation, partnership or other business entity, the applicant or licensee shall identify any other corporation, partnership or business entity in which it has an equity interest of 1% or more, including, if applicable, the state of incorporation or registration. This information need not be provided by a corporation, partnership or other business entity that has a pending registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
        (4) Whether an applicant or licensee has been
    	
indicted, convicted, pleaded guilty or nolo contendere, or forfeited bail concerning any criminal offense under the laws of any jurisdiction, either felony or misdemeanor (except for traffic violations), including the date, the name and location of the court, arresting agency and prosecuting agency, the case number, the offense, the disposition and the location and length of incarceration.
        (5) Whether an applicant or licensee has had any
    	
license or certificate issued by a licensing authority in Illinois or any other jurisdiction denied, restricted, suspended, revoked or not renewed and a statement describing the facts and circumstances concerning the denial, restriction, suspension, revocation or non-renewal, including the licensing authority, the date each such action was taken, and the reason for each such action.
        (6) Whether an applicant or licensee has ever filed
    	
or had filed against it a proceeding in bankruptcy or has ever been involved in any formal process to adjust, defer, suspend or otherwise work out the payment of any debt including the date of filing, the name and location of the court, the case and number of the disposition.
        (7) Whether an applicant or licensee has filed, or
    	
been served with a complaint or other notice filed with any public body, regarding the delinquency in the payment of, or a dispute over the filings concerning the payment of, any tax required under federal, State or local law, including the amount, type of tax, the taxing agency and time periods involved.
        (8) A statement listing the names and titles of all
    	
public officials or officers of any unit of government, and relatives of said public officials or officers who, directly or indirectly, own any financial interest in, have any beneficial interest in, are the creditors of or hold any debt instrument issued by, or hold or have any interest in any contractual or service relationship with, an applicant or licensee.
        (9) Whether an applicant or licensee has made,
    	
directly or indirectly, any political contribution, or any loans, donations or other payments, to any candidate or office holder, within 5 years from the date of filing the application, including the amount and the method of payment.
        (10) The name and business telephone number of the
    	
counsel representing an applicant or licensee in matters before the Board.
        (11) A description of any proposed or approved
    	
gambling operation, including the type of boat, home dock, or casino or gaming location, expected economic benefit to the community, anticipated or actual number of employees, any statement from an applicant or licensee regarding compliance with federal and State affirmative action guidelines, projected or actual admissions and projected or actual adjusted gross gaming receipts.
        (12) A description of the product or service to be
    	
supplied by an applicant for a supplier's license.
    (b) Notwithstanding any applicable statutory provision to the contrary, the Board shall, on written request from any person, also provide the following information:
        (1) The amount of the wagering tax and admission tax
    	
paid daily to the State of Illinois by the holder of an owner's license.
        (2) Whenever the Board finds an applicant for an
    	
owner's license unsuitable for licensing, a copy of the written letter outlining the reasons for the denial.
        (3) Whenever the Board has refused to grant leave for
    	
an applicant to withdraw his application, a copy of the letter outlining the reasons for the refusal.
    (c) Subject to the above provisions, the Board shall not disclose any information which would be barred by:
        (1) Section 7 of the Freedom of Information Act; or
        (2) The statutes, rules, regulations or
    	
intergovernmental agreements of any jurisdiction.
    (d) The Board may assess fees for the copying of information in accordance with Section 6 of the Freedom of Information Act.
(Source: P.A. 101-31, eff. 6-28-19.)
 
    (Text of Section after amendment by P.A. 101-652)
    Sec. 5.1. Disclosure of records.
    (a) Notwithstanding any applicable statutory provision to the contrary, the Board shall, on written request from any person, provide information furnished by an applicant or licensee concerning the applicant or licensee, his products, services or gambling enterprises and his business holdings, as follows:
        (1) The name, business address and business telephone
    	
number of any applicant or licensee.
        (2) An identification of any applicant or licensee
    	
including, if an applicant or licensee is not an individual, the names and addresses of all stockholders and directors, if the entity is a corporation; the names and addresses of all members, if the entity is a limited liability company; the names and addresses of all partners, both general and limited, if the entity is a partnership; and the names and addresses of all beneficiaries, if the entity is a trust. If an applicant or licensee has a pending registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, only the names of those persons or entities holding interest of 5% or more must be provided.
        (3) An identification of any business, including, if
    	
applicable, the state of incorporation or registration, in which an applicant or licensee or an applicant's or licensee's spouse or children has an equity interest of more than 1%. If an applicant or licensee is a corporation, partnership or other business entity, the applicant or licensee shall identify any other corporation, partnership or business entity in which it has an equity interest of 1% or more, including, if applicable, the state of incorporation or registration. This information need not be provided by a corporation, partnership or other business entity that has a pending registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
        (4) Whether an applicant or licensee has been
    	
indicted, convicted, pleaded guilty or nolo contendere, or pretrial release has been revoked concerning any criminal offense under the laws of any jurisdiction, either felony or misdemeanor (except for traffic violations), including the date, the name and location of the court, arresting agency and prosecuting agency, the case number, the offense, the disposition and the location and length of incarceration.
        (5) Whether an applicant or licensee has had any
    	
license or certificate issued by a licensing authority in Illinois or any other jurisdiction denied, restricted, suspended, revoked or not renewed and a statement describing the facts and circumstances concerning the denial, restriction, suspension, revocation or non-renewal, including the licensing authority, the date each such action was taken, and the reason for each such action.
        (6) Whether an applicant or licensee has ever filed
    	
or had filed against it a proceeding in bankruptcy or has ever been involved in any formal process to adjust, defer, suspend or otherwise work out the payment of any debt including the date of filing, the name and location of the court, the case and number of the disposition.
        (7) Whether an applicant or licensee has filed, or
    	
been served with a complaint or other notice filed with any public body, regarding the delinquency in the payment of, or a dispute over the filings concerning the payment of, any tax required under federal, State or local law, including the amount, type of tax, the taxing agency and time periods involved.
        (8) A statement listing the names and titles of all
    	
public officials or officers of any unit of government, and relatives of said public officials or officers who, directly or indirectly, own any financial interest in, have any beneficial interest in, are the creditors of or hold any debt instrument issued by, or hold or have any interest in any contractual or service relationship with, an applicant or licensee.
        (9) Whether an applicant or licensee has made,
    	
directly or indirectly, any political contribution, or any loans, donations or other payments, to any candidate or office holder, within 5 years from the date of filing the application, including the amount and the method of payment.
        (10) The name and business telephone number of the
    	
counsel representing an applicant or licensee in matters before the Board.
        (11) A description of any proposed or approved
    	
gambling operation, including the type of boat, home dock, or casino or gaming location, expected economic benefit to the community, anticipated or actual number of employees, any statement from an applicant or licensee regarding compliance with federal and State affirmative action guidelines, projected or actual admissions and projected or actual adjusted gross gaming receipts.
        (12) A description of the product or service to be
    	
supplied by an applicant for a supplier's license.
    (b) Notwithstanding any applicable statutory provision to the contrary, the Board shall, on written request from any person, also provide the following information:
        (1) The amount of the wagering tax and admission tax
    	
paid daily to the State of Illinois by the holder of an owner's license.
        (2) Whenever the Board finds an applicant for an
    	
owner's license unsuitable for licensing, a copy of the written letter outlining the reasons for the denial.
        (3) Whenever the Board has refused to grant leave for
    	
an applicant to withdraw his application, a copy of the letter outlining the reasons for the refusal.
    (c) Subject to the above provisions, the Board shall not disclose any information which would be barred by:
        (1) Section 7 of the Freedom of Information Act; or
        (2) The statutes, rules, regulations or
    	
intergovernmental agreements of any jurisdiction.
    (d) The Board may assess fees for the copying of information in accordance with Section 6 of the Freedom of Information Act.
(Source: P.A. 101-31, eff. 6-28-19; 101-652, eff. 1-1-23.)

    (230 ILCS 10/5.2)
    Sec. 5.2. Separation from Department of Revenue. As of July 1, 2009, all of the powers, duties, assets, liabilities, employees, contracts, property, records, pending business, and unexpended appropriations of the Department of Revenue related to the administration and enforcement of this Act are transferred to the Illinois Gaming Board.
    The status and rights of the transferred employees, and the rights of the State of Illinois and its agencies, under the Personnel Code and applicable collective bargaining agreements or under any pension, retirement, or annuity plan are not affected (except as provided in Sections 14-110 and 18-127 of the Illinois Pension Code) by that transfer or by any other provision of this amendatory Act of the 96th General Assembly.
    This Section is declarative of existing law.
(Source: P.A. 96-1392, eff. 1-1-11.)

    (230 ILCS 10/5.3)
    Sec. 5.3. Ethical conduct.
    (a) Officials and employees of the corporate authority of a host community must carry out their duties and responsibilities in such a manner as to promote and preserve public trust and confidence in the integrity and conduct of gaming.
    (b) Officials and employees of the corporate authority of a host community shall not use or attempt to use his or her official position to secure or attempt to secure any privilege, advantage, favor, or influence for himself or herself or others.
    (c) Officials and employees of the corporate authority of a host community may not have a financial interest, directly or indirectly, in his or her own name or in the name of any other person, partnership, association, trust, corporation, or other entity in any contract or subcontract for the performance of any work for a riverboat or casino that is located in the host community. This prohibition shall extend to the holding or acquisition of an interest in any entity identified by Board action that, in the Board's judgment, could represent the potential for or the appearance of a financial interest. The holding or acquisition of an interest in such entities through an indirect means, such as through a mutual fund, shall not be prohibited, except that the Board may identify specific investments or funds that, in its judgment, are so influenced by gaming holdings as to represent the potential for or the appearance of a conflict of interest.
    (d) Officials and employees of the corporate authority of a host community may not accept any gift, gratuity, service, compensation, travel, lodging, or thing of value, with the exception of unsolicited items of an incidental nature, from any person, corporation, or entity doing business with the riverboat or casino that is located in the host community.
    (e) Officials and employees of the corporate authority of a host community shall not, during the period that the person is an official or employee of the corporate authority or for a period of 2 years immediately after leaving such office, knowingly accept employment or receive compensation or fees for services from a person or entity, or its parent or affiliate, that has engaged in business with the riverboat or casino that is located in the host community that resulted in contracts with an aggregate value of at least $25,000 or if that official or employee has made a decision that directly applied to the person or entity, or its parent or affiliate.
    (f) A spouse, child, or parent of an official or employee of the corporate authority of a host community may not have a financial interest, directly or indirectly, in his or her own name or in the name of any other person, partnership, association, trust, corporation, or other entity in any contract or subcontract for the performance of any work for a riverboat or casino in the host community. This prohibition shall extend to the holding or acquisition of an interest in any entity identified by Board action that, in the judgment of the Board, could represent the potential for or the appearance of a conflict of interest. The holding or acquisition of an interest in such entities through an indirect means, such as through a mutual fund, shall not be prohibited, expect that the Board may identify specific investments or funds that, in its judgment, are so influenced by gaming holdings as to represent the potential for or the appearance of a conflict of interest.
    (g) A spouse, child, or parent of an official or employee of the corporate authority of a host community may not accept any gift, gratuity, service, compensation, travel, lodging, or thing of value, with the exception of unsolicited items of an incidental nature, from any person, corporation, or entity doing business with the riverboat or casino that is located in the host community.
    (h) A spouse, child, or parent of an official or employee of the corporate authority of a host community may not, during the period that the person is an official of the corporate authority or for a period of 2 years immediately after leaving such office or employment, knowingly accept employment or receive compensation or fees for services from a person or entity, or its parent or affiliate, that has engaged in business with the riverboat or casino that is located in the host community that resulted in contracts with an aggregate value of at least $25,000 or if that official or employee has made a decision that directly applied to the person or entity, or its parent or affiliate.
    (i) Officials and employees of the corporate authority of a host community shall not attempt, in any way, to influence any person or entity doing business with the riverboat or casino that is located in the host community or any officer, agent, or employee thereof to hire or contract with any person or entity for any compensated work.
    (j) Any communication between an official of the corporate authority of a host community and any applicant for an owners license in the host community, or an officer, director, or employee of a riverboat or casino in the host community, concerning any matter relating in any way to gaming shall be disclosed to the Board. Such disclosure shall be in writing by the official within 30 days after the communication and shall be filed with the Board. Disclosure must consist of the date of the communication, the identity and job title of the person with whom the communication was made, a brief summary of the communication, the action requested or recommended, all responses made, the identity and job title of the person making the response, and any other pertinent information. Public disclosure of the written summary provided to the Board and the Gaming Board shall be subject to the exemptions provided under the Freedom of Information Act.
    This subsection (j) shall not apply to communications regarding traffic, law enforcement, security, environmental issues, city services, transportation, or other routine matters concerning the ordinary operations of the riverboat or casino. For purposes of this subsection (j), "ordinary operations" means operations relating to the casino or riverboat facility other than the conduct of gambling activities, and "routine matters" includes the application for, issuance of, renewal of, and other processes associated with municipal permits and licenses.
    (k) Any official or employee who violates any provision of this Section is guilty of a Class 4 felony.
    (l) For purposes of this Section, "host community" or "host municipality" means a unit of local government that contains a riverboat or casino within its borders.
(Source: P.A. 101-31, eff. 6-28-19.)

    (230 ILCS 10/6) (from Ch. 120, par. 2406)
    Sec. 6. Application for owners license.
    (a) A qualified person may apply to the Board for an owners license to conduct a gambling operation as provided in this Act. The application shall be made on forms provided by the Board and shall contain such information as the Board prescribes, including but not limited to the identity of the riverboat on which such gambling operation is to be conducted, if applicable, and the exact location where such riverboat or casino will be located, a certification that the riverboat will be registered under this Act at all times during which gambling operations are conducted on board, detailed information regarding the ownership and management of the applicant, and detailed personal information regarding the applicant. Any application for an owners license to be re-issued on or after June 1, 2003 shall also include the applicant's license bid in a form prescribed by the Board. Information provided on the application shall be used as a basis for a thorough background investigation which the Board shall conduct with respect to each applicant. An incomplete application shall be cause for denial of a license by the Board.
    (a-5) In addition to any other information required under this Section, each application for an owners license must include the following information:
        (1) The history and success of the applicant and each
    	
person and entity disclosed under subsection (c) of this Section in developing tourism facilities ancillary to gaming, if applicable.
        (2) The likelihood that granting a license to the
    	
applicant will lead to the creation of quality, living wage jobs and permanent, full-time jobs for residents of the State and residents of the unit of local government that is designated as the home dock of the proposed facility where gambling is to be conducted by the applicant.
        (3) The projected number of jobs that would be
    	
created if the license is granted and the projected number of new employees at the proposed facility where gambling is to be conducted by the applicant.
        (4) The record, if any, of the applicant and its
    	
developer in meeting commitments to local agencies, community-based organizations, and employees at other locations where the applicant or its developer has performed similar functions as they would perform if the applicant were granted a license.
        (5) Identification of adverse effects that might be
    	
caused by the proposed facility where gambling is to be conducted by the applicant, including the costs of meeting increased demand for public health care, child care, public transportation, affordable housing, and social services, and a plan to mitigate those adverse effects.
        (6) The record, if any, of the applicant and its
    	
developer regarding compliance with:
            (A) federal, state, and local discrimination,
        	
wage and hour, disability, and occupational and environmental health and safety laws; and
            (B) state and local labor relations and
        	
employment laws.
        (7) The applicant's record, if any, in dealing with
    	
its employees and their representatives at other locations.
        (8) A plan concerning the utilization of
    	
minority-owned and women-owned businesses and concerning the hiring of minorities and women.
        (9) Evidence the applicant used its best efforts to
    	
reach a goal of 25% ownership representation by minority persons and 5% ownership representation by women.
    (b) Applicants shall submit with their application all documents, resolutions, and letters of support from the governing body that represents the municipality or county wherein the licensee will be located.
    (c) Each applicant shall disclose the identity of every person or entity having a greater than 1% direct or indirect pecuniary interest in the gambling operation with respect to which the license is sought. If the disclosed entity is a trust, the application shall disclose the names and addresses of all beneficiaries; if a corporation, the names and addresses of all stockholders and directors; if a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners, both general and limited.
    (d) An application shall be filed and considered in accordance with the rules of the Board. Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of $250,000. In addition, a nonrefundable fee of $50,000 shall be paid at the time of filing to defray the costs associated with the background investigation conducted by the Board. If the costs of the investigation exceed $50,000, the applicant shall pay the additional amount to the Board within 7 days after requested by the Board. If the costs of the investigation are less than $50,000, the applicant shall receive a refund of the remaining amount. All information, records, interviews, reports, statements, memoranda or other data supplied to or used by the Board in the course of its review or investigation of an application for a license or a renewal under this Act shall be privileged, strictly confidential and shall be used only for the purpose of evaluating an applicant for a license or a renewal. Such information, records, interviews, reports, statements, memoranda or other data shall not be admissible as evidence, nor discoverable in any action of any kind in any court or before any tribunal, board, agency or person, except for any action deemed necessary by the Board. The application fee shall be deposited into the State Gaming Fund.
    (e) The Board shall charge each applicant a fee set by the Department of State Police to defray the costs associated with the search and classification of fingerprints obtained by the Board with respect to the applicant's application. These fees shall be paid into the State Police Services Fund. In order to expedite the application process, the Board may establish rules allowing applicants to acquire criminal background checks and financial integrity reviews as part of the initial application process from a list of vendors approved by the Board.
    (f) The licensed owner shall be the person primarily responsible for the boat or casino itself. Only one gambling operation may be authorized by the Board on any riverboat or in any casino. The applicant must identify the riverboat or premises it intends to use and certify that the riverboat or premises: (1) has the authorized capacity required in this Act; (2) is accessible to persons with disabilities; and (3) is fully registered and licensed in accordance with any applicable laws.
    (g) A person who knowingly makes a false statement on an application is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
(Source: P.A. 101-31, eff. 6-28-19.)

    (230 ILCS 10/7) (from Ch. 120, par. 2407)
    Sec. 7. Owners licenses.
    (a) The Board shall issue owners licenses to persons or entities that apply for such licenses upon payment to the Board of the non-refundable license fee as provided in subsection (e) or (e-5) and upon a determination by the Board that the applicant is eligible for an owners license pursuant to this Act and the rules of the Board. From the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 95th General Assembly until (i) 3 years after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 95th General Assembly, (ii) the date any organization licensee begins to operate a slot machine or video game of chance under the Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975 or this Act, (iii) the date that payments begin under subsection (c-5) of Section 13 of this Act, (iv) the wagering tax imposed under Section 13 of this Act is increased by law to reflect a tax rate that is at least as stringent or more stringent than the tax rate contained in subsection (a-3) of Section 13, or (v) when an owners licensee holding a license issued pursuant to Section 7.1 of this Act begins conducting gaming, whichever occurs first, as a condition of licensure and as an alternative source of payment for those funds payable under subsection (c-5) of Section 13 of this Act, any owners licensee that holds or receives its owners license on or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 94th General Assembly, other than an owners licensee operating a riverboat with adjusted gross receipts in calendar year 2004 of less than $200,000,000, must pay into the Horse Racing Equity Trust Fund, in addition to any other payments required under this Act, an amount equal to 3% of the adjusted gross receipts received by the owners licensee. The payments required under this Section shall be made by the owners licensee to the State Treasurer no later than 3:00 o'clock p.m. of the day after the day when the adjusted gross receipts were received by the owners licensee. A person or entity is ineligible to receive an owners license if:
        (1) the person has been convicted of a felony under
    	
the laws of this State, any other state, or the United States;
        (2) the person has been convicted of any violation of
    	
Article 28 of the Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012, or substantially similar laws of any other jurisdiction;
        (3) the person has submitted an application for a
    	
license under this Act which contains false information;
        (4) the person is a member of the Board;
        (5) a person defined in (1), (2), (3), or (4) is an
    	
officer, director, or managerial employee of the entity;
        (6) the entity employs a person defined in (1), (2),
    	
(3), or (4) who participates in the management or operation of gambling operations authorized under this Act;
        (7) (blank); or
        (8) a license of the person or entity issued under
    	
this Act, or a license to own or operate gambling facilities in any other jurisdiction, has been revoked.
    The Board is expressly prohibited from making changes to the requirement that licensees make payment into the Horse Racing Equity Trust Fund without the express authority of the Illinois General Assembly and making any other rule to implement or interpret this amendatory Act of the 95th General Assembly. For the purposes of this paragraph, "rules" is given the meaning given to that term in Section 1-70 of the Illinois Administrative Procedure Act.
    (b) In determining whether to grant an owners license to an applicant, the Board shall consider:
        (1) the character, reputation, experience, and
    	
financial integrity of the applicants and of any other or separate person that either:
            (A) controls, directly or indirectly, such
        	
applicant, or
            (B) is controlled, directly or indirectly, by
        	
such applicant or by a person which controls, directly or indirectly, such applicant;
        (2) the facilities or proposed facilities for the
    	
conduct of gambling;
        (3) the highest prospective total revenue to be
    	
derived by the State from the conduct of gambling;
        (4) the extent to which the ownership of the
    	
applicant reflects the diversity of the State by including minority persons, women, and persons with a disability and the good faith affirmative action plan of each applicant to recruit, train and upgrade minority persons, women, and persons with a disability in all employment classifications; the Board shall further consider granting an owners license and giving preference to an applicant under this Section to applicants in which minority persons and women hold ownership interest of at least 16% and 4%, respectively.
        (4.5) the extent to which the ownership of the
    	
applicant includes veterans of service in the armed forces of the United States, and the good faith affirmative action plan of each applicant to recruit, train, and upgrade veterans of service in the armed forces of the United States in all employment classifications;
        (5) the financial ability of the applicant to
    	
purchase and maintain adequate liability and casualty insurance;
        (6) whether the applicant has adequate capitalization
    	
to provide and maintain, for the duration of a license, a riverboat or casino;
        (7) the extent to which the applicant exceeds or
    	
meets other standards for the issuance of an owners license which the Board may adopt by rule;
        (8) the amount of the applicant's license bid;
        (9) the extent to which the applicant or the proposed
    	
host municipality plans to enter into revenue sharing agreements with communities other than the host municipality; and
        (10) the extent to which the ownership of an
    	
applicant includes the most qualified number of minority persons, women, and persons with a disability.
    (c) Each owners license shall specify the place where the casino shall operate or the riverboat shall operate and dock.
    (d) Each applicant shall submit with his or her application, on forms provided by the Board, 2 sets of his or her fingerprints.
    (e) In addition to any licenses authorized under subsection (e-5) of this Section, the Board may issue up to 10 licenses authorizing the holders of such licenses to own riverboats. In the application for an owners license, the applicant shall state the dock at which the riverboat is based and the water on which the riverboat will be located. The Board shall issue 5 licenses to become effective not earlier than January 1, 1991. Three of such licenses shall authorize riverboat gambling on the Mississippi River, or, with approval by the municipality in which the riverboat was docked on August 7, 2003 and with Board approval, be authorized to relocate to a new location, in a municipality that (1) borders on the Mississippi River or is within 5 miles of the city limits of a municipality that borders on the Mississippi River and (2) on August 7, 2003, had a riverboat conducting riverboat gambling operations pursuant to a license issued under this Act; one of which shall authorize riverboat gambling from a home dock in the city of East St. Louis; and one of which shall authorize riverboat gambling from a home dock in the City of Alton. One other license shall authorize riverboat gambling on the Illinois River in the City of East Peoria or, with Board approval, shall authorize land-based gambling operations anywhere within the corporate limits of the City of Peoria. The Board shall issue one additional license to become effective not earlier than March 1, 1992, which shall authorize riverboat gambling on the Des Plaines River in Will County. The Board may issue 4 additional licenses to become effective not earlier than March 1, 1992. In determining the water upon which riverboats will operate, the Board shall consider the economic benefit which riverboat gambling confers on the State, and shall seek to assure that all regions of the State share in the economic benefits of riverboat gambling.
    In granting all licenses, the Board may give favorable consideration to economically depressed areas of the State, to applicants presenting plans which provide for significant economic development over a large geographic area, and to applicants who currently operate non-gambling riverboats in Illinois. The Board shall review all applications for owners licenses, and shall inform each applicant of the Board's decision. The Board may grant an owners license to an applicant that has not submitted the highest license bid, but if it does not select the highest bidder, the Board shall issue a written decision explaining why another applicant was selected and identifying the factors set forth in this Section that favored the winning bidder. The fee for issuance or renewal of a license pursuant to this subsection (e) shall be $250,000.
    (e-5) In addition to licenses authorized under subsection (e) of this Section:
        (1) the Board may issue one owners license
    	
authorizing the conduct of casino gambling in the City of Chicago;
        (2) the Board may issue one owners license
    	
authorizing the conduct of riverboat gambling in the City of Danville;
        (3) the Board may issue one owners license
    	
authorizing the conduct of riverboat gambling in the City of Waukegan;
        (4) the Board may issue one owners license
    	
authorizing the conduct of riverboat gambling in the City of Rockford;
        (5) the Board may issue one owners license
    	
authorizing the conduct of riverboat gambling in a municipality that is wholly or partially located in one of the following townships of Cook County: Bloom, Bremen, Calumet, Rich, Thornton, or Worth Township; and
        (6) the Board may issue one owners license
    	
authorizing the conduct of riverboat gambling in the unincorporated area of Williamson County adjacent to the Big Muddy River.
    Except for the license authorized under paragraph (1), each application for a license pursuant to this subsection (e-5) shall be submitted to the Board no later than 120 days after June 28, 2019 (the effective date of Public Act 101-31). All applications for a license under this subsection (e-5) shall include the nonrefundable application fee and the nonrefundable background investigation fee as provided in subsection (d) of Section 6 of this Act. In the event that an applicant submits an application for a license pursuant to this subsection (e-5) prior to June 28, 2019 (the effective date of Public Act 101-31), such applicant shall submit the nonrefundable application fee and background investigation fee as provided in subsection (d) of Section 6 of this Act no later than 6 months after June 28, 2019 (the effective date of Public Act 101-31).
    The Board shall consider issuing a license pursuant to paragraphs (1) through (6) of this subsection only after the corporate authority of the municipality or the county board of the county in which the riverboat or casino shall be located has certified to the Board the following:
        (i) that the applicant has negotiated with the
    	
corporate authority or county board in good faith;
        (ii) that the applicant and the corporate authority
    	
or county board have mutually agreed on the permanent location of the riverboat or casino;
        (iii) that the applicant and the corporate authority
    	
or county board have mutually agreed on the temporary location of the riverboat or casino;
        (iv) that the applicant and the corporate authority
    	
or the county board have mutually agreed on the percentage of revenues that will be shared with the municipality or county, if any;
        (v) that the applicant and the corporate authority or
    	
county board have mutually agreed on any zoning, licensing, public health, or other issues that are within the jurisdiction of the municipality or county;
        (vi) that the corporate authority or county board has
    	
passed a resolution or ordinance in support of the riverboat or casino in the municipality or county;
        (vii) the applicant for a license under paragraph (1)
    	
has made a public presentation concerning its casino proposal; and
        (viii) the applicant for a license under paragraph
    	
(1) has prepared a summary of its casino proposal and such summary has been posted on a public website of the municipality or the county.
    At least 7 days before the corporate authority of a municipality or county board of the county submits a certification to the Board concerning items (i) through (viii) of this subsection, it shall hold a public hearing to discuss items (i) through (viii), as well as any other details concerning the proposed riverboat or casino in the municipality or county. The corporate authority or county board must subsequently memorialize the details concerning the proposed riverboat or casino in a resolution that must be adopted by a majority of the corporate authority or county board before any certification is sent to the Board. The Board shall not alter, amend, change, or otherwise interfere with any agreement between the applicant and the corporate authority of the municipality or county board of the county regarding the location of any temporary or permanent facility.
    In addition, within 10 days after June 28, 2019 (the effective date of Public Act 101-31), the Board, with consent and at the expense of the City of Chicago, shall select and retain the services of a nationally recognized casino gaming feasibility consultant. Within 45 days after June 28, 2019 (the effective date of Public Act 101-31), the consultant shall prepare and deliver to the Board a study concerning the feasibility of, and the ability to finance, a casino in the City of Chicago. The feasibility study shall be delivered to the Mayor of the City of Chicago, the Governor, the President of the Senate, and the Speaker of the House of Representatives. Ninety days after receipt of the feasibility study, the Board shall make a determination, based on the results of the feasibility study, whether to recommend to the General Assembly that the terms of the license under paragraph (1) of this subsection (e-5) should be modified. The Board may begin accepting applications for the owners license under paragraph (1) of this subsection (e-5) upon the determination to issue such an owners license.
    In addition, prior to the Board issuing the owners license authorized under paragraph (4) of subsection (e-5), an impact study shall be completed to determine what location in the city will provide the greater impact to the region, including the creation of jobs and the generation of tax revenue.
    (e-10) The licenses authorized under subsection (e-5) of this Section shall be issued within 12 months after the date the license application is submitted. If the Board does not issue the licenses within that time period, then the Board shall give a written explanation to the applicant as to why it has not reached a determination and when it reasonably expects to make a determination. The fee for the issuance or renewal of a license issued pursuant to this subsection (e-10) shall be $250,000. Additionally, a licensee located outside of Cook County shall pay a minimum initial fee of $17,500 per gaming position, and a licensee located in Cook County shall pay a minimum initial fee of $30,000 per gaming position. The initial fees payable under this subsection (e-10) shall be deposited into the Rebuild Illinois Projects Fund. If at any point after June 1, 2020 there are no pending applications for a license under subsection (e-5) and not all licenses authorized under subsection (e-5) have been issued, then the Board shall reopen the license application process for those licenses authorized under subsection (e-5) that have not been issued. The Board shall follow the licensing process provided in subsection (e-5) with all time frames tied to the last date of a final order issued by the Board under subsection (e-5) rather than the effective date of the amendatory Act.
    (e-15) Each licensee of a license authorized under subsection (e-5) of this Section shall make a reconciliation payment 3 years after the date the licensee begins operating in an amount equal to 75% of the adjusted gross receipts for the most lucrative 12-month period of operations, minus an amount equal to the initial payment per gaming position paid by the specific licensee. Each licensee shall pay a $15,000,000 reconciliation fee upon issuance of an owners license. If this calculation results in a negative amount, then the licensee is not entitled to any reimbursement of fees previously paid. This reconciliation payment may be made in installments over a period of no more than 6 years.
    All payments by licensees under this subsection (e-15) shall be deposited into the Rebuild Illinois Projects Fund.
    (e-20) In addition to any other revocation powers granted to the Board under this Act, the Board may revoke the owners license of a licensee which fails to begin conducting gambling within 15 months of receipt of the Board's approval of the application if the Board determines that license revocation is in the best interests of the State.
    (f) The first 10 owners licenses issued under this Act shall permit the holder to own up to 2 riverboats and equipment thereon for a period of 3 years after the effective date of the license. Holders of the first 10 owners licenses must pay the annual license fee for each of the 3 years during which they are authorized to own riverboats.
    (g) Upon the termination, expiration, or revocation of each of the first 10 licenses, which shall be issued for a 3-year period, all licenses are renewable annually upon payment of the fee and a determination by the Board that the licensee continues to meet all of the requirements of this Act and the Board's rules. However, for licenses renewed on or after May 1, 1998, renewal shall be for a period of 4 years, unless the Board sets a shorter period.
    (h) An owners license, except for an owners license issued under subsection (e-5) of this Section, shall entitle the licensee to own up to 2 riverboats.
    An owners licensee of a casino or riverboat that is located in the City of Chicago pursuant to paragraph (1) of subsection (e-5) of this Section shall limit the number of gaming positions to 4,000 for such owner. An owners licensee authorized under subsection (e) or paragraph (2), (3), (4), or (5) of subsection (e-5) of this Section shall limit the number of gaming positions to 2,000 for any such owners license. An owners licensee authorized under paragraph (6) of subsection (e-5) of this Section shall limit the number of gaming positions to 1,200 for such owner. The initial fee for each gaming position obtained on or after June 28, 2019 (the effective date of Public Act 101-31) shall be a minimum of $17,500 for licensees not located in Cook County and a minimum of $30,000 for licensees located in Cook County, in addition to the reconciliation payment, as set forth in subsection (e-15) of this Section. The fees under this subsection (h) shall be deposited into the Rebuild Illinois Projects Fund. The fees under this subsection (h) that are paid by an owners licensee authorized under subsection (e) shall be paid by July 1, 2021.
    Each owners licensee under subsection (e) of this Section shall reserve its gaming positions within 30 days after June 28, 2019 (the effective date of Public Act 101-31). The Board may grant an extension to this 30-day period, provided that the owners licensee submits a written request and explanation as to why it is unable to reserve its positions within the 30-day period.
    Each owners licensee under subsection (e-5) of this Section shall reserve its gaming positions within 30 days after issuance of its owners license. The Board may grant an extension to this 30-day period, provided that the owners licensee submits a written request and explanation as to why it is unable to reserve its positions within the 30-day period.
    A licensee may operate both of its riverboats concurrently, provided that the total number of gaming positions on both riverboats does not exceed the limit established pursuant to this subsection. Riverboats licensed to operate on the Mississippi River and the Illinois River south of Marshall County shall have an authorized capacity of at least 500 persons. Any other riverboat licensed under this Act shall have an authorized capacity of at least 400 persons.
    (h-5) An owners licensee who conducted gambling operations prior to January 1, 2012 and obtains positions pursuant to Public Act 101-31 shall make a reconciliation payment 3 years after any additional gaming positions begin operating in an amount equal to 75% of the owners licensee's average gross receipts for the most lucrative 12-month period of operations minus an amount equal to the initial fee that the owners licensee paid per additional gaming position. For purposes of this subsection (h-5), "average gross receipts" means (i) the increase in adjusted gross receipts for the most lucrative 12-month period of operations over the adjusted gross receipts for 2019, multiplied by (ii) the percentage derived by dividing the number of additional gaming positions that an owners licensee had obtained by the total number of gaming positions operated by the owners licensee. If this calculation results in a negative amount, then the owners licensee is not entitled to any reimbursement of fees previously paid. This reconciliation payment may be made in installments over a period of no more than 6 years. These reconciliation payments shall be deposited into the Rebuild Illinois Projects Fund.
    (i) A licensed owner is authorized to apply to the Board for and, if approved therefor, to receive all licenses from the Board necessary for the operation of a riverboat or casino, including a liquor license, a license to prepare and serve food for human consumption, and other necessary licenses. All use, occupation, and excise taxes which apply to the sale of food and beverages in this State and all taxes imposed on the sale or use of tangible personal property apply to such sales aboard the riverboat or in the casino.
    (j) The Board may issue or re-issue a license authorizing a riverboat to dock in a municipality or approve a relocation under Section 11.2 only if, prior to the issuance or re-issuance of the license or approval, the governing body of the municipality in which the riverboat will dock has by a majority vote approved the docking of riverboats in the municipality. The Board may issue or re-issue a license authorizing a riverboat to dock in areas of a county outside any municipality or approve a relocation under Section 11.2 only if, prior to the issuance or re-issuance of the license or approval, the governing body of the county has by a majority vote approved of the docking of riverboats within such areas.
    (k) An owners licensee may conduct land-based gambling operations upon approval by the Board and payment of a fee of $250,000, which shall be deposited into the State Gaming Fund.
    (l) An owners licensee may conduct gaming at a temporary facility pending the construction of a permanent facility or the remodeling or relocation of an existing facility to accommodate gaming participants for up to 24 months after the temporary facility begins to conduct gaming. Upon request by an owners licensee and upon a showing of good cause by the owners licensee, the Board shall extend the period during which the licensee may conduct gaming at a temporary facility by up to 12 months. The Board shall make rules concerning the conduct of gaming from temporary facilities.
(Source: P.A. 100-391, eff. 8-25-17; 100-1152, eff. 12-14-18; 101-31, eff. 6-28-19; 101-648, eff. 6-30-20.)

    (230 ILCS 10/7.1)
    Sec. 7.1. Re-issuance of revoked or non-renewed owners licenses.
    (a) If an owners license terminates or expires without renewal or the Board revokes or determines not to renew an owners license (including, without limitation, an owners license for a licensee that was not conducting riverboat gambling operations on January 1, 1998) and that revocation or determination is final, the Board may re-issue such license to a qualified applicant pursuant to an open and competitive bidding process, as set forth in Section 7.5, and subject to the maximum number of authorized licenses set forth in Section 7(e).
    (b) To be a qualified applicant, a person, firm, or corporation cannot be ineligible to receive an owners license under Section 7(a) and must submit an application for an owners license that complies with Section 6. Each such applicant must also submit evidence to the Board that minority persons and women hold ownership interests in the applicant of at least 16% and 4% respectively.
    (c) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in Section 7(e), an applicant may apply to the Board for approval of relocation of a re-issued license to a new home dock location authorized under Section 3(c) upon receipt of the approval from the municipality or county, as the case may be, pursuant to Section 7(j).
    (d) In determining whether to grant a re-issued owners license to an applicant, the Board shall consider all of the factors set forth in Sections 7(b) and (e) as well as the amount of the applicant's license bid. The Board may grant the re-issued owners license to an applicant that has not submitted the highest license bid, but if it does not select the highest bidder, the Board shall issue a written decision explaining why another applicant was selected and identifying the factors set forth in Sections 7(b) and (e) that favored the winning bidder.
    (e) Re-issued owners licenses shall be subject to annual license fees as provided for in Section 7(a) and shall be governed by the provisions of Sections 7(f), (g), (h), and (i).
(Source: P.A. 100-391, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (230 ILCS 10/7.2)
    Sec. 7.2. Temporary operating permits. Any person operating under a temporary operating permit issued pursuant to 86 Ill. Admin. Code 3000.230 shall be deemed to be operating under the authority of an owner's license for purposes of Section 13 of this Act. This Section shall not affect in any way the licensure requirements of this Act.
(Source: P.A. 93-28, eff. 6-20-03.)

    (230 ILCS 10/7.3)
    Sec. 7.3. State conduct of gambling operations.
    (a) If, after reviewing each application for a re-issued license, the Board determines that the highest prospective total revenue to the State would be derived from State conduct of the gambling operation in lieu of re-issuing the license, the Board shall inform each applicant of its decision. The Board shall thereafter have the authority, without obtaining an owners license, to conduct casino or riverboat gambling operations as previously authorized by the terminated, expired, revoked, or nonrenewed license through a licensed manager selected pursuant to an open and competitive bidding process as set forth in Section 7.5 and as provided in Section 7.4.
    (b) The Board may locate any casino or riverboat on which a gambling operation is conducted by the State in any home dock or other location authorized by Section 3(c) upon receipt of approval from a majority vote of the governing body of the municipality or county, as the case may be, in which the riverboat will dock.
    (c) The Board shall have jurisdiction over and shall supervise all gambling operations conducted by the State provided for in this Act and shall have all powers necessary and proper to fully and effectively execute the provisions of this Act relating to gambling operations conducted by the State.
    (d) The maximum number of owners licenses authorized under Section 7 shall be reduced by one for each instance in which the Board authorizes the State to conduct a casino or riverboat gambling operation under subsection (a) in lieu of re-issuing a license to an applicant under Section 7.1.
(Source: P.A. 101-31, eff. 6-28-19.)

    (230 ILCS 10/7.4)
    Sec. 7.4. Managers licenses.
    (a) A qualified person may apply to the Board for a managers license to operate and manage any gambling operation conducted by the State. The application shall be made on forms provided by the Board and shall contain such information as the Board prescribes, including but not limited to information required in Sections 6(a), (b), and (c) and information relating to the applicant's proposed price to manage State gambling operations and to provide the riverboat, gambling equipment, and supplies necessary to conduct State gambling operations.
    (b) Each applicant must submit evidence to the Board that minority persons and women hold ownership interests in the applicant of at least 16% and 4%, respectively.
    (c) A person, firm, or corporation is ineligible to receive a managers license if:
        (1) the person has been convicted of a felony under
    	
the laws of this State, any other state, or the United States;
        (2) the person has been convicted of any violation of
    	
Article 28 of the Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012, or substantially similar laws of any other jurisdiction;
        (3) the person has submitted an application for a
    	
license under this Act which contains false information;
        (4) the person is a member of the Board;
        (5) a person defined in (1), (2), (3), or (4) is an
    	
officer, director, or managerial employee of the firm or corporation;
        (6) the firm or corporation employs a person defined
    	
in (1), (2), (3), or (4) who participates in the management or operation of gambling operations authorized under this Act; or
        (7) a license of the person, firm, or corporation
    	
issued under this Act, or a license to own or operate gambling facilities in any other jurisdiction, has been revoked.
    (d) Each applicant shall submit with his or her application, on forms prescribed by the Board, 2 sets of his or her fingerprints.
    (e) The Board shall charge each applicant a fee, set by the Board, to defray the costs associated with the background investigation conducted by the Board.
    (f) A person who knowingly makes a false statement on an application is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
    (g) The managers license shall be for a term not to exceed 10 years, shall be renewable at the Board's option, and shall contain such terms and provisions as the Board deems necessary to protect or enhance the credibility and integrity of State gambling operations, achieve the highest prospective total revenue to the State, and otherwise serve the interests of the citizens of Illinois.
    (h) Issuance of a managers license shall be subject to an open and competitive bidding process. The Board may select an applicant other than the lowest bidder by price. If it does not select the lowest bidder, the Board shall issue a notice of who the lowest bidder was and a written decision as to why another bidder was selected.
(Source: P.A. 100-391, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (230 ILCS 10/7.5)
    Sec. 7.5. Competitive bidding. When the Board determines that (i) it will re-issue an owners license pursuant to an open and competitive bidding process, as set forth in Section 7.1, (ii) it will issue a managers license pursuant to an open and competitive bidding process, as set forth in Section 7.4, or (iii) it will issue an owners license pursuant to an open and competitive bidding process, as set forth in Section 7.12, the open and competitive bidding process shall adhere to the following procedures:
        (1) The Board shall make applications for owners and
    	
managers licenses available to the public and allow a reasonable time for applicants to submit applications to the Board.
        (2) During the filing period for owners or managers
    	
license applications, the Board may retain the services of an investment banking firm to assist the Board in conducting the open and competitive bidding process.
        (3) After receiving all of the bid proposals, the
    	
Board shall open all of the proposals in a public forum and disclose the prospective owners or managers names, venture partners, if any, and, in the case of applicants for owners licenses, the locations of the proposed development sites.
        (4) The Board shall summarize the terms of the
    	
proposals and may make this summary available to the public.
        (5) The Board shall evaluate the proposals within a
    	
reasonable time and select no more than 3 final applicants to make presentations of their proposals to the Board.
        (6) The final applicants shall make their
    	
presentations to the Board on the same day during an open session of the Board.
        (7) As soon as practicable after the public
    	
presentations by the final applicants, the Board, in its discretion, may conduct further negotiations among the 3 final applicants. During such negotiations, each final applicant may increase its license bid or otherwise enhance its bid proposal. At the conclusion of such negotiations, the Board shall select the winning proposal. In the case of negotiations for an owners license, the Board may, at the conclusion of such negotiations, make the determination allowed under Section 7.3(a).
        (8) Upon selection of a winning bid, the Board shall
    	
evaluate the winning bid within a reasonable period of time for licensee suitability in accordance with all applicable statutory and regulatory criteria.
        (9) If the winning bidder is unable or otherwise
    	
fails to consummate the transaction, (including if the Board determines that the winning bidder does not satisfy the suitability requirements), the Board may, on the same criteria, select from the remaining bidders or make the determination allowed under Section 7.3(a).
(Source: P.A. 101-31, eff. 6-28-19.)

    (230 ILCS 10/7.6)
    Sec. 7.6. Business enterprise program.
    (a) For the purposes of this Section, the terms "minority", "minority-owned business", "woman", "women-owned business", "person with a disability", and "business owned by a person with a disability" have the meanings ascribed to them in the Business Enterprise for Minorities, Women, and Persons with Disabilities Act.
    (b) The Board shall, by rule, establish goals for the award of contracts by each owners licensee to businesses owned by minorities, women, and persons with disabilities, expressed as percentages of an owners licensee's total dollar amount of contracts awarded during each calendar year. Each owners licensee must make every effort to meet the goals established by the Board pursuant to this Section. When setting the goals for the award of contracts, the Board shall not include contracts where: (1) any purchasing mandates would be dependent upon the availability of minority-owned businesses, women-owned businesses, and businesses owned by persons with disabilities ready, willing, and able with capacity to provide quality goods and services to a gaming operation at reasonable prices; (2) there are no or a limited number of licensed suppliers as defined by this Act for the goods or services provided to the licensee; (3) the licensee or its parent company owns a company that provides the goods or services; or (4) the goods or services are provided to the licensee by a publicly traded company.
    (c) Each owners licensee shall file with the Board an annual report of its utilization of minority-owned businesses, women-owned businesses, and businesses owned by persons with disabilities during the preceding calendar year. The reports shall include a self-evaluation of the efforts of the owners licensee to meet its goals under this Section.
    (c-5) The Board shall, by rule, establish goals for the award of contracts by each owners licensee to businesses owned by veterans of service in the armed forces of the United States, expressed as percentages of an owners licensee's total dollar amount of contracts awarded during each calendar year. When setting the goals for the award of contracts, the Board shall not include contracts where: (1) any purchasing mandates would be dependent upon the availability of veteran-owned businesses ready, willing, and able with capacity to provide quality goods and services to a gaming operation at reasonable prices; (2) there are no or a limited number of licensed suppliers as defined in this Act for the goods or services provided to the licensee; (3) the licensee or its parent company owns a company that provides the goods or services; or (4) the goods or services are provided to the licensee by a publicly traded company.
    Each owners licensee shall file with the Board an annual report of its utilization of veteran-owned businesses during the preceding calendar year. The reports shall include a self-evaluation of the efforts of the owners licensee to meet its goals under this Section.
    (d) The owners licensee shall have the right to request a waiver from the requirements of this Section. The Board shall grant the waiver where the owners licensee demonstrates that there has been made a good faith effort to comply with the goals for participation by minority-owned businesses, women-owned businesses, businesses owned by persons with disabilities, and veteran-owned businesses.
    (e) If the Board determines that its goals and policies are not being met by any owners licensee, then the Board may:
        (1) adopt remedies for such violations; and
        (2) recommend that the owners licensee provide
    	
additional opportunities for participation by minority-owned businesses, women-owned businesses, businesses owned by persons with disabilities, and veteran-owned businesses; such recommendations may include, but shall not be limited to:
            (A) assurances of stronger and better focused
        	
solicitation efforts to obtain more minority-owned businesses, women-owned businesses, businesses owned by persons with disabilities, and veteran-owned businesses as potential sources of supply;
            (B) division of job or project requirements, when
        	
economically feasible, into tasks or quantities to permit participation of minority-owned businesses, women-owned businesses, businesses owned by persons with disabilities, and veteran-owned businesses;
            (C) elimination of extended experience or
        	
capitalization requirements, when programmatically feasible, to permit participation of minority-owned businesses, women-owned businesses, businesses owned by persons with disabilities, and veteran-owned businesses;
            (D) identification of specific proposed contracts
        	
as particularly attractive or appropriate for participation by minority-owned businesses, women-owned businesses, businesses owned by persons with disabilities, and veteran-owned businesses, such identification to result from and be coupled with the efforts of items (A) through (C); and
            (E) implementation of regulations established
        	
for the use of the sheltered market process.
    (f) The Board shall file, no later than March 1 of each year, an annual report that shall detail the level of achievement toward the goals specified in this Section over the 3 most recent fiscal years. The annual report shall include, but need not be limited to:
        (1) a summary detailing expenditures subject to
    	
the goals, the actual goals specified, and the goals attained by each owners licensee; and
        (2) an analysis of the level of overall goal
    	
achievement concerning purchases from minority-owned businesses, women-owned businesses, businesses owned by persons with disabilities, and veteran-owned businesses.
(Source: P.A. 99-78, eff. 7-20-15; 100-391, eff. 8-25-17; 100-1152, eff. 12-14-18.)

    (230 ILCS 10/7.7)
    Sec. 7.7. Organization gaming licenses.
    (a) The Illinois Gaming Board shall award one organization gaming license to each person or entity having operating control of a racetrack that applies under Section 56 of the Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975, subject to the application and eligibility requirements of this Section. Within 60 days after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 101st General Assembly, a person or entity having operating control of a racetrack may submit an application for an organization gaming license. The application shall be made on such forms as provided by the Board and shall contain such information as the Board prescribes, including, but not limited to, the identity of any racetrack at which gaming will be conducted pursuant to an organization gaming license, detailed information regarding the ownership and management of the applicant, and detailed personal information regarding the applicant. The application shall specify the number of gaming positions the applicant intends to use and the place where the organization gaming facility will operate. A person who knowingly makes a false statement on an application is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
    Each applicant shall disclose the identity of every person or entity having a direct or indirect pecuniary interest greater than 1% in any racetrack with respect to which the license is sought. If the disclosed entity is a corporation, the applicant shall disclose the names and addresses of all officers, stockholders, and directors. If the disclosed entity is a limited liability company, the applicant shall disclose the names and addresses of all members and managers. If the disclosed entity is a partnership, the applicant shall disclose the names and addresses of all partners, both general and limited. If the disclosed entity is a trust, the applicant shall disclose the names and addresses of all beneficiaries.
    An application shall be filed and considered in accordance with the rules of the Board. Each application for an organization gaming license shall include a nonrefundable application fee of $250,000. In addition, a nonrefundable fee of $50,000 shall be paid at the time of filing to defray the costs associated with background investigations conducted by the Board. If the costs of the background investigation exceed $50,000, the applicant shall pay the additional amount to the Board within 7 days after a request by the Board. If the costs of the investigation are less than $50,000, the applicant shall receive a refund of the remaining amount. All information, records, interviews, reports, statements, memoranda, or other data supplied to or used by the Board in the course of this review or investigation of an applicant for an organization gaming license under this Act shall be privileged and strictly confidential and shall be used only for the purpose of evaluating an applicant for an organization gaming license or a renewal. Such information, records, interviews, reports, statements, memoranda, or other data shall not be admissible as evidence nor discoverable in any action of any kind in any court or before any tribunal, board, agency or person, except for any action deemed necessary by the Board. The application fee shall be deposited into the State Gaming Fund.
    Any applicant or key person, including the applicant's owners, officers, directors (if a corporation), managers and members (if a limited liability company), and partners (if a partnership), for an organization gaming license shall have his or her fingerprints submitted to the Department of State Police in an electronic format that complies with the form and manner for requesting and furnishing criminal history record information as prescribed by the Department of State Police. These fingerprints shall be checked against the Department of State Police and Federal Bureau of Investigation criminal history record databases now and hereafter filed, including, but not limited to, civil, criminal, and latent fingerprint databases. The Department of State Police shall charge applicants a fee for conducting the criminal history records check, which shall be deposited into the State Police Services Fund and shall not exceed the actual cost of the records check. The Department of State Police shall furnish, pursuant to positive identification, records of Illinois criminal history to the Department.
    (b) The Board shall determine within 120 days after receiving an application for an organization gaming license whether to grant an organization gaming license to the applicant. If the Board does not make a determination within that time period, then the Board shall give a written explanation to the applicant as to why it has not reached a determination and when it reasonably expects to make a determination.
    The organization gaming licensee shall purchase up to the amount of gaming positions authorized under this Act within 120 days after receiving its organization gaming license. If an organization gaming licensee is prepared to purchase the gaming positions, but is temporarily prohibited from doing so by order of a court of competent jurisdiction or the Board, then the 120-day period is tolled until a resolution is reached.
    An organization gaming license shall authorize its holder to conduct gaming under this Act at its racetracks on the same days of the year and hours of the day that owners licenses are allowed to operate under approval of the Board.
    An organization gaming license and any renewal of an organization gaming license shall authorize gaming pursuant to this Section for a period of 4 years. The fee for the issuance or renewal of an organization gaming license shall be $250,000.
    All payments by licensees under this subsection (b) shall be deposited into the Rebuild Illinois Projects Fund.
    (c) To be eligible to conduct gaming under this Section, a person or entity having operating control of a racetrack must (i) obtain an organization gaming license, (ii) hold an organization license under the Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975, (iii) hold an inter-track wagering license, (iv) pay an initial fee of $30,000 per gaming position from organization gaming licensees where gaming is conducted in Cook County and, except as provided in subsection (c-5), $17,500 for organization gaming licensees where gaming is conducted outside of Cook County before beginning to conduct gaming plus make the reconciliation payment required under subsection (k), (v) conduct live racing in accordance with subsections (e-1), (e-2), and (e-3) of Section 20 of the Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975, (vi) meet the requirements of subsection (a) of Section 56 of the Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975, (vii) for organization licensees conducting standardbred race meetings, keep backstretch barns and dormitories open and operational year-round unless a lesser schedule is mutually agreed to by the organization licensee and the horsemen association racing at that organization licensee's race meeting, (viii) for organization licensees conducting thoroughbred race meetings, the organization licensee must maintain accident medical expense liability insurance coverage of $1,000,000 for jockeys, and (ix) meet all other requirements of this Act that apply to owners licensees.
    An organization gaming licensee may enter into a joint venture with a licensed owner to own, manage, conduct, or otherwise operate the organization gaming licensee's organization gaming facilities, unless the organization gaming licensee has a parent company or other affiliated company that is, directly or indirectly, wholly owned by a parent company that is also licensed to conduct organization gaming, casino gaming, or their equivalent in another state.
    All payments by licensees under this subsection (c) shall be deposited into the Rebuild Illinois Projects Fund.
    (c-5) A person or entity having operating control of a racetrack located in Madison County shall only pay the initial fees specified in subsection (c) for 540 of the gaming positions authorized under the license.
    (d) A person or entity is ineligible to receive an organization gaming license if:
        (1) the person or entity has been convicted of a
    	
felony under the laws of this State, any other state, or the United States, including a conviction under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act;
        (2) the person or entity has been convicted of any
    	
violation of Article 28 of the Criminal Code of 2012, or substantially similar laws of any other jurisdiction;
        (3) the person or entity has submitted an application
    	
for a license under this Act that contains false information;
        (4) the person is a member of the Board;
        (5) a person defined in (1), (2), (3), or (4) of this
    	
subsection (d) is an officer, director, or managerial employee of the entity;
        (6) the person or entity employs a person defined in
    	
(1), (2), (3), or (4) of this subsection (d) who participates in the management or operation of gambling operations authorized under this Act; or
        (7) a license of the person or entity issued under
    	
this Act or a license to own or operate gambling facilities in any other jurisdiction has been revoked.
    (e) The Board may approve gaming positions pursuant to an organization gaming license statewide as provided in this Section. The authority to operate gaming positions under this Section shall be allocated as follows: up to 1,200 gaming positions for any organization gaming licensee in Cook County and up to 900 gaming positions for any organization gaming licensee outside of Cook County.
    (f) Each applicant for an organization gaming license shall specify in its application for licensure the number of gaming positions it will operate, up to the applicable limitation set forth in subsection (e) of this Section. Any unreserved gaming positions that are not specified shall be forfeited and retained by the Board. For the purposes of this subsection (f), an organization gaming licensee that did not conduct live racing in 2010 and is located within 3 miles of the Mississippi River may reserve up to 900 positions and shall not be penalized under this Section for not operating those positions until it meets the requirements of subsection (e) of this Section, but such licensee shall not request unreserved gaming positions under this subsection (f) until its 900 positions are all operational.
    Thereafter, the Board shall publish the number of unreserved gaming positions and shall accept requests for additional positions from any organization gaming licensee that initially reserved all of the positions that were offered. The Board shall allocate expeditiously the unreserved gaming positions to requesting organization gaming licensees in a manner that maximizes revenue to the State. The Board may allocate any such unused gaming positions pursuant to an open and competitive bidding process, as provided under Section 7.5 of this Act. This process shall continue until all unreserved gaming positions have been purchased. All positions obtained pursuant to this process and all positions the organization gaming licensee specified it would operate in its application must be in operation within 18 months after they were obtained or the organization gaming licensee forfeits the right to operate those positions, but is not entitled to a refund of any fees paid. The Board may, after holding a public hearing, grant extensions so long as the organization gaming licensee is working in good faith to make the positions operational. The extension may be for a period of 6 months. If, after the period of the extension, the organization gaming licensee has not made the positions operational, then another public hearing must be held by the Board before it may grant another extension.
    Unreserved gaming positions retained from and allocated to organization gaming licensees by the Board pursuant to this subsection (f) shall not be allocated to owners licensees under this Act.
    For the purpose of this subsection (f), the unreserved gaming positions for each organization gaming licensee shall be the applicable limitation set forth in subsection (e) of this Section, less the number of reserved gaming positions by such organization gaming licensee, and the total unreserved gaming positions shall be the aggregate of the unreserved gaming positions for all organization gaming licensees.
    (g) An organization gaming licensee is authorized to conduct the following at a racetrack:
        (1) slot machine gambling;
        (2) video game of chance gambling;
        (3) gambling with electronic gambling games as
    	
defined in this Act or defined by the Illinois Gaming Board; and
        (4) table games.
    (h) Subject to the approval of the Illinois Gaming Board, an organization gaming licensee may make modification or additions to any existing buildings and structures to comply with the requirements of this Act. The Illinois Gaming Board shall make its decision after consulting with the Illinois Racing Board. In no case, however, shall the Illinois Gaming Board approve any modification or addition that alters the grounds of the organization licensee such that the act of live racing is an ancillary activity to gaming authorized under this Section. Gaming authorized under this Section may take place in existing structures where inter-track wagering is conducted at the racetrack or a facility within 300 yards of the racetrack in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975.
    (i) An organization gaming licensee may conduct gaming at a temporary facility pending the construction of a permanent facility or the remodeling or relocation of an existing facility to accommodate gaming participants for up to 24 months after the temporary facility begins to conduct gaming authorized under this Section. Upon request by an organization gaming licensee and upon a showing of good cause by the organization gaming licensee, the Board shall extend the period during which the licensee may conduct gaming authorized under this Section at a temporary facility by up to 12 months. The Board shall make rules concerning the conduct of gaming authorized under this Section from temporary facilities.
    The gaming authorized under this Section may take place in existing structures where inter-track wagering is conducted at the racetrack or a facility within 300 yards of the racetrack in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975.
    (i-5) Under no circumstances shall an organization gaming licensee conduct gaming at any State or county fair.
    (j) The Illinois Gaming Board must adopt emergency rules in accordance with Section 5-45 of the Illinois Administrative Procedure Act as necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this amendatory Act of the 101st General Assembly concerning the conduct of gaming by an organization gaming licensee. The adoption of emergency rules authorized by this subsection (j) shall be deemed to be necessary for the public interest, safety, and welfare.
    (k) Each organization gaming licensee who obtains gaming positions must make a reconciliation payment 3 years after the date the organization gaming licensee begins operating the positions in an amount equal to 75% of the difference between its adjusted gross receipts from gaming authorized under this Section and amounts paid to its purse accounts pursuant to item (1) of subsection (b) of Section 56 of the Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975 for the 12-month period for which such difference was the largest, minus an amount equal to the initial per position fee paid by the organization gaming licensee. If this calculation results in a negative amount, then the organization gaming licensee is not entitled to any reimbursement of fees previously paid. This reconciliation payment may be made in installments over a period of no more than 6 years.
    All payments by licensees under this subsection (k) shall be deposited into the Rebuild Illinois Projects Fund.
    (l) As soon as practical after a request is made by the Illinois Gaming Board, to minimize duplicate submissions by the applicant, the Illinois Racing Board must provide information on an applicant for an organization gaming license to the Illinois Gaming Board.
(Source: P.A. 101-31, eff. 6-28-19; 101-597, eff. 12-6-19; 101-648, eff. 6-30-20.)

    (230 ILCS 10/7.8)
    Sec. 7.8. Home rule. The regulation and licensing of organization gaming licensees and gaming conducted pursuant to an organization gaming license are exclusive powers and functions of the State. A home rule unit may not regulate or license such gaming or organization gaming licensees. This Section is a denial and limitation of home rule powers and functions under subsection (h) of Section 6 of Article VII of the Illinois Constitution.
(Source: P.A. 101-31, eff. 6-28-19.)

    (230 ILCS 10/7.10)
    Sec. 7.10. Diversity program.
    (a) Each owners licensee, organization gaming licensee, and suppliers licensee shall establish and maintain a diversity program to ensure non-discrimination in the award and administration of contracts. The programs shall establish goals of awarding not less than 25% of the annual dollar value of all contracts, purchase orders, or other agreements to minority-owned businesses and 5% of the annual dollar value of all contracts to women-owned businesses.
    (b) Each owners licensee, organization gaming licensee, and suppliers licensee shall establish and maintain a diversity program designed to promote equal opportunity for employment. The program shall establish hiring goals as the Board and each licensee determines appropriate. The Board shall monitor the progress of the gaming licensee's progress with respect to the program's goals.
    (c) No later than May 31 of each year, each licensee shall report to the Board (1) the number of respective employees and the number of its respective employees who have designated themselves as members of a minority group and gender and (2) the total goals achieved under subsection (a) of this Section as a percentage of the total contracts awarded by the license. In addition, all licensees shall submit a report with respect to the minority-owned and women-owned businesses program created in this Section to the Board.
    (d) When considering whether to re-issue or renew a license to an owners licensee, organization gaming licensee, or suppliers licensee, the Board shall take into account the licensee's success in complying with the provisions of this Section. If an owners licensee, organization gaming licensee, or suppliers licensee has not satisfied the goals contained in this Section, the Board shall require a written explanation as to why the licensee is not in compliance and shall require the licensee to file multi-year metrics designed to achieve compliance with the provisions by the next renewal period, consistent with State and federal law.
(Source: P.A. 101-31, eff. 6-28-19.)

    (230 ILCS 10/7.11)
    Sec. 7.11. Annual report on diversity.
    (a) Each licensee that receives a license under Sections 7, 7.1, and 7.7 shall execute and file a report with the Board no later than December 31 of each year that shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information:
        (i) a good faith affirmative action plan to recruit,
    	
train, and upgrade minority persons, women, and persons with a disability in all employment classifications;
        (ii) the total dollar amount of contracts that were
    	
awarded to businesses owned by minority persons, women, and persons with a disability;
        (iii) the total number of businesses owned by
    	
minority persons, women, and persons with a disability that were utilized by the licensee;
        (iv) the utilization of businesses owned by minority
    	
persons, women, and persons with disabilities during the preceding year; and
        (v) the outreach efforts used by the licensee to
    	
attract investors and businesses consisting of minority persons, women, and persons with a disability.
    (b) The Board shall forward a copy of each licensee's annual reports to the General Assembly no later than February 1 of each year. The reports to the General Assembly shall be filed with the Clerk of the House of Representatives and the Secretary of the Senate in electronic form only, in the manner that the Clerk and the Secretary shall direct.
(Source: P.A. 101-31, eff. 6-28-19.)

    (230 ILCS 10/7.12)
    Sec. 7.12. Issuance of new owners licenses.
    (a) Owners licenses newly authorized pursuant to this amendatory Act of the 101st General Assembly may be issued by the Board to a qualified applicant pursuant to an open and competitive bidding process, as set forth in Section 7.5, and subject to the maximum number of authorized licenses set forth in subsection (e-5) of Section 7 of this Act.
    (b) To be a qualified applicant, a person or entity may not be ineligible to receive an owners license under subsection (a) of Section 7 of this Act and must submit an application for an owners license that complies with Section 6 of this Act.
    (c) In determining whether to grant an owners license to an applicant, the Board shall consider all of the factors set forth in subsections (b) and (e-10) of Section 7 of this Act, as well as the amount of the applicant's license bid. The Board may grant the owners license to an applicant that has not submitted the highest license bid, but if it does not select the highest bidder, the Board shall issue a written decision explaining why another applicant was selected and identifying the factors set forth in subsections (b) and (e-10) of Section 7 of this Act that favored the winning bidder.
(Source: P.A. 101-31, eff. 6-28-19.)

    (230 ILCS 10/7.13)
    Sec. 7.13. Environmental standards. All permanent casinos, riverboats, and organization gaming facilities shall consist of buildings that are certified as meeting the U.S. Green Building Council's Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design standards. The provisions of this Section apply to a holder of an owners license or organization gaming license that (i) begins operations on or after January 1, 2019 or (ii) relocates its facilities on or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 101st General Assembly.
(Source: P.A. 101-31, eff. 6-28-19.)

    (230 ILCS 10/7.14)
    Sec. 7.14. Chicago Casino Advisory Committee. An Advisory Committee is established to monitor, review, and report on (1) the utilization of minority-owned business enterprises and women-owned business enterprises by the owners licensee, (2) employment of women, and (3) employment of minorities with regard to the development and construction of the casino as authorized under paragraph (1) of subsection (e-5) of Section 7 of the Illinois Gambling Act. The owners licensee under paragraph (1) of subsection (e-5) of Section 7 of the Illinois Gambling Act shall work with the Advisory Committee in accumulating necessary information for the Advisory Committee to submit reports, as necessary, to the General Assembly and to the City of Chicago.
    The Advisory Committee shall consist of 9 members as provided in this Section. Five members shall be selected by the Governor and 4 members shall be selected by the Mayor of the City of Chicago. The Governor and the Mayor of the City of Chicago shall each appoint at least one current member of the General Assembly. The Advisory Committee shall meet periodically and shall report the information to the Mayor of the City of Chicago and to the General Assembly by December 31st of every year.
    The Advisory Committee shall be dissolved on the date that casino gambling operations are first conducted at a permanent facility under the license authorized under paragraph (1) of subsection (e-5) Section 7 of the Illinois Gambling Act. For the purposes of this Section, the terms "woman" and "minority person" have the meanings provided in Section 2 of the Business Enterprise for Minorities, Women, and Persons with Disabilities Act.
(Source: P.A. 101-31, eff. 6-28-19.)

    (230 ILCS 10/7.15)
    Sec. 7.15. Limitations on gaming at Chicago airports. The Chicago casino may conduct gaming operations in an airport under the administration or control of the Chicago Department of Aviation. Gaming operations may be conducted pursuant to this Section so long as: (i) gaming operations are conducted in a secured area that is beyond the Transportation Security Administration security checkpoints and only available to airline passengers at least 21 years of age who are members of a private club, and not to the general public, (ii) gaming operations are limited to slot machines, as defined in Section 4 of the Illinois Gambling Act, and (iii) the combined number of gaming positions operating in the City of Chicago at the airports and at the temporary and permanent casino facility does not exceed the maximum number of gaming positions authorized pursuant to subsection (h) of Section 7 of the Illinois Gambling Act. Gaming operations at an airport are subject to all applicable laws and rules that apply to any other gaming facility under the Illinois Gambling Act.
(Source: P.A. 101-31, eff. 6-28-19.)

    (230 ILCS 10/8) (from Ch. 120, par. 2408)
    Sec. 8. Suppliers licenses.
    (a) The Board may issue a suppliers license to such persons, firms or corporations which apply therefor upon the payment of a non-refundable application fee set by the Board, upon a determination by the Board that the applicant is eligible for a suppliers license and upon payment of a $5,000 annual license fee.
    (b) The holder of a suppliers license is authorized to sell or lease, and to contract to sell or lease, gambling equipment and supplies to any licensee involved in the ownership or management of gambling operations.
    (c) Gambling supplies and equipment may not be distributed unless supplies and equipment conform to standards adopted by rules of the Board.
    (d) A person, firm or corporation is ineligible to receive a suppliers license if:
        (1) the person has been convicted of a felony under
    	
the laws of this State, any other state, or the United States;
        (2) the person has been convicted of any violation of
    	
Article 28 of the Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012, or substantially similar laws of any other jurisdiction;
        (3) the person has submitted an application for a
    	
license under this Act which contains false information;
        (4) the person is a member of the Board;
        (5) the entity is one in which a person defined in
    	
(1), (2), (3) or (4), is an officer, director or managerial employee;
        (6) the firm or corporation employs a person who
    	
participates in the management or operation of gambling authorized under this Act;
        (7) the license of the person, firm or corporation
    	
issued under this Act, or a license to own or operate gambling facilities in any other jurisdiction, has been revoked.
    (e) Any person that supplies any equipment, devices, or supplies to a licensed gambling operation must first obtain a suppliers license. A supplier shall furnish to the Board a list of all equipment, devices and supplies offered for sale or lease in connection with gambling games authorized under this Act. A supplier shall keep books and records for the furnishing of equipment, devices and supplies to gambling operations separate and distinct from any other business that the supplier might operate. A supplier shall file a quarterly return with the Board listing all sales and leases. A supplier shall permanently affix its name or a distinctive logo or other mark or design element identifying the manufacturer or supplier to all its equipment, devices, and supplies, except gaming chips without a value impressed, engraved, or imprinted on it, for gambling operations. The Board may waive this requirement for any specific product or products if it determines that the requirement is not necessary to protect the integrity of the game. Items purchased from a licensed supplier may continue to be used even though the supplier subsequently changes its name, distinctive logo, or other mark or design element; undergoes a change in ownership; or ceases to be licensed as a supplier for any reason. Any supplier's equipment, devices or supplies which are used by any person in an unauthorized gambling operation shall be forfeited to the State. A holder of an owners license or an organization gaming license may own its own equipment, devices and supplies. Each holder of an owners license or an organization gaming license under the Act shall file an annual report listing its inventories of gambling equipment, devices and supplies.
    (f) Any person who knowingly makes a false statement on an application is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
    (g) Any gambling equipment, devices and supplies provided by any licensed supplier may either be repaired on the riverboat, in the casino, or at the organization gaming facility or removed from the riverboat, casino, or organization gaming facility to a facility owned by the holder of an owners license, organization gaming license, or suppliers license for repair.
(Source: P.A. 101-31, eff. 6-28-19.)

    (230 ILCS 10/9) (from Ch. 120, par. 2409)
    Sec. 9. Occupational licenses.
    (a) The Board may issue an occupational license to an applicant upon the payment of a non-refundable fee set by the Board, upon a determination by the Board that the applicant is eligible for an occupational license and upon payment of an annual license fee in an amount to be established. To be eligible for an occupational license, an applicant must:
        (1) be at least 21 years of age if the applicant will
    	
perform any function involved in gaming by patrons. Any applicant seeking an occupational license for a non-gaming function shall be at least 18 years of age;
        (2) not have been convicted of a felony offense, a
    	
violation of Article 28 of the Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012, or a similar statute of any other jurisdiction;
        (2.5) not have been convicted of a crime, other than
    	
a crime described in item (2) of this subsection (a), involving dishonesty or moral turpitude, except that the Board may, in its discretion, issue an occupational license to a person who has been convicted of a crime described in this item (2.5) more than 10 years prior to his or her application and has not subsequently been convicted of any other crime;
        (3) have demonstrated a level of skill or knowledge
    	
which the Board determines to be necessary in order to operate gambling aboard a riverboat, in a casino, or at an organization gaming facility; and
        (4) have met standards for the holding of an
    	
occupational license as adopted by rules of the Board. Such rules shall provide that any person or entity seeking an occupational license to manage gambling operations under this Act shall be subject to background inquiries and further requirements similar to those required of applicants for an owners license. Furthermore, such rules shall provide that each such entity shall be permitted to manage gambling operations for only one licensed owner.
    (b) Each application for an occupational license shall be on forms prescribed by the Board and shall contain all information required by the Board. The applicant shall set forth in the application: whether he has been issued prior gambling related licenses; whether he has been licensed in any other state under any other name, and, if so, such name and his age; and whether or not a permit or license issued to him in any other state has been suspended, restricted or revoked, and, if so, for what period of time.
    (c) Each applicant shall submit with his application, on forms provided by the Board, 2 sets of his fingerprints. The Board shall charge each applicant a fee set by the Department of State Police to defray the costs associated with the search and classification of fingerprints obtained by the Board with respect to the applicant's application. These fees shall be paid into the State Police Services Fund.
    (d) The Board may in its discretion refuse an occupational license to any person: (1) who is unqualified to perform the duties required of such applicant; (2) who fails to disclose or states falsely any information called for in the application; (3) who has been found guilty of a violation of this Act or whose prior gambling related license or application therefor has been suspended, restricted, revoked or denied for just cause in any other state; or (4) for any other just cause.
    (e) The Board may suspend, revoke or restrict any occupational licensee: (1) for violation of any provision of this Act; (2) for violation of any of the rules and regulations of the Board; (3) for any cause which, if known to the Board, would have disqualified the applicant from receiving such license; or (4) for default in the payment of any obligation or debt due to the State of Illinois; or (5) for any other just cause.
    (f) A person who knowingly makes a false statement on an application is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
    (g) Any license issued pursuant to this Section shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance.
    (h) Nothing in this Act shall be interpreted to prohibit a licensed owner or organization gaming licensee from entering into an agreement with a public community college or a school approved under the Private Business and Vocational Schools Act of 2012 for the training of any occupational licensee. Any training offered by such a school shall be in accordance with a written agreement between the licensed owner or organization gaming licensee and the school.
    (i) Any training provided for occupational licensees may be conducted either at the site of the gambling facility or at a school with which a licensed owner or organization gaming licensee has entered into an agreement pursuant to subsection (h).
(Source: P.A. 101-31, eff. 6-28-19.)

    (230 ILCS 10/10) (from Ch. 120, par. 2410)
    Sec. 10. Bond of licensee. Before an owners license is issued or re-issued or a managers license is issued, the licensee shall post a bond in the sum of $200,000 to the State of Illinois. The bond shall be used to guarantee that the licensee faithfully makes the payments, keeps his books and records and makes reports, and conducts his games of chance in conformity with this Act and the rules adopted by the Board. The bond shall not be canceled by a surety on less than 30 days notice in writing to the Board. If a bond is canceled and the licensee fails to file a new bond with the Board in the required amount on or before the effective date of cancellation, the licensee's license shall be revoked. The total and aggregate liability of the surety on the bond is limited to the amount specified in the bond.
(Source: P.A. 93-28, eff. 6-20-03.)

    (230 ILCS 10/11) (from Ch. 120, par. 2411)
    Sec. 11. Conduct of gambling. Gambling may be conducted by licensed owners or licensed managers on behalf of the State aboard riverboats. Gambling may be conducted by organization gaming licensees at organization gaming facilities. Gambling authorized under this Section is subject to the following standards:
        (1) A licensee may conduct riverboat gambling
    	
authorized under this Act regardless of whether it conducts excursion cruises. A licensee may permit the continuous ingress and egress of patrons on a riverboat not used for excursion cruises for the purpose of gambling. Excursion cruises shall not exceed 4 hours for a round trip. However, the Board may grant express approval for an extended cruise on a case-by-case basis.
        (1.5) An owners licensee may conduct gambling
    	
operations authorized under this Act 24 hours a day.
        (2) (Blank).
        (3) Minimum and maximum wagers on games shall be set
    	
by the licensee.
        (4) Agents of the Board and the Department of State
    	
Police may board and inspect any riverboat, enter and inspect any portion of a casino, or enter and inspect any portion of an organization gaming facility at any time for the purpose of determining whether this Act is being complied with. Every riverboat, if under way and being hailed by a law enforcement officer or agent of the Board, must stop immediately and lay to.
        (5) Employees of the Board shall have the right to be
    	
present on the riverboat or in the casino or on adjacent facilities under the control of the licensee and at the organization gaming facility under the control of the organization gaming licensee.
        (6) Gambling equipment and supplies customarily used
    	
in conducting gambling must be purchased or leased only from suppliers licensed for such purpose under this Act. The Board may approve the transfer, sale, or lease of gambling equipment and supplies by a licensed owner from or to an affiliate of the licensed owner as long as the gambling equipment and supplies were initially acquired from a supplier licensed in Illinois.
        (7) Persons licensed under this Act shall permit no
    	
form of wagering on gambling games except as permitted by this Act.
        (8) Wagers may be received only from a person present
    	
on a licensed riverboat, in a casino, or at an organization gaming facility. No person present on a licensed riverboat, in a casino, or at an organization gaming facility shall place or attempt to place a wager on behalf of another person who is not present on the riverboat, in a casino, or at the organization gaming facility.
        (9) Wagering, including gaming authorized under
    	
Section 7.7, shall not be conducted with money or other negotiable currency.
        (10) A person under age 21 shall not be permitted on
    	
an area of a riverboat or casino where gambling is being conducted or at an organization gaming facility where gambling is being conducted, except for a person at least 18 years of age who is an employee of the riverboat or casino gambling operation or gaming operation. No employee under age 21 shall perform any function involved in gambling by the patrons. No person under age 21 shall be permitted to make a wager under this Act, and any winnings that are a result of a wager by a person under age 21, whether or not paid by a licensee, shall be treated as winnings for the privilege tax purposes, confiscated, and forfeited to the State and deposited into the Education Assistance Fund.
        (11) Gambling excursion cruises are permitted only
    	
when the waterway for which the riverboat is licensed is navigable, as determined by the Board in consultation with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. This paragraph (11) does not limit the ability of a licensee to conduct gambling authorized under this Act when gambling excursion cruises are not permitted.
        (12) All tickets, chips, or electronic cards used to
    	
make wagers must be purchased (i) from a licensed owner or manager, in the case of a riverboat, either aboard a riverboat or at an onshore facility which has been approved by the Board and which is located where the riverboat docks, (ii) in the case of a casino, from a licensed owner at the casino, or (iii) from an organization gaming licensee at the organization gaming facility. The tickets, chips, or electronic cards may be purchased by means of an agreement under which the owner or manager extends credit to the patron. Such tickets, chips, or electronic cards may be used while aboard the riverboat, in the casino, or at the organization gaming facility only for the purpose of making wagers on gambling games.
        (13) Notwithstanding any other Section of this Act,
    	
in addition to the other licenses authorized under this Act, the Board may issue special event licenses allowing persons who are not otherwise licensed to conduct riverboat gambling to conduct such gambling on a specified date or series of dates. Riverboat gambling under such a license may take place on a riverboat not normally used for riverboat gambling. The Board shall establish standards, fees and fines for, and limitations upon, such licenses, which may differ from the standards, fees, fines and limitations otherwise applicable under this Act. All such fees shall be deposited into the State Gaming Fund. All such fines shall be deposited into the Education Assistance Fund, created by Public Act 86-0018, of the State of Illinois.
        (14) In addition to the above, gambling must be
    	
conducted in accordance with all rules adopted by the Board.
(Source: P.A. 101-31, eff. 6-28-19.)

    (230 ILCS 10/11.1) (from Ch. 120, par. 2411.1)
    Sec. 11.1. Collection of amounts owing under credit agreements. Notwithstanding any applicable statutory provision to the contrary, a licensed owner, licensed manager, or organization gaming licensee who extends credit to a gambling patron pursuant to paragraph (12) of Section 11 of this Act is expressly authorized to institute a cause of action to collect any amounts due and owing under the extension of credit, as well as the licensed owner's, licensed manager's, or organization gaming licensee's costs, expenses and reasonable attorney's fees incurred in collection.
(Source: P.A. 101-31, eff. 6-28-19.)

    (230 ILCS 10/11.2)
    Sec. 11.2. Relocation of riverboat home dock.
    (a) A licensee that was not conducting riverboat gambling on January 1, 1998 may apply to the Board for renewal and approval of relocation to a new home dock location authorized under Section 3(c) and the Board shall grant the application and approval upon receipt by the licensee of approval from the new municipality or county, as the case may be, in which the licensee wishes to relocate pursuant to Section 7(j).
    (b) Any licensee that relocates its home dock pursuant to this Section shall attain a level of at least 20% minority person and woman ownership, at least 16% and 4% respectively, within a time period prescribed by the Board, but not to exceed 12 months from the date the licensee begins conducting gambling at the new home dock location. The 12-month period shall be extended by the amount of time necessary to conduct a background investigation pursuant to Section 6. For the purposes of this Section, the terms "woman" and "minority person" have the meanings provided in Section 2 of the Business Enterprise for Minorities, Women, and Persons with Disabilities Act.
(Source: P.A. 100-391, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (230 ILCS 10/12) (from Ch. 120, par. 2412)
    Sec. 12. Admission tax; fees.
    (a) A tax is hereby imposed upon admissions to riverboat and casino gambling facilities operated by licensed owners authorized pursuant to this Act. Until July 1, 2002, the rate is $2 per person admitted. From July 1, 2002 until July 1, 2003, the rate is $3 per person admitted. From July 1, 2003 until August 23, 2005 (the effective date of Public Act 94-673), for a licensee that admitted 1,000,000 persons or fewer in the previous calendar year, the rate is $3 per person admitted; for a licensee that admitted more than 1,000,000 but no more than 2,300,000 persons in the previous calendar year, the rate is $4 per person admitted; and for a licensee that admitted more than 2,300,000 persons in the previous calendar year, the rate is $5 per person admitted. Beginning on August 23, 2005 (the effective date of Public Act 94-673), for a licensee that admitted 1,000,000 persons or fewer in calendar year 2004, the rate is $2 per person admitted, and for all other licensees, including licensees that were not conducting gambling operations in 2004, the rate is $3 per person admitted. This admission tax is imposed upon the licensed owner conducting gambling.
        (1) The admission tax shall be paid for each
    	
admission, except that a person who exits a riverboat gambling facility and reenters that riverboat gambling facility within the same gaming day shall be subject only to the initial admission tax.
        (2) (Blank).
        (3) The riverboat licensee may issue tax-free passes
    	
to actual and necessary officials and employees of the licensee or other persons actually working on the riverboat.
        (4) The number and issuance of tax-free passes is
    	
subject to the rules of the Board, and a list of all persons to whom the tax-free passes are issued shall be filed with the Board.
    (a-5) A fee is hereby imposed upon admissions operated by licensed managers on behalf of the State pursuant to Section 7.3 at the rates provided in this subsection (a-5). For a licensee that admitted 1,000,000 persons or fewer in the previous calendar year, the rate is $3 per person admitted; for a licensee that admitted more than 1,000,000 but no more than 2,300,000 persons in the previous calendar year, the rate is $4 per person admitted; and for a licensee that admitted more than 2,300,000 persons in the previous calendar year, the rate is $5 per person admitted.
        (1) The admission fee shall be paid for each
    	
admission.
        (2) (Blank).
        (3) The licensed manager may issue fee-free passes to
    	
actual and necessary officials and employees of the manager or other persons actually working on the riverboat.
        (4) The number and issuance of fee-free passes is
    	
subject to the rules of the Board, and a list of all persons to whom the fee-free passes are issued shall be filed with the Board.
    (b) Except as provided in subsection (b-5), from the tax imposed under subsection (a) and the fee imposed under subsection (a-5), a municipality shall receive from the State $1 for each person embarking on a riverboat docked within the municipality or entering a casino located within the municipality, and a county shall receive $1 for each person entering a casino or embarking on a riverboat docked within the county but outside the boundaries of any municipality. The municipality's or county's share shall be collected by the Board on behalf of the State and remitted quarterly by the State, subject to appropriation, to the treasurer of the unit of local government for deposit in the general fund.
    (b-5) From the tax imposed under subsection (a) and the fee imposed under subsection (a-5), $1 for each person embarking on a riverboat designated in paragraph (4) of subsection (e-5) of Section 7 shall be divided as follows: $0.70 to the City of Rockford, $0.05 to the City of Loves Park, $0.05 to the Village of Machesney Park, and $0.20 to Winnebago County.
    The municipality's or county's share shall be collected by the Board on behalf of the State and remitted monthly by the State, subject to appropriation, to the treasurer of the unit of local government for deposit in the general fund.
    (b-10) From the tax imposed under subsection (a) and the fee imposed under subsection (a-5), $1 for each person embarking on a riverboat or entering a casino designated in paragraph (1) of subsection (e-5) of Section 7 shall be divided as follows: $0.70 to the City of Chicago, $0.15 to the Village of Maywood, and $0.15 to the Village of Summit.
    The municipality's or county's share shall be collected by the Board on behalf of the State and remitted monthly by the State, subject to appropriation, to the treasurer of the unit of local government for deposit in the general fund.
    (b-15) From the tax imposed under subsection (a) and the fee imposed under subsection (a-5), $1 for each person embarking on a riverboat or entering a casino designated in paragraph (2) of subsection (e-5) of Section 7 shall be divided as follows: $0.70 to the City of Danville and $0.30 to Vermilion County.
    The municipality's or county's share shall be collected by the Board on behalf of the State and remitted monthly by the State, subject to appropriation, to the treasurer of the unit of local government for deposit in the general fund.
    (c) The licensed owner shall pay the entire admission tax to the Board and the licensed manager shall pay the entire admission fee to the Board. Such payments shall be made daily. Accompanying each payment shall be a return on forms provided by the Board which shall include other information regarding admissions as the Board may require. Failure to submit either the payment or the return within the specified time may result in suspension or revocation of the owners or managers license.
    (c-5) A tax is imposed on admissions to organization gaming facilities at the rate of $3 per person admitted by an organization gaming licensee. The tax is imposed upon the organization gaming licensee.
        (1) The admission tax shall be paid for each
    	
admission, except that a person who exits an organization gaming facility and reenters that organization gaming facility within the same gaming day, as the term "gaming day" is defined by the Board by rule, shall be subject only to the initial admission tax. The Board shall establish, by rule, a procedure to determine whether a person admitted to an organization gaming facility has paid the admission tax.
        (2) An organization gaming licensee may issue
    	
tax-free passes to actual and necessary officials and employees of the licensee and other persons associated with its gaming operations.
        (3) The number and issuance of tax-free passes is
    	
subject to the rules of the Board, and a list of all persons to whom the tax-free passes are issued shall be filed with the Board.
        (4) The organization gaming licensee shall pay the
    	
entire admission tax to the Board.
    Such payments shall be made daily. Accompanying each payment shall be a return on forms provided by the Board, which shall include other information regarding admission as the Board may require. Failure to submit either the payment or the return within the specified time may result in suspension or revocation of the organization gaming license.
    From the tax imposed under this subsection (c-5), a municipality other than the Village of Stickney or the City of Collinsville in which an organization gaming facility is located, or if the organization gaming facility is not located within a municipality, then the county in which the organization gaming facility is located, except as otherwise provided in this Section, shall receive, subject to appropriation, $1 for each person who enters the organization gaming facility. For each admission to the organization gaming facility in excess of 1,500,000 in a year, from the tax imposed under this subsection (c-5), the county in which the organization gaming facility is located shall receive, subject to appropriation, $0.30, which shall be in addition to any other moneys paid to the county under this Section.
    From the tax imposed under this subsection (c-5) on an organization gaming facility located in the Village of Stickney, $1 for each person who enters the organization gaming facility shall be distributed as follows, subject to appropriation: $0.24 to the Village of Stickney, $0.49 to the Town of Cicero, $0.05 to the City of Berwyn, and $0.17 to the Stickney Public Health District, and $0.05 to the City of Bridgeview.
    From the tax imposed under this subsection (c-5) on an organization gaming facility located in the City of Collinsville, the following shall each receive 10 cents for each person who enters the organization gaming facility, subject to appropriation: the Village of Alorton; the Village of Washington Park; State Park Place; the Village of Fairmont City; the City of Centreville; the Village of Brooklyn; the City of Venice; the City of Madison; the Village of Caseyville; and the Village of Pontoon Beach.
    On the 25th day of each month, all amounts remaining after payments required under this subsection (c-5) have been made shall be transferred into the Capital Projects Fund.
    (d) The Board shall administer and collect the admission tax imposed by this Section, to the extent practicable, in a manner consistent with the provisions of Sections 4, 5, 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e, 5f, 5g, 5i, 5j, 6, 6a, 6b, 6c, 8, 9 and 10 of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act and Section 3-7 of the Uniform Penalty and Interest Act.
(Source: P.A. 101-31, eff. 6-28-19.)

    (230 ILCS 10/13) (from Ch. 120, par. 2413)
    Sec. 13. Wagering tax; rate; distribution.
    (a) Until January 1, 1998, a tax is imposed on the adjusted gross receipts received from gambling games authorized under this Act at the rate of 20%.
    (a-1) From January 1, 1998 until July 1, 2002, a privilege tax is imposed on persons engaged in the business of conducting riverboat gambling operations, based on the adjusted gross receipts received by a licensed owner from gambling games authorized under this Act at the following rates:
        15% of annual adjusted gross receipts up to and
    	
including $25,000,000;
        20% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$25,000,000 but not exceeding $50,000,000;
        25% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$50,000,000 but not exceeding $75,000,000;
        30% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$75,000,000 but not exceeding $100,000,000;
        35% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$100,000,000.
    (a-2) From July 1, 2002 until July 1, 2003, a privilege tax is imposed on persons engaged in the business of conducting riverboat gambling operations, other than licensed managers conducting riverboat gambling operations on behalf of the State, based on the adjusted gross receipts received by a licensed owner from gambling games authorized under this Act at the following rates:
        15% of annual adjusted gross receipts up to and
    	
including $25,000,000;
        22.5% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$25,000,000 but not exceeding $50,000,000;
        27.5% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$50,000,000 but not exceeding $75,000,000;
        32.5% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$75,000,000 but not exceeding $100,000,000;
        37.5% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$100,000,000 but not exceeding $150,000,000;
        45% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$150,000,000 but not exceeding $200,000,000;
        50% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$200,000,000.
    (a-3) Beginning July 1, 2003, a privilege tax is imposed on persons engaged in the business of conducting riverboat gambling operations, other than licensed managers conducting riverboat gambling operations on behalf of the State, based on the adjusted gross receipts received by a licensed owner from gambling games authorized under this Act at the following rates:
        15% of annual adjusted gross receipts up to and
    	
including $25,000,000;
        27.5% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$25,000,000 but not exceeding $37,500,000;
        32.5% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$37,500,000 but not exceeding $50,000,000;
        37.5% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$50,000,000 but not exceeding $75,000,000;
        45% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$75,000,000 but not exceeding $100,000,000;
        50% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$100,000,000 but not exceeding $250,000,000;
        70% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$250,000,000.
    An amount equal to the amount of wagering taxes collected under this subsection (a-3) that are in addition to the amount of wagering taxes that would have been collected if the wagering tax rates under subsection (a-2) were in effect shall be paid into the Common School Fund.
    The privilege tax imposed under this subsection (a-3) shall no longer be imposed beginning on the earlier of (i) July 1, 2005; (ii) the first date after June 20, 2003 that riverboat gambling operations are conducted pursuant to a dormant license; or (iii) the first day that riverboat gambling operations are conducted under the authority of an owners license that is in addition to the 10 owners licenses initially authorized under this Act. For the purposes of this subsection (a-3), the term "dormant license" means an owners license that is authorized by this Act under which no riverboat gambling operations are being conducted on June 20, 2003.
    (a-4) Beginning on the first day on which the tax imposed under subsection (a-3) is no longer imposed and ending upon the imposition of the privilege tax under subsection (a-5) of this Section, a privilege tax is imposed on persons engaged in the business of conducting gambling operations, other than licensed managers conducting riverboat gambling operations on behalf of the State, based on the adjusted gross receipts received by a licensed owner from gambling games authorized under this Act at the following rates:
        15% of annual adjusted gross receipts up to and
    	
including $25,000,000;
        22.5% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$25,000,000 but not exceeding $50,000,000;
        27.5% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$50,000,000 but not exceeding $75,000,000;
        32.5% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$75,000,000 but not exceeding $100,000,000;
        37.5% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$100,000,000 but not exceeding $150,000,000;
        45% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$150,000,000 but not exceeding $200,000,000;
        50% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$200,000,000.
    For the imposition of the privilege tax in this subsection (a-4), amounts paid pursuant to item (1) of subsection (b) of Section 56 of the Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975 shall not be included in the determination of adjusted gross receipts.
    (a-5)(1) Beginning on July 1, 2020, a privilege tax is imposed on persons engaged in the business of conducting gambling operations, other than the owners licensee under paragraph (1) of subsection (e-5) of Section 7 and licensed managers conducting riverboat gambling operations on behalf of the State, based on the adjusted gross receipts received by such licensee from the gambling games authorized under this Act. The privilege tax for all gambling games other than table games, including, but not limited to, slot machines, video game of chance gambling, and electronic gambling games shall be at the following rates:
        15% of annual adjusted gross receipts up to and
    	
including $25,000,000;
        22.5% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$25,000,000 but not exceeding $50,000,000;
        27.5% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$50,000,000 but not exceeding $75,000,000;
        32.5% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$75,000,000 but not exceeding $100,000,000;
        37.5% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$100,000,000 but not exceeding $150,000,000;
        45% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$150,000,000 but not exceeding $200,000,000;
        50% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$200,000,000.
    The privilege tax for table games shall be at the following rates:
        15% of annual adjusted gross receipts up to and
    	
including $25,000,000;
        20% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$25,000,000.
    For the imposition of the privilege tax in this subsection (a-5), amounts paid pursuant to item (1) of subsection (b) of Section 56 of the Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975 shall not be included in the determination of adjusted gross receipts.
    (2) Beginning on the first day that an owners licensee under paragraph (1) of subsection (e-5) of Section 7 conducts gambling operations, either in a temporary facility or a permanent facility, a privilege tax is imposed on persons engaged in the business of conducting gambling operations under paragraph (1) of subsection (e-5) of Section 7, other than licensed managers conducting riverboat gambling operations on behalf of the State, based on the adjusted gross receipts received by such licensee from the gambling games authorized under this Act. The privilege tax for all gambling games other than table games, including, but not limited to, slot machines, video game of chance gambling, and electronic gambling games shall be at the following rates:
        12% of annual adjusted gross receipts up to and
    	
including $25,000,000 to the State and 10.5% of annual adjusted gross receipts up to and including $25,000,000 to the City of Chicago;
        16% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$25,000,000 but not exceeding $50,000,000 to the State and 14% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of $25,000,000 but not exceeding $50,000,000 to the City of Chicago;
        20.1% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$50,000,000 but not exceeding $75,000,000 to the State and 17.4% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of $50,000,000 but not exceeding $75,000,000 to the City of Chicago;
        21.4% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$75,000,000 but not exceeding $100,000,000 to the State and 18.6% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of $75,000,000 but not exceeding $100,000,000 to the City of Chicago;
        22.7% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$100,000,000 but not exceeding $150,000,000 to the State and 19.8% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of $100,000,000 but not exceeding $150,000,000 to the City of Chicago;
        24.1% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$150,000,000 but not exceeding $225,000,000 to the State and 20.9% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of $150,000,000 but not exceeding $225,000,000 to the City of Chicago;
        26.8% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$225,000,000 but not exceeding $1,000,000,000 to the State and 23.2% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of $225,000,000 but not exceeding $1,000,000,000 to the City of Chicago;
        40% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$1,000,000,000 to the State and 34.7% of annual gross receipts in excess of $1,000,000,000 to the City of Chicago.
    The privilege tax for table games shall be at the following rates:
        8.1% of annual adjusted gross receipts up to and
    	
including $25,000,000 to the State and 6.9% of annual adjusted gross receipts up to and including $25,000,000 to the City of Chicago;
        10.7% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$25,000,000 but not exceeding $75,000,000 to the State and 9.3% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of $25,000,000 but not exceeding $75,000,000 to the City of Chicago;
        11.2% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$75,000,000 but not exceeding $175,000,000 to the State and 9.8% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of $75,000,000 but not exceeding $175,000,000 to the City of Chicago;
        13.5% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$175,000,000 but not exceeding $225,000,000 to the State and 11.5% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of $175,000,000 but not exceeding $225,000,000 to the City of Chicago;
        15.1% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$225,000,000 but not exceeding $275,000,000 to the State and 12.9% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of $225,000,000 but not exceeding $275,000,000 to the City of Chicago;
        16.2% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$275,000,000 but not exceeding $375,000,000 to the State and 13.8% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of $275,000,000 but not exceeding $375,000,000 to the City of Chicago;
        18.9% of annual adjusted gross receipts in excess of
    	
$375,000,000 to the State and 16.1% of annual gross receipts in excess of $375,000,000 to the City of Chicago.
    For the imposition of the privilege tax in this subsection (a-5), amounts paid pursuant to item (1) of subsection (b) of Section 56 of the Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975 shall not be included in the determination of adjusted gross receipts.
    Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection (a-5), for the first 10 years that the privilege tax is imposed under this subsection (a-5), the privilege tax shall be imposed on the modified annual adjusted gross receipts of a riverboat or casino conducting gambling operations in the City of East St. Louis, unless:
        (1) the riverboat or casino fails to employ at least
    	
450 people;
        (2) the riverboat or casino fails to maintain
    	
operations in a manner consistent with this Act or is not a viable riverboat or casino subject to the approval of the Board; or
        (3) the owners licensee is not an entity in which
    	
employees participate in an employee stock ownership plan.
    As used in this subsection (a-5), "modified annual adjusted gross receipts" means:
        (A) for calendar year 2020, the annual adjusted gross
    	
receipts for the current year minus the difference between an amount equal to the average annual adjusted gross receipts from a riverboat or casino conducting gambling operations in the City of East St. Louis for 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017, and 2018 and the annual adjusted gross receipts for 2018;
        (B) for calendar year 2021, the annual adjusted gross
    	
receipts for the current year minus the difference between an amount equal to the average annual adjusted gross receipts from a riverboat or casino conducting gambling operations in the City of East St. Louis for 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017, and 2018 and the annual adjusted gross receipts for 2019; and
        (C) for calendar years 2022 through 2029, the annual
    	
adjusted gross receipts for the current year minus the difference between an amount equal to the average annual adjusted gross receipts from a riverboat or casino conducting gambling operations in the City of East St. Louis for 3 years preceding the current year and the annual adjusted gross receipts for the immediately preceding year.
    (a-6) From June 28, 2019 (the effective date of Public Act 101-31) until June 30, 2023, an owners licensee that conducted gambling operations prior to January 1, 2011 shall receive a dollar-for-dollar credit against the tax imposed under this Section for any renovation or construction costs paid by the owners licensee, but in no event shall the credit exceed $2,000,000.
    Additionally, from June 28, 2019 (the effective date of Public Act 101-31) until December 31, 2022, an owners licensee that (i) is located within 15 miles of the Missouri border, and (ii) has at least 3 riverboats, casinos, or their equivalent within a 45-mile radius, may be authorized to relocate to a new location with the approval of both the unit of local government designated as the home dock and the Board, so long as the new location is within the same unit of local government and no more than 3 miles away from its original location. Such owners licensee shall receive a credit against the tax imposed under this Section equal to 8% of the total project costs, as approved by the Board, for any renovation or construction costs paid by the owners licensee for the construction of the new facility, provided that the new facility is operational by July 1, 2022. In determining whether or not to approve a relocation, the Board must consider the extent to which the relocation will diminish the gaming revenues received by other Illinois gaming facilities.
    (a-7) Beginning in the initial adjustment year and through the final adjustment year, if the total obligation imposed pursuant to either subsection (a-5) or (a-6) will result in an owners licensee receiving less after-tax adjusted gross receipts than it received in calendar year 2018, then the total amount of privilege taxes that the owners licensee is required to pay for that calendar year shall be reduced to the extent necessary so that the after-tax adjusted gross receipts in that calendar year equals the after-tax adjusted gross receipts in calendar year 2018, but the privilege tax reduction shall not exceed the annual adjustment cap. If pursuant to this subsection (a-7), the total obligation imposed pursuant to either subsection (a-5) or (a-6) shall be reduced, then the owners licensee shall not receive a refund from the State at the end of the subject calendar year but instead shall be able to apply that amount as a credit against any payments it owes to the State in the following calendar year to satisfy its total obligation under either subsection (a-5) or (a-6). The credit for the final adjustment year shall occur in the calendar year following the final adjustment year.
    If an owners licensee that conducted gambling operations prior to January 1, 2019 expands its riverboat or casino, including, but not limited to, with respect to its gaming floor, additional non-gaming amenities such as restaurants, bars, and hotels and other additional facilities, and incurs construction and other costs related to such expansion from June 28, 2019 (the effective date of Public Act 101-31) until June 28, 2024 (the 5th anniversary of the effective date of Public Act 101-31), then for each $15,000,000 spent for any such construction or other costs related to expansion paid by the owners licensee, the final adjustment year shall be extended by one year and the annual adjustment cap shall increase by 0.2% of adjusted gross receipts during each calendar year until and including the final adjustment year. No further modifications to the final adjustment year or annual adjustment cap shall be made after $75,000,000 is incurred in construction or other costs related to expansion so that the final adjustment year shall not extend beyond the 9th calendar year after the initial adjustment year, not including the initial adjustment year, and the annual adjustment cap shall not exceed 4% of adjusted gross receipts in a particular calendar year. Construction and other costs related to expansion shall include all project related costs, including, but not limited to, all hard and soft costs, financing costs, on or off-site ground, road or utility work, cost of gaming equipment and all other personal property, initial fees assessed for each incremental gaming position, and the cost of incremental land acquired for such expansion. Soft costs shall include, but not be limited to, legal fees, architect, engineering and design costs, other consultant costs, insurance cost, permitting costs, and pre-opening costs related to the expansion, including, but not limited to, any of the following: marketing, real estate taxes, personnel, training, travel and out-of-pocket expenses, supply, inventory, and other costs, and any other project related soft costs.
    To be eligible for the tax credits in subsection (a-6), all construction contracts shall include a requirement that the contractor enter into a project labor agreement with the building and construction trades council with geographic jurisdiction of the location of the proposed gaming facility.
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection (a-7), this subsection (a-7) does not apply to an owners licensee unless such owners licensee spends at least $15,000,000 on construction and other costs related to its expansion, excluding the initial fees assessed for each incremental gaming position.
    This subsection (a-7) does not apply to owners licensees authorized pursuant to subsection (e-5) of Section 7 of this Act.
    For purposes of this subsection (a-7):
    "Building and construction trades council" means any organization representing multiple construction entities that are monitoring or attentive to compliance with public or workers' safety laws, wage and hour requirements, or other statutory requirements or that are making or maintaining collective bargaining agreements.
    "Initial adjustment year" means the year commencing on January 1 of the calendar year immediately following the earlier of the following:
        (1) the commencement of gambling operations, either
    	
in a temporary or permanent facility, with respect to the owners license authorized under paragraph (1) of subsection (e-5) of Section 7 of this Act; or
        (2) June 28, 2021 (24 months after the effective date
    	
of Public Act 101-31);
provided the initial adjustment year shall not commence earlier than June 28, 2020 (12 months after the effective date of Public Act 101-31).
    "Final adjustment year" means the 2nd calendar year after the initial adjustment year, not including the initial adjustment year, and as may be extended further as described in this subsection (a-7).
    "Annual adjustment cap" means 3% of adjusted gross receipts in a particular calendar year, and as may be increased further as otherwise described in this subsection (a-7).
    (a-8) Riverboat gambling operations conducted by a licensed manager on behalf of the State are not subject to the tax imposed under this Section.
    (a-9) Beginning on January 1, 2020, the calculation of gross receipts or adjusted gross receipts, for the purposes of this Section, for a riverboat, a casino, or an organization gaming facility shall not include the dollar amount of non-cashable vouchers, coupons, and electronic promotions redeemed by wagerers upon the riverboat, in the casino, or in the organization gaming facility up to and including an amount not to exceed 20% of a riverboat's, a casino's, or an organization gaming facility's adjusted gross receipts.
    The Illinois Gaming Board shall submit to the General Assembly a comprehensive report no later than March 31, 2023 detailing, at a minimum, the effect of removing non-cashable vouchers, coupons, and electronic promotions from this calculation on net gaming revenues to the State in calendar years 2020 through 2022, the increase or reduction in wagerers as a result of removing non-cashable vouchers, coupons, and electronic promotions from this calculation, the effect of the tax rates in subsection (a-5) on net gaming revenues to this State, and proposed modifications to the calculation.
    (a-10) The taxes imposed by this Section shall be paid by the licensed owner or the organization gaming licensee to the Board not later than 5:00 o'clock p.m. of the day after the day when the wagers were made.
    (a-15) If the privilege tax imposed under subsection (a-3) is no longer imposed pursuant to item (i) of the last paragraph of subsection (a-3), then by June 15 of each year, each owners licensee, other than an owners licensee that admitted 1,000,000 persons or fewer in calendar year 2004, must, in addition to the payment of all amounts otherwise due under this Section, pay to the Board a reconciliation payment in the amount, if any, by which the licensed owner's base amount exceeds the amount of net privilege tax paid by the licensed owner to the Board in the then current State fiscal year. A licensed owner's net privilege tax obligation due for the balance of the State fiscal year shall be reduced up to the total of the amount paid by the licensed owner in its June 15 reconciliation payment. The obligation imposed by this subsection (a-15) is binding on any person, firm, corporation, or other entity that acquires an ownership interest in any such owners license. The obligation imposed under this subsection (a-15) terminates on the earliest of: (i) July 1, 2007, (ii) the first day after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 94th General Assembly that riverboat gambling operations are conducted pursuant to a dormant license, (iii) the first day that riverboat gambling operations are conducted under the authority of an owners license that is in addition to the 10 owners licenses initially authorized under this Act, or (iv) the first day that a licensee under the Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975 conducts gaming operations with slot machines or other electronic gaming devices. The Board must reduce the obligation imposed under this subsection (a-15) by an amount the Board deems reasonable for any of the following reasons: (A) an act or acts of God, (B) an act of bioterrorism or terrorism or a bioterrorism or terrorism threat that was investigated by a law enforcement agency, or (C) a condition beyond the control of the owners licensee that does not result from any act or omission by the owners licensee or any of its agents and that poses a hazardous threat to the health and safety of patrons. If an owners licensee pays an amount in excess of its liability under this Section, the Board shall apply the overpayment to future payments required under this Section.
    For purposes of this subsection (a-15):
    "Act of God" means an incident caused by the operation of an extraordinary force that cannot be foreseen, that cannot be avoided by the exercise of due care, and for which no person can be held liable.
    "Base amount" means the following:
        For a riverboat in Alton, $31,000,000.
        For a riverboat in East Peoria, $43,000,000.
        For the Empress riverboat in Joliet, $86,000,000.
        For a riverboat in Metropolis, $45,000,000.
        For the Harrah's riverboat in Joliet, $114,000,000.
        For a riverboat in Aurora, $86,000,000.
        For a riverboat in East St. Louis, $48,500,000.
        For a riverboat in Elgin, $198,000,000.
    "Dormant license" has the meaning ascribed to it in subsection (a-3).
    "Net privilege tax" means all privilege taxes paid by a licensed owner to the Board under this Section, less all payments made from the State Gaming Fund pursuant to subsection (b) of this Section.
    The changes made to this subsection (a-15) by Public Act 94-839 are intended to restate and clarify the intent of Public Act 94-673 with respect to the amount of the payments required to be made under this subsection by an owners licensee to the Board.
    (b) From the tax revenue from riverboat or casino gambling deposited in the State Gaming Fund under this Section, an amount equal to 5% of adjusted gross receipts generated by a riverboat or a casino, other than a riverboat or casino designated in paragraph (1), (3), or (4) of subsection (e-5) of Section 7, shall be paid monthly, subject to appropriation by the General Assembly, to the unit of local government in which the casino is located or that is designated as the home dock of the riverboat. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, beginning on the first day that an owners licensee under paragraph (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), or (6) of subsection (e-5) of Section 7 conducts gambling operations, either in a temporary facility or a permanent facility, and for 2 years thereafter, a unit of local government designated as the home dock of a riverboat whose license was issued before January 1, 2019, other than a riverboat conducting gambling operations in the City of East St. Louis, shall not receive less under this subsection (b) than the amount the unit of local government received under this subsection (b) in calendar year 2018. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary and because the City of East St. Louis is a financially distressed city, beginning on the first day that an owners licensee under paragraph (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), or (6) of subsection (e-5) of Section 7 conducts gambling operations, either in a temporary facility or a permanent facility, and for 10 years thereafter, a unit of local government designated as the home dock of a riverboat conducting gambling operations in the City of East St. Louis shall not receive less under this subsection (b) than the amount the unit of local government received under this subsection (b) in calendar year 2018.
    From the tax revenue deposited in the State Gaming Fund pursuant to riverboat or casino gambling operations conducted by a licensed manager on behalf of the State, an amount equal to 5% of adjusted gross receipts generated pursuant to those riverboat or casino gambling operations shall be paid monthly, subject to appropriation by the General Assembly, to the unit of local government that is designated as the home dock of the riverboat upon which those riverboat gambling operations are conducted or in which the casino is located.
    From the tax revenue from riverboat or casino gambling deposited in the State Gaming Fund under this Section, an amount equal to 5% of the adjusted gross receipts generated by a riverboat designated in paragraph (3) of subsection (e-5) of Section 7 shall be divided and remitted monthly, subject to appropriation, as follows: 70% to Waukegan, 10% to Park City, 15% to North Chicago, and 5% to Lake County.
    From the tax revenue from riverboat or casino gambling deposited in the State Gaming Fund under this Section, an amount equal to 5% of the adjusted gross receipts generated by a riverboat designated in paragraph (4) of subsection (e-5) of Section 7 shall be remitted monthly, subject to appropriation, as follows: 70% to the City of Rockford, 5% to the City of Loves Park, 5% to the Village of Machesney, and 20% to Winnebago County.
    From the tax revenue from riverboat or casino gambling deposited in the State Gaming Fund under this Section, an amount equal to 5% of the adjusted gross receipts generated by a riverboat designated in paragraph (5) of subsection (e-5) of Section 7 shall be remitted monthly, subject to appropriation, as follows: 2% to the unit of local government in which the riverboat or casino is located, and 3% shall be distributed: (A) in accordance with a regional capital development plan entered into by the following communities: Village of Beecher, City of Blue Island, Village of Burnham, City of Calumet City, Village of Calumet Park, City of Chicago Heights, City of Country Club Hills, Village of Crestwood, Village of Crete, Village of Dixmoor, Village of Dolton, Village of East Hazel Crest, Village of Flossmoor, Village of Ford Heights, Village of Glenwood, City of Harvey, Village of Hazel Crest, Village of Homewood, Village of Lansing, Village of Lynwood, City of Markham, Village of Matteson, Village of Midlothian, Village of Monee, City of Oak Forest, Village of Olympia Fields, Village of Orland Hills, Village of Orland Park, City of Palos Heights, Village of Park Forest, Village of Phoenix, Village of Posen, Village of Richton Park, Village of Riverdale, Village of Robbins, Village of Sauk Village, Village of South Chicago Heights, Village of South Holland, Village of Steger, Village of Thornton, Village of Tinley Park, Village of University Park and Village of Worth; or (B) if no regional capital development plan exists, equally among the communities listed in item (A) to be used for capital expenditures or public pension payments, or both.
    Units of local government may refund any portion of the payment that they receive pursuant to this subsection (b) to the riverboat or casino.
    (b-4) Beginning on the first day the licensee under paragraph (5) of subsection (e-5) of Section 7 conducts gambling operations, either in a temporary facility or a permanent facility, and ending on July 31, 2042, from the tax revenue deposited in the State Gaming Fund under this Section, $5,000,000 shall be paid annually, subject to appropriation, to the host municipality of that owners licensee of a license issued or re-issued pursuant to Section 7.1 of this Act before January 1, 2012. Payments received by the host municipality pursuant to this subsection (b-4) may not be shared with any other unit of local government.
    (b-5) Beginning on June 28, 2019 (the effective date of Public Act 101-31), from the tax revenue deposited in the State Gaming Fund under this Section, an amount equal to 3% of adjusted gross receipts generated by each organization gaming facility located outside Madison County shall be paid monthly, subject to appropriation by the General Assembly, to a municipality other than the Village of Stickney in which each organization gaming facility is located or, if the organization gaming facility is not located within a municipality, to the county in which the organization gaming facility is located, except as otherwise provided in this Section. From the tax revenue deposited in the State Gaming Fund under this Section, an amount equal to 3% of adjusted gross receipts generated by an organization gaming facility located in the Village of Stickney shall be paid monthly, subject to appropriation by the General Assembly, as follows: 25% to the Village of Stickney, 5% to the City of Berwyn, 50% to the Town of Cicero, and 20% to the Stickney Public Health District.
    From the tax revenue deposited in the State Gaming Fund under this Section, an amount equal to 5% of adjusted gross receipts generated by an organization gaming facility located in the City of Collinsville shall be paid monthly, subject to appropriation by the General Assembly, as follows: 30% to the City of Alton, 30% to the City of East St. Louis, and 40% to the City of Collinsville.
    Municipalities and counties may refund any portion of the payment that they receive pursuant to this subsection (b-5) to the organization gaming facility.
    (b-6) Beginning on June 28, 2019 (the effective date of Public Act 101-31), from the tax revenue deposited in the State Gaming Fund under this Section, an amount equal to 2% of adjusted gross receipts generated by an organization gaming facility located outside Madison County shall be paid monthly, subject to appropriation by the General Assembly, to the county in which the organization gaming facility is located for the purposes of its criminal justice system or health care system.
    Counties may refund any portion of the payment that they receive pursuant to this subsection (b-6) to the organization gaming facility.
    (b-7) From the tax revenue from the organization gaming licensee located in one of the following townships of Cook County: Bloom, Bremen, Calumet, Orland, Rich, Thornton, or Worth, an amount equal to 5% of the adjusted gross receipts generated by that organization gaming licensee shall be remitted monthly, subject to appropriation, as follows: 2% to the unit of local government in which the organization gaming licensee is located, and 3% shall be distributed: (A) in accordance with a regional capital development plan entered into by the following communities: Village of Beecher, City of Blue Island, Village of Burnham, City of Calumet City, Village of Calumet Park, City of Chicago Heights, City of Country Club Hills, Village of Crestwood, Village of Crete, Village of Dixmoor, Village of Dolton, Village of East Hazel Crest, Village of Flossmoor, Village of Ford Heights, Village of Glenwood, City of Harvey, Village of Hazel Crest, Village of Homewood, Village of Lansing, Village of Lynwood, City of Markham, Village of Matteson, Village of Midlothian, Village of Monee, City of Oak Forest, Village of Olympia Fields, Village of Orland Hills, Village of Orland Park, City of Palos Heights, Village of Park Forest, Village of Phoenix, Village of Posen, Village of Richton Park, Village of Riverdale, Village of Robbins, Village of Sauk Village, Village of South Chicago Heights, Village of South Holland, Village of Steger, Village of Thornton, Village of Tinley Park, Village of University Park, and Village of Worth; or (B) if no regional capital development plan exists, equally among the communities listed in item (A) to be used for capital expenditures or public pension payments, or both.
    (b-8) In lieu of the payments under subsection (b) of this Section, from the tax revenue deposited in the State Gaming Fund pursuant to riverboat or casino gambling operations conducted by an owners licensee under paragraph (1) of subsection (e-5) of Section 7, an amount equal to the tax revenue generated from the privilege tax imposed by paragraph (2) of subsection (a-5) that is to be paid to the City of Chicago shall be paid monthly, subject to appropriation by the General Assembly, as follows: (1) an amount equal to 0.5% of the annual adjusted gross receipts generated by the owners licensee under paragraph (1) of subsection (e-5) of Section 7 to the home rule county in which the owners licensee is located for the purpose of enhancing the county's criminal justice system; and (2) the balance to the City of Chicago and shall be expended or obligated by the City of Chicago for pension payments in accordance with Public Act 99-506.
    (c) Appropriations, as approved by the General Assembly, may be made from the State Gaming Fund to the Board (i) for the administration and enforcement of this Act and the Video Gaming Act, (ii) for distribution to the Department of State Police and to the Department of Revenue for the enforcement of this Act and the Video Gaming Act, and (iii) to the Department of Human Services for the administration of programs to treat problem gambling, including problem gambling from sports wagering. The Board's annual appropriations request must separately state its funding needs for the regulation of gaming authorized under Section 7.7, riverboat gaming, casino gaming, video gaming, and sports wagering.
    (c-2) An amount equal to 2% of the adjusted gross receipts generated by an organization gaming facility located within a home rule county with a population of over 3,000,000 inhabitants shall be paid, subject to appropriation from the General Assembly, from the State Gaming Fund to the home rule county in which the organization gaming licensee is located for the purpose of enhancing the county's criminal justice system.
    (c-3) Appropriations, as approved by the General Assembly, may be made from the tax revenue deposited into the State Gaming Fund from organization gaming licensees pursuant to this Section for the administration and enforcement of this Act.
    (c-4) After payments required under subsections (b), (b-5), (b-6), (b-7), (c), (c-2), and (c-3) have been made from the tax revenue from organization gaming licensees deposited into the State Gaming Fund under this Section, all remaining amounts from organization gaming licensees shall be transferred into the Capital Projects Fund.
    (c-5) (Blank).
    (c-10) Each year the General Assembly shall appropriate from the General Revenue Fund to the Education Assistance Fund an amount equal to the amount paid into the Horse Racing Equity Fund pursuant to subsection (c-5) in the prior calendar year.
    (c-15) After the payments required under subsections (b), (c), and (c-5) have been made, an amount equal to 2% of the adjusted gross receipts of (1) an owners licensee that relocates pursuant to Section 11.2, (2) an owners licensee conducting riverboat gambling operations pursuant to an owners license that is initially issued after June 25, 1999, or (3) the first riverboat gambling operations conducted by a licensed manager on behalf of the State under Section 7.3, whichever comes first, shall be paid, subject to appropriation from the General Assembly, from the State Gaming Fund to each home rule county with a population of over 3,000,000 inhabitants for the purpose of enhancing the county's criminal justice system.
    (c-20) Each year the General Assembly shall appropriate from the General Revenue Fund to the Education Assistance Fund an amount equal to the amount paid to each home rule county with a population of over 3,000,000 inhabitants pursuant to subsection (c-15) in the prior calendar year.
    (c-21) After the payments required under subsections (b), (b-4), (b-5), (b-6), (b-7), (b-8), (c), (c-3), and (c-4) have been made, an amount equal to 0.5% of the adjusted gross receipts generated by the owners licensee under paragraph (1) of subsection (e-5) of Section 7 shall be paid monthly, subject to appropriation from the General Assembly, from the State Gaming Fund to the home rule county in which the owners licensee is located for the purpose of enhancing the county's criminal justice system.
    (c-22) After the payments required under subsections (b), (b-4), (b-5), (b-6), (b-7), (b-8), (c), (c-3), (c-4), and (c-21) have been made, an amount equal to 2% of the adjusted gross receipts generated by the owners licensee under paragraph (5) of subsection (e-5) of Section 7 shall be paid, subject to appropriation from the General Assembly, from the State Gaming Fund to the home rule county in which the owners licensee is located for the purpose of enhancing the county's criminal justice system.
    (c-25) From July 1, 2013 and each July 1 thereafter through July 1, 2019, $1,600,000 shall be transferred from the State Gaming Fund to the Chicago State University Education Improvement Fund.
    On July 1, 2020 and each July 1 thereafter, $3,000,000 shall be transferred from the State Gaming Fund to the Chicago State University Education Improvement Fund.
    (c-30) On July 1, 2013 or as soon as possible thereafter, $92,000,000 shall be transferred from the State Gaming Fund to the School Infrastructure Fund and $23,000,000 shall be transferred from the State Gaming Fund to the Horse Racing Equity Fund.
    (c-35) Beginning on July 1, 2013, in addition to any amount transferred under subsection (c-30) of this Section, $5,530,000 shall be transferred monthly from the State Gaming Fund to the School Infrastructure Fund.
    (d) From time to time, the Board shall transfer the remainder of the funds generated by this Act into the Education Assistance Fund, created by Public Act 86-0018, of the State of Illinois.
    (e) Nothing in this Act shall prohibit the unit of local government designated as the home dock of the riverboat from entering into agreements with other units of local government in this State or in other states to share its portion of the tax revenue.
    (f) To the extent practicable, the Board shall administer and collect the wagering taxes imposed by this Section in a manner consistent with the provisions of Sections 4, 5, 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e, 5f, 5g, 5i, 5j, 6, 6a, 6b, 6c, 8, 9, and 10 of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act and Section 3-7 of the Uniform Penalty and Interest Act.
(Source: P.A. 101-31, Article 25, Section 25-910, eff. 6-28-19; 101-31, Article 35, Section 35-55, eff. 6-28-19; 101-648, eff. 6-30-20.)

    (230 ILCS 10/13.05)
    Sec. 13.05. Withholding of delinquent child support.
    (a) From winnings required to be reported to the Internal Revenue Service on Form W-2G, an owners licensee or a licensee that operates one or more facilities or gaming locations at which lawful gambling is authorized as provided in this Act shall withhold up to the full amount of winnings necessary to pay the winner's past due child support amount as certified by the Department of Healthcare and Family Services under Section 10-17.15 of the Illinois Public Aid Code. Amounts withheld shall be paid to the Department of Healthcare and Family Services by the owners licensee or casino operator licensee, as applicable.
    (b) For withholding of winnings, the licensee shall be entitled to an administrative fee not to exceed the lesser of 4% of the total amount of cash winnings paid to the gambling winner or $150.
    (c) In no event may the total amount withheld from the cash payout, including the administrative fee, exceed the total cash winnings claimed by the obligor. If the cash payout claimed is greater than the amount sufficient to satisfy the obligor's delinquent child support payments, the licensee shall pay the obligor the remaining balance of the payout, less the administrative fee authorized by subsection (b) of this Section, at the time it is claimed.
    (d) A licensee who in good faith complies with the requirements of this Section shall not be liable to the gaming winner or any other individual or entity.
    (e) Upon request of a licensed owner under this Act, an agent of the Board (such as a gaming special agent employed by the Board, a State police officer, or a revenue agent) shall be responsible for notifying the person identified as being delinquent in child support payments that the licensed owner is required by law to withhold all or a portion of his or her winnings. If given, this notification must be provided at the time the winnings are withheld.
    (f) The provisions of this Section shall be operative on and after the date that rules are adopted by the Department of Healthcare and Family Services pursuant to Section 10-17.15 of the Illinois Public Aid Code.
    (g) The delinquent child support required to be withheld under this Section and the administrative fee under subsection (b) of this Section have priority over any secured or unsecured claim on cash winnings, except claims for federal or State taxes that are required to be withheld under federal or State law.
(Source: P.A. 98-318, eff. 8-12-13.)

    (230 ILCS 10/13.1)
    Sec. 13.1. Compulsive gambling.
    (a) Each licensed owner shall post signs with a statement regarding obtaining assistance with gambling problems, the text of which shall be determined by rule by the Department of Human Services, at the following locations in each facility at which gambling is conducted by the licensed owner:
        (i) Each entrance and exit.
        (ii) Near each credit location.
    The signs shall be provided by the Department of Human Services.
    (b) Each licensed owner shall print a statement regarding obtaining assistance with gambling problems, the text of which shall be determined by rule by the Department of Human Services, on all paper stock that the licensed owner provides to the general public.
(Source: P.A. 89-374, eff. 1-1-96; 89-507, eff. 7-1-97.)

    (230 ILCS 10/13.2)
    Sec. 13.2. Withholding of delinquent child support; signs; statement.
    (a) Each licensed owner may post signs with a statement regarding withholding of delinquent child support, the text of which shall be determined by rule by the Department of Healthcare and Family Services, at the following locations in each facility at which gambling is conducted by the licensed owner:
        (1) Each entrance and exit.
        (2) Near each credit location.
        (3) At each cashier's cage.
    The signs shall be provided by the Department of Healthcare and Family Services.
    (b) Each licensed owner may print a statement regarding withholding of delinquent child support, the text of which shall be determined by rule by the Department of Healthcare and Family Services, on all paper stock that the license owner provides to the general public.
(Source: P.A. 98-318, eff. 8-12-13.)

    (230 ILCS 10/14) (from Ch. 120, par. 2414)
    Sec. 14. Licensees - Records - Reports - Supervision.
    (a) Licensed owners and organization gaming licensees shall keep books and records so as to clearly show the following:
        (1) The amount received daily from admission fees.
        (2) The total amount of gross receipts.
        (3) The total amount of the adjusted gross receipts.
    (b) Licensed owners and organization gaming licensees shall furnish to the Board reports and information as the Board may require with respect to its activities on forms designed and supplied for such purpose by the Board.
    (c) The books and records kept by a licensed owner as provided by this Section are public records and the examination, publication, and dissemination of the books and records are governed by the provisions of The Freedom of Information Act.
(Source: P.A. 101-31, eff. 6-28-19.)

    (230 ILCS 10/15) (from Ch. 120, par. 2415)
    Sec. 15. Audit of licensee operations. Annually, the licensed owner, manager, or organization gaming licensee shall transmit to the Board an audit of the financial transactions and condition of the licensee's or manager's total operations. Additionally, within 90 days after the end of each quarter of each fiscal year, the licensed owner, manager, or organization gaming licensee shall transmit to the Board a compliance report on engagement procedures determined by the Board. All audits and compliance engagements shall be conducted by certified public accountants selected by the Board. Each certified public accountant must be registered in the State of Illinois under the Illinois Public Accounting Act. The compensation for each certified public accountant shall be paid directly by the licensed owner, manager, or organization gaming licensee to the certified public accountant.
(Source: P.A. 101-31, eff. 6-28-19.)

    (230 ILCS 10/16) (from Ch. 120, par. 2416)
    Sec. 16. Annual Report of Board. The Board shall make an annual report to the Governor, for the period ending December 31 of each year. Included in the report shall be an account of the Board actions, its financial position and results of operation under this Act, the practical results attained under this Act and any recommendations for legislation which the Board deems advisable.
(Source: P.A. 86-1029.)

    (230 ILCS 10/17) (from Ch. 120, par. 2417)
    Sec. 17. Administrative procedures. The Illinois Administrative Procedure Act shall apply to all administrative rules and procedures of the Board under this Act and the Video Gaming Act, except that: (1) subsection (b) of Section 5-10 of the Illinois Administrative Procedure Act does not apply to final orders, decisions and opinions of the Board; (2) subsection (a) of Section 5-10 of the Illinois Administrative Procedure Act does not apply to forms established by the Board for use under this Act and or the Video Gaming Act; (3) the provisions of Section 10-45 of the Illinois Administrative Procedure Act regarding proposals for decision are excluded under this Act and the Video Gaming Act; and (4) the provisions of subsection (d) of Section 10-65 of the Illinois Administrative Procedure Act do not apply so as to prevent summary suspension of any license pending revocation or other action, which suspension shall remain in effect unless modified by the Board or unless the Board's decision is reversed on the merits upon judicial review.
(Source: P.A. 101-31, eff. 6-28-19.)

    (230 ILCS 10/17.1) (from Ch. 120, par. 2417.1)
    Sec. 17.1. Judicial review.
    (a) Jurisdiction and venue for the judicial review of a final order of the Board relating to licensed owners, suppliers, organization gaming licensees, and special event licenses is vested in the Appellate Court of the judicial district in which Sangamon County is located. A petition for judicial review of a final order of the Board must be filed in the Appellate Court, within 35 days from the date that a copy of the decision sought to be reviewed was served upon the party affected by the decision.
    (b) Judicial review of all other final orders of the Board shall be conducted in accordance with the Administrative Review Law.
(Source: P.A. 101-31, eff. 6-28-19.)

    (230 ILCS 10/18) (from Ch. 120, par. 2418)
    Sec. 18. Prohibited Activities - Penalty.
    (a) A person is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor for doing any of the following:
        (1) Conducting gambling where wagering is used or to
    	
be used without a license issued by the Board.
        (2) Conducting gambling where wagering is permitted
    	
other than in the manner specified by Section 11.
    (b) A person is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor for doing any of the following:
        (1) permitting a person under 21 years to make a
    	
wager; or
        (2) violating paragraph (12) of subsection (a) of
    	
Section 11 of this Act.
    (c) A person wagering or accepting a wager at any location outside the riverboat, casino, or organization gaming facility in violation of paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection (a) of Section 28-1 of the Criminal Code of 2012 is subject to the penalties provided in that Section.
    (d) A person commits a Class 4 felony and, in addition, shall be barred for life from gambling operations under the jurisdiction of the Board, if the person does any of the following:
        (1) Offers, promises, or gives anything of value or
    	
benefit to a person who is connected with a riverboat or casino owner or organization gaming licensee, including, but not limited to, an officer or employee of a licensed owner, organization gaming licensee, or holder of an occupational license pursuant to an agreement or arrangement or with the intent that the promise or thing of value or benefit will influence the actions of the person to whom the offer, promise, or gift was made in order to affect or attempt to affect the outcome of a gambling game, or to influence official action of a member of the Board.
        (2) Solicits or knowingly accepts or receives a
    	
promise of anything of value or benefit while the person is connected with a riverboat, casino, or organization gaming facility, including, but not limited to, an officer or employee of a licensed owner or organization gaming licensee, or the holder of an occupational license, pursuant to an understanding or arrangement or with the intent that the promise or thing of value or benefit will influence the actions of the person to affect or attempt to affect the outcome of a gambling game, or to influence official action of a member of the Board.
        (3) Uses or possesses with the intent to use a device
    	
to assist:
            (i) In projecting the outcome of the game.
            (ii) In keeping track of the cards played.
            (iii) In analyzing the probability of the
        	
occurrence of an event relating to the gambling game.
            (iv) In analyzing the strategy for playing or
        	
betting to be used in the game except as permitted by the Board.
        (4) Cheats at a gambling game.
        (5) Manufactures, sells, or distributes any cards,
    	
chips, dice, game or device which is intended to be used to violate any provision of this Act.
        (6) Alters or misrepresents the outcome of a gambling
    	
game on which wagers have been made after the outcome is made sure but before it is revealed to the players.
        (7) Places a bet after acquiring knowledge, not
    	
available to all players, of the outcome of the gambling game which is subject of the bet or to aid a person in acquiring the knowledge for the purpose of placing a bet contingent on that outcome.
        (8) Claims, collects, or takes, or attempts to claim,
    	
collect, or take, money or anything of value in or from the gambling games, with intent to defraud, without having made a wager contingent on winning a gambling game, or claims, collects, or takes an amount of money or thing of value of greater value than the amount won.
        (9) Uses counterfeit chips or tokens in a gambling
    	
game.
        (10) Possesses any key or device designed for the
    	
purpose of opening, entering, or affecting the operation of a gambling game, drop box, or an electronic or mechanical device connected with the gambling game or for removing coins, tokens, chips or other contents of a gambling game. This paragraph (10) does not apply to a gambling licensee or employee of a gambling licensee acting in furtherance of the employee's employment.
    (e) The possession of more than one of the devices described in subsection (d), paragraphs (3), (5), or (10) permits a rebuttable presumption that the possessor intended to use the devices for cheating.
    (f) A person under the age of 21 who, except as authorized under paragraph (10) of Section 11, enters upon a riverboat or in a casino or organization gaming facility commits a petty offense and is subject to a fine of not less than $100 or more than $250 for a first offense and of not less than $200 or more than $500 for a second or subsequent offense.
    An action to prosecute any crime occurring on a riverboat shall be tried in the county of the dock at which the riverboat is based. An action to prosecute any crime occurring in a casino or organization gaming facility shall be tried in the county in which the casino or organization gaming facility is located.
(Source: P.A. 101-31, eff. 6-28-19.)

    (230 ILCS 10/18.1)
    Sec. 18.1. Distribution of certain fines. If a fine is imposed on an owners licensee or an organization gaming licensee for knowingly sending marketing or promotional materials to any person placed on the self-exclusion list, then the Board shall distribute an amount equal to 15% of the fine imposed to the unit of local government in which the casino, riverboat, or organization gaming facility is located for the purpose of awarding grants to non-profit entities that assist gambling addicts.
(Source: P.A. 101-31, eff. 6-28-19.)

    (230 ILCS 10/19) (from Ch. 120, par. 2419)
    Sec. 19. Forfeiture of property.
    (a) Except as provided in subsection (b), any riverboat, casino, or organization gaming facility used for the conduct of gambling games in violation of this Act shall be considered a gambling place in violation of Section 28-3 of the Criminal Code of 2012. Every gambling device found on a riverboat, in a casino, or at an organization gaming facility operating gambling games in violation of this Act and every slot machine and video game of chance found at an organization gaming facility operating gambling games in violation of this Act shall be subject to seizure, confiscation and destruction as provided in Section 28-5 of the Criminal Code of 2012.
    (b) It is not a violation of this Act for a riverboat or other watercraft which is licensed for gaming by a contiguous state to dock on the shores of this State if the municipality having jurisdiction of the shores, or the county in the case of unincorporated areas, has granted permission for docking and no gaming is conducted on the riverboat or other watercraft while it is docked on the shores of this State. No gambling device shall be subject to seizure, confiscation or destruction if the gambling device is located on a riverboat or other watercraft which is licensed for gaming by a contiguous state and which is docked on the shores of this State if the municipality having jurisdiction of the shores, or the county in the case of unincorporated areas, has granted permission for docking and no gaming is conducted on the riverboat or other watercraft while it is docked on the shores of this State.
(Source: P.A. 101-31, eff. 6-28-19.)

    (230 ILCS 10/20) (from Ch. 120, par. 2420)
    Sec. 20. Prohibited activities - civil penalties. Any person who conducts a gambling operation without first obtaining a license to do so, or who continues to conduct such games after revocation of his license, or any licensee who conducts or allows to be conducted any unauthorized gambling games on a riverboat, in a casino, or at an organization gaming facility where it is authorized to conduct its gambling operation, in addition to other penalties provided, shall be subject to a civil penalty equal to the amount of gross receipts derived from wagering on the gambling games, whether unauthorized or authorized, conducted on that day as well as confiscation and forfeiture of all gambling game equipment used in the conduct of unauthorized gambling games.
(Source: P.A. 101-31, eff. 6-28-19.)

    (230 ILCS 10/21) (from Ch. 120, par. 2421)
    Sec. 21. Limitation on taxation of licensees. Licensees shall not be subjected to any excise tax, license tax, permit tax, privilege tax, occupation tax or excursion tax which is imposed exclusively upon the licensee by the State or any political subdivision thereof, except as provided in this Act.
(Source: P.A. 86-1029.)

    (230 ILCS 10/22) (from Ch. 120, par. 2422)
    Sec. 22. Criminal history record information. Whenever the Board is authorized or required by law to consider some aspect of criminal history record information for the purpose of carrying out its statutory powers and responsibilities, the Board shall, in the form and manner required by the Department of State Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, cause to be conducted a criminal history record investigation to obtain any information currently or thereafter contained in the files of the Department of State Police or the Federal Bureau of Investigation, including, but not limited to, civil, criminal, and latent fingerprint databases. Each applicant for occupational licensing under Section 9 or key person as defined by the Board in administrative rules shall submit his or her fingerprints to the Department of State Police in the form and manner prescribed by the Department of State Police. These fingerprints shall be checked against the fingerprint records now and hereafter filed in the Department of State Police and Federal Bureau of Investigation criminal history records databases, including, but not limited to, civil, criminal, and latent fingerprint databases. The Department of State Police shall charge a fee for conducting the criminal history records check, which shall be deposited in the State Police Services Fund and shall not exceed the actual cost of the records check. The Department of State Police shall provide, on the Board's request, information concerning any criminal charges, and their disposition, currently or thereafter filed against any applicant, key person, or holder of any license or for determinations of suitability. Information obtained as a result of an investigation under this Section shall be used in determining eligibility for any license. Upon request and payment of fees in conformance with the requirements of Section 2605-400 of the Department of State Police Law (20 ILCS 2605/2605-400), the Department of State Police is authorized to furnish, pursuant to positive identification, such information contained in State files as is necessary to fulfill the request.
(Source: P.A. 101-597, eff. 12-6-19.)

    (230 ILCS 10/23) (from Ch. 120, par. 2423)
    Sec. 23. The State Gaming Fund. On or after the effective date of this Act, except as provided for payments into the Horse Racing Equity Trust Fund under subsection (a) of Section 7, all of the fees and taxes collected pursuant to this Act shall be deposited into the State Gaming Fund, a special fund in the State Treasury, which is hereby created. The adjusted gross receipts of any riverboat gambling operations conducted by a licensed manager on behalf of the State remaining after the payment of the fees and expenses of the licensed manager shall be deposited into the State Gaming Fund. Fines and penalties collected pursuant to this Act shall be deposited into the Education Assistance Fund, created by Public Act 86-0018, of the State of Illinois.
(Source: P.A. 93-28, eff. 6-20-03; 94-804, eff. 5-26-06.)

    (230 ILCS 10/24)
    Sec. 24. Applicability of this Act. The provisions of this Act, and all rules promulgated thereunder, shall apply to the Video Gaming Act, except where there is a conflict between the Acts. In the event of a conflict between this Act and the Video Gaming Act, the terms of this Act shall prevail.
(Source: P.A. 101-31, eff. 6-28-19.)