FAMILIES
(750 ILCS 5/) Illinois Marriage and Dissolution of Marriage Act.

 
    (750 ILCS 5/Pt. I heading)
PART I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

    (750 ILCS 5/101) (from Ch. 40, par. 101)
    Sec. 101. Short Title.) This Act may be cited as the "Illinois Marriage and Dissolution of Marriage Act".
(Source: P.A. 86-649.)

    (750 ILCS 5/102) (from Ch. 40, par. 102)
    Sec. 102. Purposes; Rules of Construction. This Act shall be liberally construed and applied to promote its underlying purposes, which are to:
        (1) provide adequate procedures for the solemnization
    	
and registration of marriage;
        (2) strengthen and preserve the integrity of marriage
    	
and safeguard family relationships;
        (3) promote the amicable settlement of disputes that
    	
have arisen between parties to a marriage;
        (4) mitigate the potential harm to spouses and their
    	
children caused by the process of an action brought under this Act, and protect children from exposure to conflict and violence;
        (5) ensure predictable decision-making for the care
    	
of children and for the allocation of parenting time and other parental responsibilities, and avoid prolonged uncertainty by expeditiously resolving issues involving children;
        (6) recognize the right of children to a healthy
    	
relationship with parents, and the responsibility of parents to ensure such a relationship;
        (7) acknowledge that the determination of children's
    	
best interests, and the allocation of parenting time and significant decision-making responsibilities, are among the paramount responsibilities of our system of justice, and to that end:
            (A) recognize children's right to a strong and
        	
healthy relationship with parents, and parents' concomitant right and responsibility to create and maintain such relationships;
            (B) recognize that, in the absence of domestic
        	
violence or any other factor that the court expressly finds to be relevant, proximity to, and frequent contact with, both parents promotes healthy development of children;
            (C) facilitate parental planning and agreement
        	
about the children's upbringing and allocation of parenting time and other parental responsibilities;
            (D) continue existing parent-child relationships,
        	
and secure the maximum involvement and cooperation of parents regarding the physical, mental, moral, and emotional well-being of the children during and after the litigation; and
            (E) promote or order parents to participate in
        	
programs designed to educate parents to:
                (i) minimize or eliminate rancor and the
            	
detrimental effect of litigation in any proceeding involving children; and
                (ii) facilitate the maximum cooperation of
            	
parents in raising their children;
        (8) make reasonable provision for support during and
    	
after an underlying dissolution of marriage, legal separation, parentage, or parental responsibility allocation action, including provision for timely advances of interim fees and costs to all attorneys, experts, and opinion witnesses including guardians ad litem and children's representatives, to achieve substantial parity in parties' access to funds for pre-judgment litigation costs in an action for dissolution of marriage or legal separation;
        (9) eliminate the consideration of marital
    	
misconduct in the adjudication of rights and duties incident to dissolution of marriage, legal separation and declaration of invalidity of marriage; and
        (10) make provision for the preservation and
    	
conservation of marital assets during the litigation.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/103) (from Ch. 40, par. 103)
    Sec. 103. Trial by Jury.) There shall be no trial by jury under this Act.
(Source: P.A. 80-923.)

    (750 ILCS 5/104) (from Ch. 40, par. 104)
    Sec. 104. Venue. The proceedings shall be had in the county where the plaintiff or defendant resides, except as otherwise provided herein, but process may be directed to any county in the State. Objection to venue is barred if not made within such time as the defendant's response is due. In no event shall venue be deemed jurisdictional.
    In any case brought pursuant to this Act where neither the petitioner nor respondent resides in the county in which the initial pleading is filed, the petitioner shall file with the initial pleading a written motion, which shall be set for hearing and ruled upon before any other issue is taken up, advising that the forum selected is not one of proper venue and seeking an appropriate order from the court allowing a waiver of the venue requirements of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/105) (from Ch. 40, par. 105)
    Sec. 105. Application of Civil Practice Law.)
    (a) The provisions of the Civil Practice Law shall apply to all proceedings under this Act, except as otherwise provided in this Act.
    (b) A proceeding for dissolution of marriage, legal separation or declaration of invalidity of marriage shall be entitled "In re the Marriage of ... and ...". A parental responsibility allocation or support proceeding shall be entitled "In re the (Parental Responsibility) (Support) of ...".
    (c) The initial pleading in all proceedings under this Act shall be denominated a petition. A responsive pleading shall be denominated a response. If new matter by way of defense is pleaded in the response, a reply may be filed by the petitioner, but the failure to reply is not an admission of the legal sufficiency of the new matter. All other pleadings under this Act shall be denominated as provided in the Civil Practice Law.
    (d) As used in this Section, "pleadings" includes any petition or motion filed in the dissolution of marriage case which, if independently filed, would constitute a separate cause of action, including, but not limited to, actions for declaratory judgment, injunctive relief, and orders of protection. Actions under this subsection are subject to motions filed pursuant to Sections 2-615 and 2-619 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/106) (from Ch. 40, par. 106)
    Sec. 106. Employment of Administrative Aides.) The employment of qualified administrative aides to assist the court of any county in the administration of proceedings hereunder may be provided for by such county as the case may be. All such aides shall be appointed by the authority which provided for them, subject to the approval of a majority of the judges of each court involved, and shall serve for such terms and shall receive such compensation as provided by ordinance.
    (a) The administrative aides shall perform such nonjudicial duties with respect to proceedings hereunder and matters ancillary thereto as the court shall direct.
    (b) Any county may make such appropriations as may be necessary to provide for the expense and compensation of the administrative aides.
(Source: P.A. 80-923.)

    (750 ILCS 5/107) (from Ch. 40, par. 107)
    Sec. 107. Order of protection; status. Whenever relief is sought under Part V, Part VI or Part VII of this Act, the court shall inquire and parties shall advise the court whether any order of protection has previously been entered in the instant proceeding or any other proceeding in which any party, or a child of any party, or both, if relevant, has been designated as either a petitioner, respondent, or protected person.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)


 
    (750 ILCS 5/Pt. II heading)
PART II
MARRIAGE

    (750 ILCS 5/201) (from Ch. 40, par. 201)
    Sec. 201. Formalities.) A marriage between 2 persons licensed, solemnized and registered as provided in this Act is valid in this State.
(Source: P.A. 98-597, eff. 6-1-14.)

    (750 ILCS 5/202) (from Ch. 40, par. 202)
    Sec. 202. Marriage License and Marriage Certificate.)
    (a) The Director of Public Health shall prescribe the form for an application for a marriage license, which shall include the following information:
        (1) name, sex, occupation, address, social security
    	
number, date and place of birth of each party to the proposed marriage;
        (2) if either party was previously married, his name,
    	
and the date, place and court in which the marriage was dissolved or declared invalid or the date and place of death of the former spouse;
        (3) name and address of the parents or guardian of
    	
each party; and
        (4) whether the parties are related to each other
    	
and, if so, their relationship.
    (b) The Director of Public Health shall prescribe the forms for the marriage license, the marriage certificate and, when necessary, the consent to marriage.
(Source: P.A. 80-923.)

    (750 ILCS 5/203) (from Ch. 40, par. 203)
    Sec. 203. License to Marry. When a marriage application has been completed and signed by both parties to a prospective marriage and both parties have appeared before the county clerk and the marriage license fee has been paid, the county clerk shall issue a license to marry and a marriage certificate form upon being furnished:
        (1) satisfactory proof that each party to the
    	
marriage will have attained the age of 18 years at the time the marriage license is effective or will have attained the age of 16 years and has either the consent to the marriage of both parents or his guardian or judicial approval; provided, if one parent cannot be located in order to obtain such consent and diligent efforts have been made to locate that parent by the consenting parent, then the consent of one parent plus a signed affidavit by the consenting parent which (i) names the absent parent and states that he or she cannot be located, and (ii) states what diligent efforts have been made to locate the absent parent, shall have the effect of both parents' consent for purposes of this Section;
        (2) satisfactory proof that the marriage is not
    	
prohibited; and
        (3) an affidavit or record as prescribed in
    	
subparagraph (1) of Section 205 or a court order as prescribed in subparagraph (2) of Section 205, if applicable.
    With each marriage license, the county clerk shall provide a pamphlet describing the causes and effects of fetal alcohol syndrome. At least annually, the county board shall submit to the Illinois Department of Public Health a report as to the county clerk's compliance with the requirement that the county clerk provide a pamphlet with each marriage license. All funding and production costs for the aforementioned educational pamphlets for distribution to each county clerk shall be provided by non-profit, non-sectarian statewide programs that provide education, advocacy, support, and prevention services pertaining to Fetal Alcohol Syndrome.
(Source: P.A. 96-1323, eff. 1-1-11.)

    (750 ILCS 5/204) (from Ch. 40, par. 204)
    Sec. 204. Medical information brochure. The county clerk shall distribute free of charge, to all persons applying for a marriage license, a brochure prepared by the Department of Public Health concerning sexually transmitted diseases and inherited metabolic diseases.
(Source: P.A. 86-884.)

    (750 ILCS 5/205) (from Ch. 40, par. 205)
    Sec. 205. Exceptions.
    (1) Irrespective of the results of laboratory tests and clinical examination relative to sexually transmitted diseases, the clerks of the respective counties shall issue a marriage license to parties to a proposed marriage (a) when a woman is pregnant at the time of such application, or (b) when a woman has, prior to the time of application, given birth to a child born out of wedlock which is living at the time of such application and the man making such application makes affidavit that he is the father of such child born out of wedlock. The county clerk shall, in lieu of the health certificate required hereunder, accept, as the case may be, either an affidavit on a form prescribed by the State Department of Public Health, signed by a physician duly licensed in this State, stating that the woman is pregnant, or a copy of the birth record of the child born out of wedlock, if one is available in this State, or if such birth record is not available, an affidavit signed by the woman that she is the mother of such child.
    (2) Any judge of the circuit court within the county in which the license is to be issued is authorized and empowered on joint application by both applicants for a marriage license to waive the requirements as to medical examination, laboratory tests, and certificates, except the requirements of paragraph (4) of subsection (a) of Section 212 of this Act which shall not be waived; and to authorize the county clerk to issue the license if all other requirements of law have been complied with and the judge is satisfied, by affidavit, or other proof, that the examination or tests are contrary to the tenets or practices of the religious creed of which the applicant is an adherent, and that the public health and welfare will not be injuriously affected thereby.
(Source: P.A. 94-229, eff. 1-1-06.)

    (750 ILCS 5/206) (from Ch. 40, par. 206)
    Sec. 206. Records.) Any health certificate filed with the county clerk, or any certificate, affidavit, or record accepted in lieu thereof, shall be retained in the files of the office for one year after the license is issued and shall thereafter be destroyed by the county clerk.
(Source: P.A. 82-561.)

    (750 ILCS 5/207) (from Ch. 40, par. 207)
    Sec. 207. Effective Date of License.) A license to marry becomes effective in the county where it was issued one day after the date of issuance, unless the court orders that the license is effective when issued, and expires 60 days after it becomes effective, provided that the marriage is not invalidated by the fact that the marriage was inadvertently solemnized in a county in Illinois other than the county where the license was issued.
(Source: P.A. 95-775, eff. 1-1-09.)

    (750 ILCS 5/208) (from Ch. 40, par. 208)
    Sec. 208. Judicial Approval of Underage Marriages.) (a) The court, after a reasonable effort has been made to notify the parents or guardian of each underaged party, may order the county clerk to issue a marriage license and a marriage certificate form to a party aged 16 or 17 years who has no parent capable of consenting to his marriage or whose parent or guardian has not consented to his marriage.
    (b) A marriage license and a marriage certificate form may be issued under this Section only if the court finds that the underaged party is capable of assuming the responsibilities of marriage and the marriage will serve his best interest. Pregnancy alone does not establish that the best interest of the party will be served.
(Source: P.A. 80-923.)

    (750 ILCS 5/209) (from Ch. 40, par. 209)
    Sec. 209. Solemnization and registration.
    (a) A marriage may be solemnized by a judge of a court of record, by a retired judge of a court of record, unless the retired judge was removed from office by the Judicial Inquiry Board, except that a retired judge shall not receive any compensation from the State, a county or any unit of local government in return for the solemnization of a marriage and there shall be no effect upon any pension benefits conferred by the Judges Retirement System of Illinois, by a judge of the Court of Claims, by a county clerk in counties having 2,000,000 or more inhabitants, by a public official whose powers include solemnization of marriages, by a mayor or president of a city, village, or incorporated town who is in office on the date of the solemnization, or in accordance with the prescriptions of any religious denomination, Indian Nation or Tribe or Native Group, provided that when such prescriptions require an officiant, the officiant be in good standing with his or her religious denomination, Indian Nation or Tribe or Native Group. Either the person solemnizing the marriage, or, if no individual acting alone solemnized the marriage, both parties to the marriage, shall complete the marriage certificate form and forward it to the county clerk within 10 days after such marriage is solemnized. A mayor or president of a city, village, or incorporated town shall not receive any compensation in return for the solemnization of a marriage.
    (a-5) Nothing in this Act shall be construed to require any religious denomination or Indian Nation or Tribe or Native Group, or any minister, clergy, or officiant acting as a representative of a religious denomination or Indian Nation or Tribe or Native Group, to solemnize any marriage. Instead, any religious denomination or Indian Nation or Tribe or Native Group, or any minister, clergy, or officiant acting as a representative of a religious denomination or Indian Nation or Tribe or Native Group is free to choose which marriages it will solemnize. Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, a refusal by a religious denomination or Indian Nation or Tribe or Native Group, or any minister, clergy, or officiant acting as a representative of a religious denomination or Indian Nation or Tribe or Native Group to solemnize any marriage under this Act shall not create or be the basis for any civil, administrative, or criminal penalty, claim, or cause of action.
    (a-10) No church, mosque, synagogue, temple, nondenominational ministry, interdenominational or ecumenical organization, mission organization, or other organization whose principal purpose is the study, practice, or advancement of religion is required to provide religious facilities for the solemnization ceremony or celebration associated with the solemnization ceremony of a marriage if the solemnization ceremony or celebration associated with the solemnization ceremony is in violation of its religious beliefs. An entity identified in this subsection (a-10) shall be immune from any civil, administrative, criminal penalty, claim, or cause of action based on its refusal to provide religious facilities for the solemnization ceremony or celebration associated with the solemnization ceremony of a marriage if the solemnization ceremony or celebration associated with the solemnization ceremony is in violation of its religious beliefs. As used in this subsection (a-10), "religious facilities" means sanctuaries, parish halls, fellowship halls, and similar facilities. "Religious facilities" does not include facilities such as businesses, health care facilities, educational facilities, or social service agencies.
    (b) The solemnization of the marriage is not invalidated: (1) by the fact that the person solemnizing the marriage was not legally qualified to solemnize it, if a reasonable person would believe the person solemnizing the marriage to be so qualified; or (2) by the fact that the marriage was inadvertently solemnized in a county in Illinois other than the county where the license was issued and filed.
    (c) Any marriage that meets the requirements of this Section shall be presumed valid.
(Source: P.A. 101-14, eff. 6-14-19.)

    (750 ILCS 5/210) (from Ch. 40, par. 210)
    Sec. 210. Registration of Marriage Certificate.) Upon receipt of the marriage certificate, the county clerk shall register the marriage. Within 45 days after the close of the month in which a marriage is registered, the county clerk shall make to the Department of Public Health a return of such marriage. Such return shall be made on a form furnished by the Department of Public Health and shall substantially consist of the following items:
    (1) A copy of the marriage license application signed and attested to by the applicants, except that in any county in which the information provided in a marriage license application is entered into a computer, the county clerk may submit a computer copy of such information without the signatures and attestations of the applicants.
    (2) The date and place of marriage.
    (3) The marriage license number.
(Source: P.A. 85-1307.)

    (750 ILCS 5/211) (from Ch. 40, par. 211)
    Sec. 211. Reporting.) In transmitting the required returns, the county clerk shall make a report to the Department of Public Health stating the total number of marriage licenses issued during the month for which returns are made, and the number of marriage certificates registered during the month.
(Source: P.A. 80-923.)

    (750 ILCS 5/212) (from Ch. 40, par. 212)
    Sec. 212. Prohibited Marriages.
    (a) The following marriages are prohibited:
        (1) a marriage entered into prior to the dissolution
    	
of an earlier marriage, civil union, or substantially similar legal relationship of one of the parties, unless the parties to the marriage are the same as the parties to a civil union and are seeking to convert their civil union to a marriage pursuant to Section 65 of the Illinois Religious Freedom Protection and Civil Union Act;
        (2) a marriage between an ancestor and a descendant
    	
or between siblings, whether the relationship is by the half or the whole blood or by adoption;
        (3) a marriage between an uncle and a niece, between
    	
an uncle and a nephew, between an aunt and a nephew, or between an aunt and a niece, whether the relationship is by the half or the whole blood;
        (4) a marriage between cousins of the first degree;
    	
however, a marriage between first cousins is not prohibited if:
            (i) both parties are 50 years of age or older; or
            (ii) either party, at the time of application for
        	
a marriage license, presents for filing with the county clerk of the county in which the marriage is to be solemnized, a certificate signed by a licensed physician stating that the party to the proposed marriage is permanently and irreversibly sterile;
        (5) (blank).
    (b) Parties to a marriage prohibited under subsection (a) of this Section who cohabit after removal of the impediment are lawfully married as of the date of the removal of the impediment.
    (c) Children born or adopted of a prohibited or common law marriage are the lawful children of the parties.
(Source: P.A. 98-597, eff. 6-1-14.)

    (750 ILCS 5/213) (from Ch. 40, par. 213)
    Sec. 213. Validity.) All marriages contracted within this State, prior to the effective date of this Act, or outside this State, that were valid at the time of the contract or subsequently validated by the laws of the place in which they were contracted or by the domicile of the parties, are valid in this State, except where contrary to the public policy of this State.
(Source: P.A. 80-923.)

    (750 ILCS 5/213.1)
    Sec. 213.1. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 89-459, eff. 5-24-96. Repealed by P.A. 98-597, eff. 6-1-14.)

    (750 ILCS 5/214) (from Ch. 40, par. 214)
    Sec. 214. Invalidity of Common Law Marriages.) Common law marriages contracted in this State after June 30, 1905 are invalid.
(Source: P.A. 80-923.)

    (750 ILCS 5/215) (from Ch. 40, par. 215)
    Sec. 215. Penalty.) Unless otherwise provided by law, any person who violates any provision of Part II of this Act is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
(Source: P.A. 80-923.)

    (750 ILCS 5/216) (from Ch. 40, par. 216)
    Sec. 216. Prohibited Marriages Void if Contracted in Another State.) That if any person residing and intending to continue to reside in this state and who is a person with a disability or prohibited from contracting marriage under the laws of this state, shall go into another state or country and there contract a marriage prohibited and declared void by the laws of this state, such marriage shall be null and void for all purposes in this state with the same effect as though such prohibited marriage had been entered into in this state.
(Source: P.A. 99-143, eff. 7-27-15.)

    (750 ILCS 5/217) (from Ch. 40, par. 217)
    Sec. 217. Marriage by Non-residents - When Void.) No marriage shall be contracted in this state by a party residing and intending to continue to reside in another state or jurisdiction if such marriage would be void if contracted in such other state or jurisdiction and every marriage celebrated in this state in violation of this provision shall be null and void.
(Source: P.A. 80-923.)

    (750 ILCS 5/218) (from Ch. 40, par. 218)
    Sec. 218. Duty of Officer Issuing License.) Before issuing a license to marry a person who resides and intends to continue to reside in another state, the officer having authority to issue the license shall satisfy himself by requiring affidavits or otherwise that such person is not prohibited from intermarrying by the laws of the jurisdiction where he or she resides.
(Source: P.A. 80-923.)

    (750 ILCS 5/219) (from Ch. 40, par. 219)
    Sec. 219. Offenses. Any official issuing a license with knowledge that the parties are thus prohibited from marrying and any person authorized to solemnize marriage who shall knowingly solemnize such a marriage shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/220)
    Sec. 220. Consent to jurisdiction. Members of a same-sex couple who enter into a marriage in this State consent to the jurisdiction of the courts of this State for the purpose of any action relating to the marriage, even if one or both parties cease to reside in this State. A court shall enter a judgment of dissolution of marriage if, at the time the action is commenced, it meets the grounds for dissolution of marriage set forth in this Act.
(Source: P.A. 98-597, eff. 6-1-14; 99-78, eff. 7-20-15.)


 
    (750 ILCS 5/Pt. III heading)
PART III
DECLARATION OF INVALIDITY OF MARRIAGE

    (750 ILCS 5/301) (from Ch. 40, par. 301)
    Sec. 301. Declaration of Invalidity - Grounds.) The court shall enter its judgment declaring the invalidity of a marriage (formerly known as annulment) entered into under the following circumstances:
    (1) a party lacked capacity to consent to the marriage at the time the marriage was solemnized, either because of mental incapacity or infirmity or because of the influence of alcohol, drugs or other incapacitating substances, or a party was induced to enter into a marriage by force or duress or by fraud involving the essentials of marriage;
    (2) a party lacks the physical capacity to consummate the marriage by sexual intercourse and at the time the marriage was solemnized the other party did not know of the incapacity;
    (3) a party was aged 16 or 17 years and did not have the consent of his parents or guardian or judicial approval; or
    (4) the marriage is prohibited.
(Source: P.A. 80-923.)

    (750 ILCS 5/302) (from Ch. 40, par. 302)
    Sec. 302. Time of Commencement.) (a) A declaration of invalidity under paragraphs (1) through (3) of Section 301 may be sought by any of the following persons and must be commenced within the times specified:
    (1) for any of the reasons set forth in paragraph (1) of Section 301, by either party or by the legal representative of the party who lacked capacity to consent, no later than 90 days after the petitioner obtained knowledge of the described condition;
    (2) for the reason set forth in paragraph (2) of Section 301, by either party, no later than one year after the petitioner obtained knowledge of the described condition;
    (3) for the reason set forth in paragraph (3) of Section 301, by the underaged party, his parent or guardian, prior to the time the underaged party reaches the age at which he could have married without needing to satisfy the omitted requirement.
    (b) In no event may a declaration of invalidity of marriage be sought after the death of either party to the marriage under subsections (1), (2) and (3) of Section 301.
    (c) A declaration of invalidity for the reason set forth in paragraph (4) of Section 301 may be sought by either party, the legal spouse in case of a bigamous marriage, the State's Attorney or a child of either party, at any time not to exceed 3 years following the death of the first party to die.
(Source: P.A. 80-923.)

    (750 ILCS 5/303) (from Ch. 40, par. 303)
    Sec. 303. Legitimacy of Children.) Children born or adopted of a marriage declared invalid are the lawful children of the parties. Children whose parents marry after their birth are the lawful children of the parties.
(Source: P.A. 94-229, eff. 1-1-06.)

    (750 ILCS 5/304) (from Ch. 40, par. 304)
    Sec. 304. Retroactivity. Unless the court finds, after a consideration of all relevant circumstances, including the effect of a retroactive judgment on third parties, that the interests of justice would be served by making the judgment not retroactive, it shall declare the marriage invalid as of the date of the marriage. The provisions of this Act relating to property rights of the spouses, maintenance, support of children, and allocation of parental responsibilities on dissolution of marriage are applicable to non-retroactive judgments of invalidity of marriage only.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/305) (from Ch. 40, par. 305)
    Sec. 305. Putative Spouse.) Any person, having gone through a marriage ceremony, who has cohabited with another to whom he is not legally married in the good faith belief that he was married to that person is a putative spouse until knowledge of the fact that he is not legally married terminates his status and prevents acquisition of further rights. A putative spouse acquires the rights conferred upon a legal spouse, including the right to maintenance following termination of his status, whether or not the marriage is prohibited, under Section 212, or declared invalid, under Section 301. If there is a legal spouse or other putative spouse, rights acquired by a putative spouse do not supersede the rights of the legal spouse or those acquired by other putative spouses, but the court shall apportion property, maintenance and support rights among the claimants as appropriate in the circumstances and in the interests of justice. This Section shall not apply to common law marriages contracted in the State after June 30, 1905.
(Source: P.A. 80-923.)

    (750 ILCS 5/306) (from Ch. 40, par. 306)
    Sec. 306. Commencement of Action.) Actions for declaration of invalidity of marriage shall be commenced as in other civil cases.
(Source: P.A. 80-923.)


 
    (750 ILCS 5/Pt. IV heading)
PART IV
DISSOLUTION AND LEGAL SEPARATION

    (750 ILCS 5/401) (from Ch. 40, par. 401)
    Sec. 401. Dissolution of marriage.
    (a) The court shall enter a judgment of dissolution of marriage when at the time the action was commenced one of the spouses was a resident of this State or was stationed in this State while a member of the armed services, and the residence or military presence had been maintained for 90 days next preceding the commencement of the action or the making of the finding:
    Irreconcilable differences have caused the irretrievable breakdown of the marriage and the court determines that efforts at reconciliation have failed or that future attempts at reconciliation would be impracticable and not in the best interests of the family.
    (a-5) If the parties live separate and apart for a continuous period of not less than 6 months immediately preceding the entry of the judgment dissolving the marriage, there is an irrebuttable presumption that the requirement of irreconcilable differences has been met.
    (b) Judgment shall not be entered unless, to the extent it has jurisdiction to do so, the court has considered, approved, reserved or made provision for the allocation of parental responsibilities, the support of any child of the marriage entitled to support, the maintenance of either spouse and the disposition of property. The court shall enter a judgment for dissolution that reserves any of these issues either upon (i) agreement of the parties, or (ii) motion of either party and a finding by the court that appropriate circumstances exist.
    The death of a party subsequent to entry of a judgment for dissolution but before judgment on reserved issues shall not abate the proceedings.
    If any provision of this Section or its application shall be adjudged unconstitutional or invalid for any reason by any court of competent jurisdiction, that judgment shall not impair, affect or invalidate any other provision or application of this Section, which shall remain in full force and effect.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/402) (from Ch. 40, par. 402)
    Sec. 402. Legal Separation.
    (a) Any person living separate and apart from his or her spouse may have a remedy for reasonable support and maintenance while they so live apart.
    (b) Such action shall be brought in the circuit court of the county in which the petitioner or respondent resides or in which the parties last resided together as husband and wife. Commencement of the action, temporary relief and trials shall be the same as in actions for dissolution of marriage, except that temporary relief in an action for legal separation shall be limited to the relief set forth in subdivision (a)(1) and items (ii), (iii), and (iv) of subdivision (a)(2) of Section 501. If the court deems it appropriate to enter a judgment for legal separation, the court shall consider the applicable factors in Section 504 in awarding maintenance. If the court deems it appropriate to enter a judgment for legal separation, the court may approve a property settlement agreement that the parties have requested the court to incorporate into the judgment, subject to the following provisions:
        (1) the court may not value or allocate property in
    	
the absence of such an agreement;
        (2) the court may disapprove such an agreement only
    	
if it finds that the agreement is unconscionable; and
        (3) such an agreement is final and non-modifiable.
    (c) A proceeding or judgment for legal separation shall not bar either party from instituting an action for dissolution of marriage, and if the party so moving has met the requirements of Section 401, a judgment for dissolution shall be granted. Absent an agreement set forth in a separation agreement that provides for non-modifiable permanent maintenance, if a party to a judgment for legal separation files an action for dissolution of marriage, the issues of temporary and permanent maintenance shall be decided de novo.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/403) (from Ch. 40, par. 403)
    Sec. 403. Pleadings - Commencement - Abolition of Existing Defenses - Procedure.
    (a) The complaint or petition for dissolution of marriage or legal separation shall be verified and shall minimally set forth:
        (1) the age, occupation and residence of each party
    	
and his length of residence in this State;
        (2) the date of the marriage and the place at which
    	
it was registered;
        (2.5) whether a petition for dissolution of marriage
    	
is pending in any other county or state;
        (3) that the jurisdictional requirements of
    	
subsection (a) of Section 401 have been met and that irreconcilable differences have caused the irretrievable breakdown of the marriage;
        (4) the names, ages and addresses of all living
    	
children of the marriage and whether a spouse is pregnant;
        (5) any arrangements as to support, allocation of
    	
parental responsibility of the children and maintenance of a spouse; and
        (6) the relief sought.
    (b) Either or both parties to the marriage may initiate the proceeding.
    (c) (Blank).
    (d) The court may join additional parties necessary and proper for the exercise of its authority under this Act.
    (e) Contested trials shall be on a bifurcated basis with the issue of whether irreconcilable differences have caused the irretrievable breakdown of the marriage, as described in Section 401, being tried first, regardless of whether that issue is contested or uncontested. Upon the court determining that irreconcilable differences have caused the irretrievable breakdown of the marriage, the court may allow additional time for the parties to settle amicably the remaining issues before resuming the trial, or may proceed immediately to trial on the remaining issues. The court has the discretion to use the date of the trial or such other date as agreed upon by the parties, or ordered by the court within its discretion, for purposes of determining the value of assets or property. In cases where the requirements of Section 401 are uncontested and proved as in cases of default, the trial on all other remaining issues shall proceed immediately, if so ordered by the court or if the parties so stipulate. Except as provided in subsection (b) of Section 401, the court shall enter a judgment of dissolution of marriage, including an order dissolving the marriage, incorporation of a marital settlement agreement if applicable, and any other appropriate findings or orders, only at the conclusion of the case and not after hearing only the testimony as to whether irreconcilable differences have caused the irretrievable breakdown of the marriage.
    (f) (Blank).
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/404) (from Ch. 40, par. 404)
    Sec. 404. Conciliation.
    (a) If the court concludes that there is a prospect of reconciliation, the court, at the request of either party, or on its own motion, may order a conciliation conference. The conciliation conference and counseling shall take place at the established court conciliation service of that judicial district or at any similar service or facility where no court conciliation service has been established.
    (b) The facts adduced at any conciliation conference resulting from a referral hereunder, shall not be considered in the adjudication of a pending or subsequent action, nor shall any report resulting from such conference become part of the record of the case unless the parties have stipulated in writing to the contrary.
    The court, upon good cause shown, may prohibit conciliation or other process that requires the parties to meet and confer without counsel.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/404.1) (from Ch. 40, par. 404.1)
    Sec. 404.1. (a) In an action for dissolution of marriage involving minor children, or in a post-judgment proceeding involving minor children, the court may on its own motion order the parties, excluding the minor children, to attend an educational program concerning the effects of dissolution of marriage on the children, if the court finds that it would be in the best interests of the minor children. The program may be divided into sessions, which in the aggregate shall not exceed 4 hours in duration. The program shall be educational in nature and not designed for individual therapy.
    (b) The facts adduced at any educational session resulting from a referral under this Section shall not be considered in the adjudication of a pending or subsequent action, nor shall any report resulting from such educational session become part of the record of the case unless the parties have stipulated in writing to the contrary.
    (c) The fees or costs of educational sessions under this Section shall be borne by the parties and may be assessed by the court as it deems equitable.
(Source: P.A. 86-288.)

    (750 ILCS 5/405) (from Ch. 40, par. 405)
    Sec. 405. Hearing on Default - Notice. If the respondent is in default, the court shall proceed to hear the cause upon testimony of petitioner taken in open court, and in no case of default shall the court grant a dissolution of marriage or legal separation or declaration of invalidity of marriage, unless the judge is satisfied that all proper means have been taken to notify the respondent of the pendency of the suit. Whenever the judge is satisfied that the interests of the respondent require it, the court may order such additional notice as may be required. All of the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure relating to default hearings are applicable to hearings on default.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/406) (from Ch. 40, par. 406)
    Sec. 406. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 81-231. Repealed by P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/407) (from Ch. 40, par. 407)
    Sec. 407. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 84-551. Repealed by P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/408) (from Ch. 40, par. 408)
    Sec. 408. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 80-923. Repealed by P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/409) (from Ch. 40, par. 409)
    Sec. 409. Proof of Foreign Marriage. A marriage which may have been solemnized or had in any foreign state or country, may be proved by the acknowledgment of the parties, their cohabitation, and other evidence. Certified copies of records of a marriage performed in any foreign state or country obtained from an authorized state governmental unit, embassy, or consulate may be admitted as an exception to the hearsay rule.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/410) (from Ch. 40, par. 410)
    Sec. 410. Process - Practice - Proceedings - Publication.) The process, practice and proceedings under this Act shall be the same as in other civil cases, except as otherwise provided by this Act, or by any law or rule of court, and except that when the parties resided in a municipality, in a county with a population under 2,000,000, at the time the cause of action arose, and if service by publication is necessary, publication shall be in a newspaper published in such municipality if there is one.
(Source: P.A. 80-923.)

    (750 ILCS 5/411) (from Ch. 40, par. 411)
    Sec. 411. Commencement of Action.
    (a) Actions for dissolution of marriage or legal separation shall be commenced as in other civil cases or, at the option of petitioner, by filing a praecipe for summons with the clerk of the court and paying the regular filing fees, in which latter case, a petition shall be filed within 6 months thereafter, or any extension for good cause shown granted by the court.
    (b) When a praecipe for summons is filed without the petition, the summons shall recite that petitioner has commenced suit for dissolution of marriage or legal separation and shall require the respondent to file his or her appearance not later than 30 days from the day the summons is served and to plead to the petitioner's petition within 30 days from the day the petition is filed.
    Until a petition has been filed, the court, pursuant to subsections (c) and (d) herein, may dismiss the suit, order the filing of a petition, or grant leave to the respondent to file a petition in the nature of a counter petition.
    After the filing of the petition, the party filing the same shall, within 2 days, serve a copy thereof upon the other party, in the manner provided by rule of the Supreme Court for service of notices in other civil cases.
    (c) Unless a respondent voluntarily files an appearance, a praecipe for summons filed without the petition shall be served on the respondent not later than 30 days after its issuance, and upon failure to obtain service upon the respondent within the 30 day period, or any extension for good cause shown granted by the court, the court shall dismiss the suit.
    (d) An action for dissolution of marriage or legal separation commenced by the filing a praecipe for summons without the petition may be dismissed if a petition for dissolution of marriage or legal separation has not been filed within 6 months after the commencement of the action or within the extension granted under subsection (a) of this Section.
    (e) The filing of a praecipe for summons under this Section constitutes the commencement of an action that serves as grounds for involuntary dismissal under subdivision (a)(3) of Section 2-619 of the Code of Civil Procedure of a subsequently filed petition for dissolution of marriage or legal separation in another county.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/412) (from Ch. 40, par. 412)
    Sec. 412. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 81-231. Repealed by P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/413) (from Ch. 40, par. 413)
    Sec. 413. Judgment.
    (a) A judgment of dissolution of marriage or of legal separation or of declaration of invalidity of marriage shall be entered within 60 days of the closing of proofs; however, if the court enters an order specifying good cause as to why the court needs an additional 30 days, the judgment shall be entered within 90 days of the closing of proofs, including any hearing under subsection (j) of Section 503 of this Act and submission of closing arguments. A judgment of dissolution of marriage or of legal separation or of declaration of invalidity of marriage is final when entered, subject to the right of appeal. An appeal from the judgment of dissolution of marriage that does not challenge the finding as to grounds does not delay the finality of that provision of the judgment which dissolves the marriage, beyond the time for appealing from that provision, and either of the parties may remarry pending appeal. An order requiring maintenance or support of a spouse or a minor child or children entered under this Act or any other law of this State shall not be suspended or the enforcement thereof stayed pending the filing and resolution of post-judgment motions or an appeal.
    (b) The clerk of the court shall give notice of the entry of a judgment of dissolution of marriage or legal separation or a declaration of invalidity of marriage:
        (1) if the marriage is registered in this State, to
    	
the county clerk of the county where the marriage is registered, who shall enter the fact of dissolution of marriage or legal separation or declaration of invalidity of marriage in the marriage registry; and within 45 days after the close of the month in which the judgment is entered, the clerk shall forward the certificate to the Department of Public Health on a form furnished by the Department; or
        (2) if the marriage is registered in another
    	
jurisdiction, to the appropriate official of that jurisdiction, with the request that he enter the fact of dissolution of marriage or legal separation or declaration of invalidity of marriage in the appropriate record.
    (c) Unless the person whose marriage is dissolved or declared invalid requests otherwise, the judgment under this Section shall contain a provision authorizing the person to resume the use of his or her former or maiden name, should he or she choose to do so, at any time he or she chooses to do so. If a judgment contains such a provision, the person resuming the use of his or her former or maiden name is not required to file a petition for a change of name under Article XXI of the Code of Civil Procedure.
    If a person whose marriage is dissolved or declared invalid chooses to resume the use of his or her former or maiden name, he or she is not required to provide notice by publication pursuant to subsection (a) of Section 21-103 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
    (d) A judgment of dissolution of marriage or legal separation, if made, shall be awarded to both of the parties, and shall provide that it affects the status previously existing between the parties in the manner adjudged.
(Source: P.A. 100-520, eff. 1-1-18 (see Section 5 of P.A. 100-565 for the effective date of P.A. 100-520); 101-203, eff. 1-1-20.)


 
    (750 ILCS 5/Pt. IV-A heading)
PART IV-A
JOINT SIMPLIFIED DISSOLUTION PROCEDURE

    (750 ILCS 5/451)
    Sec. 451. Applicability. In any proceeding under this Part IV-A, the provisions of this Part IV-A shall control where they conflict with other provisions of this Act.
(Source: P.A. 88-39.)

    (750 ILCS 5/452)
    Sec. 452. Petition. The parties to a dissolution proceeding may file a joint petition for simplified dissolution if they certify that all of the following conditions exist when the proceeding is commenced:
        (a) Neither party is dependent on the other party for
    	
support or each party is willing to waive the right to support; and the parties understand that consultation with attorneys may help them determine eligibility for spousal support.
        (b) Either party has met the residency or military
    	
presence requirement of Section 401 of this Act.
        (c) The requirements of Section 401 regarding proof
    	
of irreconcilable differences have been met.
        (d) No children were born of the relationship of the
    	
parties or adopted by the parties during the marriage, and the wife, to her knowledge, is not pregnant by the husband.
        (e) The duration of the marriage does not exceed 8
    	
years.
        (f) Neither party has any interest in real property
    	
or retirement benefits unless the retirement benefits are exclusively held in individual retirement accounts and the combined value of the accounts is less than $10,000.
        (g) The parties waive any rights to maintenance.
        (h) The total fair market value of all marital
    	
property, after deducting all encumbrances, is less than $50,000, the combined gross annualized income from all sources is less than $60,000, and neither party has a gross annualized income from all sources in excess of $30,000.
        (i) The parties have disclosed to each other all
    	
assets and liabilities and their tax returns for all years of the marriage.
        (j) The parties have executed a written agreement
    	
dividing all assets in excess of $100 in value and allocating responsibility for debts and liabilities between the parties.
        (k) The parties have executed a written agreement
    	
allocating ownership of and responsibility for any companion animals owned by the parties. As used in this Section, "companion animal" does not include a service animal as defined in Section 2.01c of the Humane Care for Animals Act.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16; 99-763, eff. 1-1-17; 100-422, eff. 1-1-18.)

    (750 ILCS 5/453)
    Sec. 453. Procedure; Judgment. The parties shall use the forms, including a form for the affidavit required under Section 454, provided by the circuit court clerk, and the clerk shall submit the petition to the court. The court shall expeditiously consider the cause. Both parties shall appear in person before the court and, if the court so directs, testify. The court, after examination of the petition and the parties and finding the agreement of the parties not unconscionable, shall enter a judgment granting the dissolution if the requirements of this Part IV-A have been met and the parties have submitted the affidavit required under Section 454. No transcript of proceedings shall be required.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/454)
    Sec. 454. Affidavit. At the time of the hearing, the parties shall submit to the court an affidavit executed by both parties stating that all property has been divided in accordance with the agreement of the parties and that they have executed all documents required to effectuate the agreement.
(Source: P.A. 88-39.)

    (750 ILCS 5/455)
    Sec. 455. Copies of judgment. Upon entry of the judgment and upon payment of the fee, the circuit court clerk shall furnish to each party a certified copy of the final judgment of dissolution.
(Source: P.A. 88-39.)

    (750 ILCS 5/456)
    Sec. 456. Forms. The contents of forms to be used in simplified dissolutions shall be provided for by court rule. The circuit court clerk shall supply forms upon request for use by parties seeking simplified dissolutions under this Part IV-A.
(Source: P.A. 88-39.)

    (750 ILCS 5/457)
    Sec. 457. Brochure to describe proceedings. The circuit court clerk may make available a brochure that describes the requirements, nature, and effect of a simplified dissolution. The brochure should state, in nontechnical language, the following:
        (a) It is in the best interests of each of the
    	
parties to consult attorneys regarding the dissolution of their marriage, and that the services of attorneys may be obtained.
        (b) The parties should not rely exclusively on the
    	
brochure, and the brochure is intended only as a guide for self-representation.
        (c) A concise summary of the provisions and
    	
procedures of the simplified dissolution procedure.
        (d) The nature and availability of counseling
    	
services.
        (e) If the parties waive their rights to maintenance,
    	
neither party can in the future obtain maintenance from the other.
        (f) A statement in boldface type that a judgment for
    	
dissolution of marriage permanently adjudicates all financial rights arising out of the marriage, including the right to property in the name of one's spouse and the right to support from one's spouse (maintenance or alimony), that a judgment is final, and the parties waive their right to appeal, except that neither party is barred from instituting an action to set aside a final judgment for fraud, duress, accident, mistake, or other grounds at law or in equity.
        (g) The parties to the marriage remain married
    	
persons and cannot remarry until a judgment dissolving the marriage is entered.
(Source: P.A. 88-39.)


 
    (750 ILCS 5/Pt. V heading)
PART V
PROPERTY, SUPPORT AND ATTORNEY FEES

    (750 ILCS 5/501) (from Ch. 40, par. 501)
    Sec. 501. Temporary relief. In all proceedings under this Act, temporary relief shall be as follows:
    (a) Either party may petition or move for:
        (1) temporary maintenance or temporary support of a
    	
child of the marriage entitled to support, accompanied by an affidavit as to the factual basis for the relief requested. One form of financial affidavit, as determined by the Supreme Court, shall be used statewide. The financial affidavit shall be supported by documentary evidence including, but not limited to, income tax returns, pay stubs, and banking statements. Unless the court otherwise directs, any affidavit or supporting documentary evidence submitted pursuant to this paragraph shall not be made part of the public record of the proceedings but shall be available to the court or an appellate court in which the proceedings are subject to review, to the parties, their attorneys, and such other persons as the court may direct. Upon motion of a party, a court may hold a hearing to determine whether and why there is a disparity between a party's sworn affidavit and the supporting documentation. If a party intentionally or recklessly files an inaccurate or misleading financial affidavit, the court shall impose significant penalties and sanctions including, but not limited to, costs and attorney's fees;
        (2) a temporary restraining order or preliminary
    	
injunction, accompanied by affidavit showing a factual basis for any of the following relief:
            (i) restraining any person from transferring,
        	
encumbering, concealing or otherwise disposing of any property except in the usual course of business or for the necessities of life, and, if so restrained, requiring him to notify the moving party and his attorney of any proposed extraordinary expenditures made after the order is issued; however, an order need not include an exception for transferring, encumbering, or otherwise disposing of property in the usual course of business or for the necessities of life if the court enters appropriate orders that enable the parties to pay their necessary personal and business expenses including, but not limited to, appropriate professionals to assist the court pursuant to subsection (l) of Section 503 to administer the payment and accounting of such living and business expenses;
            (ii) enjoining a party from removing a child from
        	
the jurisdiction of the court for more than 14 days;
            (iii) enjoining a party from striking or
        	
interfering with the personal liberty of the other party or of any child; or
            (iv) providing other injunctive relief proper in
        	
the circumstances; or
        (3) other appropriate temporary relief including, in
    	
the discretion of the court, ordering the purchase or sale of assets and requiring that a party or parties borrow funds in the appropriate circumstances.
    Issues concerning temporary maintenance or temporary support of a child entitled to support shall be dealt with on a summary basis based on allocated parenting time, financial affidavits, tax returns, pay stubs, banking statements, and other relevant documentation, except an evidentiary hearing may be held upon a showing of good cause. If a party intentionally or recklessly files an inaccurate or misleading financial affidavit, the court shall impose significant penalties and sanctions including, but not limited to, costs and attorney's fees resulting from the improper representation.
    (b) The court may issue a temporary restraining order without requiring notice to the other party only if it finds, on the basis of the moving affidavit or other evidence, that irreparable injury will result to the moving party if no order is issued until the time for responding has elapsed.
    (c) A response hereunder may be filed within 21 days after service of notice of motion or at the time specified in the temporary restraining order.
    (c-1) As used in this subsection (c-1), "interim attorney's fees and costs" means attorney's fees and costs assessed from time to time while a case is pending, in favor of the petitioning party's current counsel, for reasonable fees and costs either already incurred or to be incurred, and "interim award" means an award of interim attorney's fees and costs. Interim awards shall be governed by the following:
        (1) Except for good cause shown, a proceeding for (or
    	
relating to) interim attorney's fees and costs in a pre-judgment dissolution proceeding shall be nonevidentiary and summary in nature. All hearings for or relating to interim attorney's fees and costs under this subsection shall be scheduled expeditiously by the court. When a party files a petition for interim attorney's fees and costs supported by one or more affidavits that delineate relevant factors, the court (or a hearing officer) shall assess an interim award after affording the opposing party a reasonable opportunity to file a responsive pleading. A responsive pleading shall set out the amount of each retainer or other payment or payments, or both, previously paid to the responding party's counsel by or on behalf of the responding party. A responsive pleading shall include costs incurred, and shall indicate whether the costs are paid or unpaid. In assessing an interim award, the court shall consider all relevant factors, as presented, that appear reasonable and necessary, including to the extent applicable:
            (A) the income and property of each party,
        	
including alleged marital property within the sole control of one party and alleged non-marital property within access to a party;
            (B) the needs of each party;
            (C) the realistic earning capacity of each party;
            (D) any impairment to present earning capacity of
        	
either party, including age and physical and emotional health;
            (E) the standard of living established during the
        	
marriage;
            (F) the degree of complexity of the issues,
        	
including allocation of parental responsibility, valuation or division (or both) of closely held businesses, and tax planning, as well as reasonable needs for expert investigations or expert witnesses, or both;
            (G) each party's access to relevant information;
            (H) the amount of the payment or payments made or
        	
reasonably expected to be made to the attorney for the other party; and
            (I) any other factor that the court expressly
        	
finds to be just and equitable.
        (2) Any assessment of an interim award (including one
    	
pursuant to an agreed order) shall be without prejudice to any final allocation and without prejudice as to any claim or right of either party or any counsel of record at the time of the award. Any such claim or right may be presented by the appropriate party or counsel at a hearing on contribution under subsection (j) of Section 503 or a hearing on counsel's fees under subsection (c) of Section 508. Unless otherwise ordered by the court at the final hearing between the parties or in a hearing under subsection (j) of Section 503 or subsection (c) of Section 508, interim awards, as well as the aggregate of all other payments by each party to counsel and related payments to third parties, shall be deemed to have been advances from the parties' marital estate. Any portion of any interim award constituting an overpayment shall be remitted back to the appropriate party or parties, or, alternatively, to successor counsel, as the court determines and directs, after notice in a form designated by the Supreme Court. An order for the award of interim attorney's fees shall be a standardized form order and labeled "Interim Fee Award Order".
        (3) In any proceeding under this subsection (c-1),
    	
the court (or hearing officer) shall assess an interim award against an opposing party in an amount necessary to enable the petitioning party to participate adequately in the litigation, upon findings that the party from whom attorney's fees and costs are sought has the financial ability to pay reasonable amounts and that the party seeking attorney's fees and costs lacks sufficient access to assets or income to pay reasonable amounts. In determining an award, the court shall consider whether adequate participation in the litigation requires expenditure of more fees and costs for a party that is not in control of assets or relevant information. Except for good cause shown, an interim award shall not be less than payments made or reasonably expected to be made to the counsel for the other party. If the court finds that both parties lack financial ability or access to assets or income for reasonable attorney's fees and costs, the court (or hearing officer) shall enter an order that allocates available funds for each party's counsel, including retainers or interim payments, or both, previously paid, in a manner that achieves substantial parity between the parties.
        (4) The changes to this Section 501 made by this
    	
amendatory Act of 1996 apply to cases pending on or after June 1, 1997, except as otherwise provided in Section 508.
    (c-2) Allocation of use of marital residence. Where there is on file a verified complaint or verified petition seeking temporary eviction from the marital residence, the court may, during the pendency of the proceeding, only in cases where the physical or mental well-being of either spouse or his or her children is jeopardized by occupancy of the marital residence by both spouses, and only upon due notice and full hearing, unless waived by the court on good cause shown, enter orders granting the exclusive possession of the marital residence to either spouse, by eviction from, or restoration of, the marital residence, until the final determination of the cause pursuant to the factors listed in Section 602.7 of this Act. No such order shall in any manner affect any estate in homestead property of either party. In entering orders under this subsection (c-2), the court shall balance hardships to the parties.
    (d) A temporary order entered under this Section:
        (1) does not prejudice the rights of the parties or
    	
the child which are to be adjudicated at subsequent hearings in the proceeding;
        (2) may be revoked or modified before final judgment,
    	
on a showing by affidavit and upon hearing; and
        (3) terminates when the final judgment is entered or
    	
when the petition for dissolution of marriage or legal separation or declaration of invalidity of marriage is dismissed.
    (e) The fees or costs of mediation shall be borne by the parties and may be assessed by the court as it deems equitable without prejudice and are subject to reallocation at the conclusion of the case.
    (f) Companion animals. Either party may petition or move for the temporary allocation of sole or joint possession of and responsibility for a companion animal jointly owned by the parties. In issuing an order under this subsection, the court shall take into consideration the well-being of the companion animal. As used in this Section, "companion animal" does not include a service animal as defined in Section 2.01c of the Humane Care for Animals Act.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16; 99-763, eff. 1-1-17; 100-422, eff. 1-1-18.)

    (750 ILCS 5/501.1) (from Ch. 40, par. 501.1)
    Sec. 501.1. Dissolution action stay.
    (a) Upon service of a summons and petition or praecipe filed under the Illinois Marriage and Dissolution of Marriage Act or upon the filing of the respondent's appearance in the proceeding, whichever first occurs, a dissolution action stay shall be in effect against both parties, without bond or further notice, until a final judgement is entered, the proceeding is dismissed, or until further order of the court:
         (1) restraining both parties from physically abusing,
    	
harassing, intimidating, striking, or interfering with the personal liberty of the other party or the minor children of either party; and
         (2) restraining both parties from concealing a minor
    	
child of either party from the child's other parent.
    The restraint provided in this subsection (a) does not operate to make unavailable any of the remedies provided in the Illinois Domestic Violence Act of 1986.
    (b) (Blank).
    (c) (Blank).
    (d) (Blank).
    (e) In a proceeding filed under this Act, the summons shall provide notice of the entry of the automatic dissolution action stay in a form as required by applicable rules.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16; 99-763, eff. 1-1-17.)

    (750 ILCS 5/502) (from Ch. 40, par. 502)
    Sec. 502. Agreement.
    (a) To promote amicable settlement of disputes between parties to a marriage attendant upon the dissolution of their marriage, the parties may enter into an agreement containing provisions for disposition of any property owned by either of them, maintenance of either of them, support, parental responsibility allocation of their children, and support of their children as provided in Sections 513 and 513.5 after the children attain majority. The parties may also enter into an agreement allocating the sole or joint ownership of or responsibility for a companion animal. As used in this Section, "companion animal" does not include a service animal as defined in Section 2.01c of the Humane Care for Animals Act. Any agreement pursuant to this Section must be in writing, except for good cause shown with the approval of the court, before proceeding to an oral prove up.
    (b) The terms of the agreement, except those providing for the support and parental responsibility allocation of children, are binding upon the court unless it finds, after considering the economic circumstances of the parties and any other relevant evidence produced by the parties, on their own motion or on request of the court, that the agreement is unconscionable. The terms of the agreement incorporated into the judgment are binding if there is any conflict between the terms of the agreement and any testimony made at an uncontested prove-up hearing on the grounds or the substance of the agreement.
    (c) If the court finds the agreement unconscionable, it may request the parties to submit a revised agreement or upon hearing, may make orders for the disposition of property, maintenance, child support and other matters.
    (d) Unless the agreement provides to the contrary, its terms shall be set forth in the judgment, and the parties shall be ordered to perform under such terms, or if the agreement provides that its terms shall not be set forth in the judgment, the judgment shall identify the agreement and state that the court has approved its terms.
    (e) Terms of the agreement set forth in the judgment are enforceable by all remedies available for enforcement of a judgment, including contempt, and are enforceable as contract terms.
    (f) Child support, support of children as provided in Sections 513 and 513.5 after the children attain majority, and parental responsibility allocation of children may be modified upon a showing of a substantial change in circumstances. The parties may provide that maintenance is non-modifiable in amount, duration, or both. If the parties do not provide that maintenance is non-modifiable in amount, duration, or both, then those terms are modifiable upon a substantial change of circumstances. Property provisions of an agreement are never modifiable. The judgment may expressly preclude or limit modification of other terms set forth in the judgment if the agreement so provides. Otherwise, terms of an agreement set forth in the judgment are automatically modified by modification of the judgment.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16; 99-763, eff. 1-1-17; 100-422, eff. 1-1-18.)

    (750 ILCS 5/503) (from Ch. 40, par. 503)
    Sec. 503. Disposition of property and debts.
    (a) For purposes of this Act, "marital property" means all property, including debts and other obligations, acquired by either spouse subsequent to the marriage, except the following, which is known as "non-marital property":
        (1) property acquired by gift, legacy or descent or
    	
property acquired in exchange for such property;
        (2) property acquired in exchange for property
    	
acquired before the marriage;
        (3) property acquired by a spouse after a judgment of
    	
legal separation;
        (4) property excluded by valid agreement of the
    	
parties, including a premarital agreement or a postnuptial agreement;
        (5) any judgment or property obtained by judgment
    	
awarded to a spouse from the other spouse except, however, when a spouse is required to sue the other spouse in order to obtain insurance coverage or otherwise recover from a third party and the recovery is directly related to amounts advanced by the marital estate, the judgment shall be considered marital property;
        (6) property acquired before the marriage, except as
    	
it relates to retirement plans that may have both marital and non-marital characteristics;
        (6.5) all property acquired by a spouse by the sole
    	
use of non-marital property as collateral for a loan that then is used to acquire property during the marriage; to the extent that the marital estate repays any portion of the loan, it shall be considered a contribution from the marital estate to the non-marital estate subject to reimbursement;
        (7) the increase in value of non-marital property,
    	
irrespective of whether the increase results from a contribution of marital property, non-marital property, the personal effort of a spouse, or otherwise, subject to the right of reimbursement provided in subsection (c) of this Section; and
        (8) income from property acquired by a method listed
    	
in paragraphs (1) through (7) of this subsection if the income is not attributable to the personal effort of a spouse.
    Property acquired prior to a marriage that would otherwise be non-marital property shall not be deemed to be marital property solely because the property was acquired in contemplation of marriage.
    The court shall make specific factual findings as to its classification of assets as marital or non-marital property, values, and other factual findings supporting its property award.
    (b)(1) For purposes of distribution of property, all property acquired by either spouse after the marriage and before a judgment of dissolution of marriage or declaration of invalidity of marriage is presumed marital property. This presumption includes non-marital property transferred into some form of co-ownership between the spouses, regardless of whether title is held individually or by the spouses in some form of co-ownership such as joint tenancy, tenancy in common, tenancy by the entirety, or community property. The presumption of marital property is overcome by showing through clear and convincing evidence that the property was acquired by a method listed in subsection (a) of this Section or was done for estate or tax planning purposes or for other reasons that establish that a transfer between spouses was not intended to be a gift.
    (2) For purposes of distribution of property pursuant to this Section, all pension benefits (including pension benefits under the Illinois Pension Code, defined benefit plans, defined contribution plans and accounts, individual retirement accounts, and non-qualified plans) acquired by or participated in by either spouse after the marriage and before a judgment of dissolution of marriage or legal separation or declaration of invalidity of the marriage are presumed to be marital property. A spouse may overcome the presumption that these pension benefits are marital property by showing through clear and convincing evidence that the pension benefits were acquired by a method listed in subsection (a) of this Section. The right to a division of pension benefits in just proportions under this Section is enforceable under Section 1-119 of the Illinois Pension Code.
    The value of pension benefits in a retirement system subject to the Illinois Pension Code shall be determined in accordance with the valuation procedures established by the retirement system.
    The recognition of pension benefits as marital property and the division of those benefits pursuant to a Qualified Illinois Domestic Relations Order shall not be deemed to be a diminishment, alienation, or impairment of those benefits. The division of pension benefits is an allocation of property in which each spouse has a species of common ownership.
    (3) For purposes of distribution of property under this Section, all stock options and restricted stock or similar form of benefit granted to either spouse after the marriage and before a judgment of dissolution of marriage or legal separation or declaration of invalidity of marriage, whether vested or non-vested or whether their value is ascertainable, are presumed to be marital property. This presumption of marital property is overcome by a showing that the stock options or restricted stock or similar form of benefit were acquired by a method listed in subsection (a) of this Section. The court shall allocate stock options and restricted stock or similar form of benefit between the parties at the time of the judgment of dissolution of marriage or declaration of invalidity of marriage recognizing that the value of the stock options and restricted stock or similar form of benefit may not be then determinable and that the actual division of the options may not occur until a future date. In making the allocation between the parties, the court shall consider, in addition to the factors set forth in subsection (d) of this Section, the following:
        (i) All circumstances underlying the grant of the
    	
stock option and restricted stock or similar form of benefit including but not limited to the vesting schedule, whether the grant was for past, present, or future efforts, whether the grant is designed to promote future performance or employment, or any combination thereof.
        (ii) The length of time from the grant of the option
    	
to the time the option is exercisable.
    (b-5)(1) As to any existing policy of life insurance insuring the life of either spouse, or any interest in such policy, that constitutes marital property, whether whole life, term life, group term life, universal life, or other form of life insurance policy, and whether or not the value is ascertainable, the court shall allocate ownership, death benefits or the right to assign death benefits, and the obligation for premium payments, if any, equitably between the parties at the time of the judgment for dissolution or declaration of invalidity of marriage.
    (2) If a judgment of dissolution of marriage is entered after an insured has designated the insured's spouse as a beneficiary under a life insurance policy in force at the time of entry, the designation of the insured's former spouse as beneficiary is not effective unless:
        (A) the judgment designates the insured's former
    	
spouse as the beneficiary;
        (B) the insured redesignates the former spouse as the
    	
beneficiary after entry of the judgment; or
        (C) the former spouse is designated to receive the
    	
proceeds in trust for, on behalf of, or for the benefit of a child or a dependent of either former spouse.
    (3) If a designation is not effective under paragraph (2), the proceeds of the policy are payable to the named alternative beneficiary or, if there is not a named alternative beneficiary, to the estate of the insured.
    (4) An insurer that pays the proceeds of a life insurance policy to the beneficiary under a designation that is not effective under paragraph (2) is liable for payment of the proceeds to the person or estate provided by paragraph (3) only if:
        (A) before payment of the proceeds to the designated
    	
beneficiary, the insurer receives written notice at the home office of the insurer from an interested person that the designation is not effective under paragraph (2); and
        (B) the insurer has not filed an interpleader.
    (5) The provisions in paragraphs (2), (3) and (4) of this subsection (b-5) do not apply to life insurance policies subject to regulation under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended, 29 U.S.C. 100 et seq., the Federal Employee Group Life Insurance Act, 5 U.S.C. 8701 et seq., or any other federal law that preempts the application of those paragraphs.
    (c) Commingled marital and non-marital property shall be treated in the following manner, unless otherwise agreed by the spouses:
        (1)(A) If marital and non-marital property are
    	
commingled by one estate being contributed into the other, the following shall apply:
            (i) If the contributed property loses its
        	
identity, the contributed property transmutes to the estate receiving the property, subject to the provisions of paragraph (2) of this subsection (c).
            (ii) If the contributed property retains its
        	
identity, it does not transmute and remains property of the contributing estate.
        (B) If marital and non-marital property are
    	
commingled into newly acquired property resulting in a loss of identity of the contributing estates, the commingled property shall be deemed transmuted to marital property, subject to the provisions of paragraph (2) of this subsection (c).
        (2)(A) When one estate of property makes a
    	
contribution to another estate of property, the contributing estate shall be reimbursed from the estate receiving the contribution notwithstanding any transmutation. No such reimbursement shall be made with respect to a contribution that is not traceable by clear and convincing evidence or that was a gift. The court may provide for reimbursement out of the marital property to be divided or by imposing a lien against the non-marital property that received the contribution.
        (B) When a spouse contributes personal effort to
    	
non-marital property, it shall be deemed a contribution from the marital estate, which shall receive reimbursement for the efforts if the efforts are significant and result in substantial appreciation to the non-marital property except that if the marital estate reasonably has been compensated for his or her efforts, it shall not be deemed a contribution to the marital estate and there shall be no reimbursement to the marital estate. The court may provide for reimbursement out of the marital property to be divided or by imposing a lien against the non-marital property which received the contribution.
    (d) In a proceeding for dissolution of marriage or declaration of invalidity of marriage, or in a proceeding for disposition of property following dissolution of marriage by a court that lacked personal jurisdiction over the absent spouse or lacked jurisdiction to dispose of the property, the court shall assign each spouse's non-marital property to that spouse. It also shall divide the marital property without regard to marital misconduct in just proportions considering all relevant factors, including:
        (1) each party's contribution to the acquisition,
    	
preservation, or increase or decrease in value of the marital or non-marital property, including (i) any decrease attributable to an advance from the parties' marital estate under subsection (c-1)(2) of Section 501; (ii) the contribution of a spouse as a homemaker or to the family unit; and (iii) whether the contribution is after the commencement of a proceeding for dissolution of marriage or declaration of invalidity of marriage;
        (2) the dissipation by each party of the marital
    	
property, provided that a party's claim of dissipation is subject to the following conditions:
            (i) a notice of intent to claim dissipation shall
        	
be given no later than 60 days before trial or 30 days after discovery closes, whichever is later;
            (ii) the notice of intent to claim dissipation
        	
shall contain, at a minimum, a date or period of time during which the marriage began undergoing an irretrievable breakdown, an identification of the property dissipated, and a date or period of time during which the dissipation occurred;
            (iii) a certificate or service of the notice of
        	
intent to claim dissipation shall be filed with the clerk of the court and be served pursuant to applicable rules;
            (iv) no dissipation shall be deemed to have
        	
occurred prior to 3 years after the party claiming dissipation knew or should have known of the dissipation, but in no event prior to 5 years before the filing of the petition for dissolution of marriage;
        (3) the value of the property assigned to each spouse;
        (4) the duration of the marriage;
        (5) the relevant economic circumstances of each
    	
spouse when the division of property is to become effective, including the desirability of awarding the family home, or the right to live therein for reasonable periods, to the spouse having the primary residence of the children;
        (6) any obligations and rights arising from a prior
    	
marriage of either party;
        (7) any prenuptial or postnuptial agreement of the
    	
parties;
        (8) the age, health, station, occupation, amount and
    	
sources of income, vocational skills, employability, estate, liabilities, and needs of each of the parties;
        (9) the custodial provisions for any children;
        (10) whether the apportionment is in lieu of or in
    	
addition to maintenance;
        (11) the reasonable opportunity of each spouse for
    	
future acquisition of capital assets and income; and
        (12) the tax consequences of the property division
    	
upon the respective economic circumstances of the parties.
    (e) Each spouse has a species of common ownership in the marital property which vests at the time dissolution proceedings are commenced and continues only during the pendency of the action. Any such interest in marital property shall not encumber that property so as to restrict its transfer, assignment or conveyance by the title holder unless such title holder is specifically enjoined from making such transfer, assignment or conveyance.
    (f) In a proceeding for dissolution of marriage or declaration of invalidity of marriage or in a proceeding for disposition of property following dissolution of marriage by a court that lacked personal jurisdiction over the absent spouse or lacked jurisdiction to dispose of the property, the court, in determining the value of the marital and non-marital property for purposes of dividing the property, has the discretion to use the date of the trial or such other date as agreed upon by the parties, or ordered by the court within its discretion, for purposes of determining the value of assets or property.
    (g) The court if necessary to protect and promote the best interests of the children may set aside a portion of the jointly or separately held estates of the parties in a separate fund or trust for the support, maintenance, education, physical and mental health, and general welfare of any minor, dependent, or incompetent child of the parties. In making a determination under this subsection, the court may consider, among other things, the conviction of a party of any of the offenses set forth in Section 11-1.20, 11-1.30, 11-1.40, 11-1.50, 11-1.60, 12-3.3, 12-4, 12-4.1, 12-4.2, 12-4.3, 12-13, 12-14, 12-14.1, 12-15, or 12-16, or Section 12-3.05 except for subdivision (a)(4) or (g)(1), of the Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012 if the victim is a child of one or both of the parties, and there is a need for, and cost of, care, healing and counseling for the child who is the victim of the crime.
    (h) Unless specifically directed by a reviewing court, or upon good cause shown, the court shall not on remand consider any increase or decrease in the value of any "marital" or "non-marital" property occurring since the assessment of such property at the original trial or hearing, but shall use only that assessment made at the original trial or hearing.
    (i) The court may make such judgments affecting the marital property as may be just and may enforce such judgments by ordering a sale of marital property, with proceeds therefrom to be applied as determined by the court.
    (j) After proofs have closed in the final hearing on all other issues between the parties (or in conjunction with the final hearing, if all parties so stipulate) and before judgment is entered, a party's petition for contribution to fees and costs incurred in the proceeding shall be heard and decided, in accordance with the following provisions:
        (1) A petition for contribution, if not filed before
    	
the final hearing on other issues between the parties, shall be filed no later than 14 days after the closing of proofs in the final hearing or within such other period as the court orders.
        (2) Any award of contribution to one party from the
    	
other party shall be based on the criteria for division of marital property under this Section 503 and, if maintenance has been awarded, on the criteria for an award of maintenance under Section 504.
        (3) The filing of a petition for contribution shall
    	
not be deemed to constitute a waiver of the attorney-client privilege between the petitioning party and current or former counsel; and such a waiver shall not constitute a prerequisite to a hearing for contribution. If either party's presentation on contribution, however, includes evidence within the scope of the attorney-client privilege, the disclosure or disclosures shall be narrowly construed and shall not be deemed by the court to constitute a general waiver of the privilege as to matters beyond the scope of the presentation.
        (4) No finding on which a contribution award is based
    	
or denied shall be asserted against counsel or former counsel for purposes of any hearing under subsection (c) or (e) of Section 508.
        (5) A contribution award (payable to either the
    	
petitioning party or the party's counsel, or jointly, as the court determines) may be in the form of either a set dollar amount or a percentage of fees and costs (or a portion of fees and costs) to be subsequently agreed upon by the petitioning party and counsel or, alternatively, thereafter determined in a hearing pursuant to subsection (c) of Section 508 or previously or thereafter determined in an independent proceeding under subsection (e) of Section 508.
        (6) The changes to this Section 503 made by this
    	
amendatory Act of 1996 apply to cases pending on or after June 1, 1997, except as otherwise provided in Section 508.
    (k) In determining the value of assets or property under this Section, the court shall employ a fair market value standard. The date of valuation for the purposes of division of assets shall be the date of trial or such other date as agreed by the parties or ordered by the court, within its discretion. If the court grants a petition brought under Section 2-1401 of the Code of Civil Procedure, then the court has the discretion to use the date of the trial or such other date as agreed upon by the parties, or ordered by the court within its discretion, for purposes of determining the value of assets or property.
    (l) The court may seek the advice of financial experts or other professionals, whether or not employed by the court on a regular basis. The advice given shall be in writing and made available by the court to counsel. Counsel may examine as a witness any professional consulted by the court designated as the court's witness. Professional personnel consulted by the court are subject to subpoena for the purposes of discovery, trial, or both. The court shall allocate the costs and fees of those professional personnel between the parties based upon the financial ability of each party and any other criteria the court considers appropriate, and the allocation is subject to reallocation under subsection (a) of Section 508. Upon the request of any party or upon the court's own motion, the court may conduct a hearing as to the reasonableness of those fees and costs.
    (m) The changes made to this Section by Public Act 97-941 apply only to petitions for dissolution of marriage filed on or after January 1, 2013 (the effective date of Public Act 97-941).
    (n) If the court finds that a companion animal of the parties is a marital asset, it shall allocate the sole or joint ownership of and responsibility for a companion animal of the parties. In issuing an order under this subsection, the court shall take into consideration the well-being of the companion animal. As used in this Section, "companion animal" does not include a service animal as defined in Section 2.01c of the Humane Care for Animals Act.
(Source: P.A. 99-78, eff. 7-20-15; 99-90, eff. 1-1-16; 99-763, eff. 1-1-17; 100-422, eff. 1-1-18; 100-871, eff. 1-1-19.)

    (750 ILCS 5/504) (from Ch. 40, par. 504)
    Sec. 504. Maintenance.
    (a) Entitlement to maintenance. In a proceeding for dissolution of marriage, legal separation, declaration of invalidity of marriage, or dissolution of a civil union, a proceeding for maintenance following a legal separation or dissolution of the marriage or civil union by a court which lacked personal jurisdiction over the absent spouse, a proceeding for modification of a previous order for maintenance under Section 510 of this Act, or any proceeding authorized under Section 501 of this Act, the court may grant a maintenance award for either spouse in amounts and for periods of time as the court deems just, without regard to marital misconduct, and the maintenance may be paid from the income or property of the other spouse. The court shall first make a finding as to whether a maintenance award is appropriate, after consideration of all relevant factors, including:
        (1) the income and property of each party, including
    	
marital property apportioned and non-marital property assigned to the party seeking maintenance as well as all financial obligations imposed on the parties as a result of the dissolution of marriage;
        (2) the needs of each party;
        (3) the realistic present and future earning capacity
    	
of each party;
        (4) any impairment of the present and future earning
    	
capacity of the party seeking maintenance due to that party devoting time to domestic duties or having forgone or delayed education, training, employment, or career opportunities due to the marriage;
        (5) any impairment of the realistic present or future
    	
earning capacity of the party against whom maintenance is sought;
        (6) the time necessary to enable the party seeking
    	
maintenance to acquire appropriate education, training, and employment, and whether that party is able to support himself or herself through appropriate employment;
        (6.1) the effect of any parental responsibility
    	
arrangements and its effect on a party's ability to seek or maintain employment;
        (7) the standard of living established during the
    	
marriage;
        (8) the duration of the marriage;
        (9) the age, health, station, occupation, amount and
    	
sources of income, vocational skills, employability, estate, liabilities, and the needs of each of the parties;
        (10) all sources of public and private income
    	
including, without limitation, disability and retirement income;
        (11) the tax consequences to each party;
        (12) contributions and services by the party seeking
    	
maintenance to the education, training, career or career potential, or license of the other spouse;
        (13) any valid agreement of the parties; and
        (14) any other factor that the court expressly finds
    	
to be just and equitable.
    (b) (Blank).
    (b-1) Amount and duration of maintenance. Unless the court finds that a maintenance award is appropriate, it shall bar maintenance as to the party seeking maintenance regardless of the length of the marriage at the time the action was commenced. Only if the court finds that a maintenance award is appropriate, the court shall order guideline maintenance in accordance with paragraph (1) or non-guideline maintenance in accordance with paragraph (2) of this subsection (b-1). If the application of guideline maintenance results in a combined maintenance and child support obligation that exceeds 50% of the payor's net income, the court may determine non-guideline maintenance in accordance with paragraph (2) of this subsection (b-1), non-guideline child support in accordance with paragraph (3.4) of subsection (a) of Section 505, or both.
        (1) Maintenance award in accordance with guidelines.
    	
If the combined gross annual income of the parties is less than $500,000 and the payor has no obligation to pay child support or maintenance or both from a prior relationship, maintenance payable after the date the parties' marriage is dissolved shall be in accordance with subparagraphs (A) and (B) of this paragraph (1), unless the court makes a finding that the application of the guidelines would be inappropriate.
            (A) The amount of maintenance under this
        	
paragraph (1) shall be calculated by taking 33 1/3% of the payor's net annual income minus 25% of the payee's net annual income. The amount calculated as maintenance, however, when added to the net income of the payee, shall not result in the payee receiving an amount that is in excess of 40% of the combined net income of the parties.
            (A-1) Modification of maintenance orders entered
        	
before January 1, 2019 that are and continue to be eligible for inclusion in the gross income of the payee for federal income tax purposes and deductible by the payor shall be calculated by taking 30% of the payor's gross annual income minus 20% of the payee's gross annual income, unless both parties expressly provide otherwise in the modification order. The amount calculated as maintenance, however, when added to the gross income of the payee, may not result in the payee receiving an amount that is in excess of 40% of the combined gross income of the parties.
            (B) The duration of an award under this
        	
paragraph (1) shall be calculated by multiplying the length of the marriage at the time the action was commenced by whichever of the following factors applies: less than 5 years (.20); 5 years or more but less than 6 years (.24); 6 years or more but less than 7 years (.28); 7 years or more but less than 8 years (.32); 8 years or more but less than 9 years (.36); 9 years or more but less than 10 years (.40); 10 years or more but less than 11 years (.44); 11 years or more but less than 12 years (.48); 12 years or more but less than 13 years (.52); 13 years or more but less than 14 years (.56); 14 years or more but less than 15 years (.60); 15 years or more but less than 16 years (.64); 16 years or more but less than 17 years (.68); 17 years or more but less than 18 years (.72); 18 years or more but less than 19 years (.76); 19 years or more but less than 20 years (.80). For a marriage of 20 or more years, the court, in its discretion, shall order maintenance for a period equal to the length of the marriage or for an indefinite term.
        (1.5) In the discretion of the court, any term of
    	
temporary maintenance paid by court order under Section 501 may be a corresponding credit to the duration of maintenance set forth in subparagraph (b-1)(1)(B).
        (2) Maintenance award not in accordance with
    	
guidelines. Any non-guidelines award of maintenance shall be made after the court's consideration of all relevant factors set forth in subsection (a) of this Section.
    (b-2) Findings. In each case involving the issue of maintenance, the court shall make specific findings of fact, as follows:
        (1) the court shall state its reasoning for awarding
    	
or not awarding maintenance and shall include references to each relevant factor set forth in subsection (a) of this Section;
        (2) if the court deviates from applicable guidelines
    	
under paragraph (1) of subsection (b-1), it shall state in its findings the amount of maintenance (if determinable) or duration that would have been required under the guidelines and the reasoning for any variance from the guidelines; and
        (3) the court shall state whether the maintenance is
    	
fixed-term, indefinite, reviewable, or reserved by the court.
    (b-3) Gross income. For purposes of this Section, the term "gross income" means all income from all sources, within the scope of that phrase in Section 505 of this Act, except maintenance payments in the pending proceedings shall not be included.
    (b-3.5) Net income. As used in this Section, "net income" has the meaning provided in Section 505 of this Act, except maintenance payments in the pending proceedings shall not be included.
    (b-4) Modification of maintenance orders entered before January 1, 2019. For any order for maintenance or unallocated maintenance and child support entered before January 1, 2019 that is modified after December 31, 2018, payments thereunder shall continue to retain the same tax treatment for federal income tax purposes unless both parties expressly agree otherwise and the agreement is included in the modification order.
    (b-4.5) Maintenance designation.
        (1) Fixed-term maintenance. If a court grants
    	
maintenance for a fixed term, the court shall designate the termination of the period during which this maintenance is to be paid. Maintenance is barred after the end of the period during which fixed-term maintenance is to be paid.
        (2) Indefinite maintenance. If a court grants
    	
maintenance for an indefinite term, the court shall not designate a termination date. Indefinite maintenance shall continue until modification or termination under Section 510.
        (3) Reviewable maintenance. If a court grants
    	
maintenance for a specific term with a review, the court shall designate the period of the specific term and state that the maintenance is reviewable. Upon review, the court shall make a finding in accordance with subdivision (b-8) of this Section, unless the maintenance is modified or terminated under Section 510.
    (b-5) Interest on maintenance. Any maintenance obligation including any unallocated maintenance and child support obligation, or any portion of any support obligation, that becomes due and remains unpaid shall accrue simple interest as set forth in Section 505 of this Act.
    (b-7) Maintenance judgments. Any new or existing maintenance order including any unallocated maintenance and child support order entered by the court under this Section shall be deemed to be a series of judgments against the person obligated to pay support thereunder. Each such judgment to be in the amount of each payment or installment of support and each such judgment to be deemed entered as of the date the corresponding payment or installment becomes due under the terms of the support order, except no judgment shall arise as to any installment coming due after the termination of maintenance as provided by Section 510 of the Illinois Marriage and Dissolution of Marriage Act or the provisions of any order for maintenance. Each such judgment shall have the full force, effect and attributes of any other judgment of this State, including the ability to be enforced. Notwithstanding any other State or local law to the contrary, a lien arises by operation of law against the real and personal property of the obligor for each installment of overdue support owed by the obligor.
    (b-8) Review of maintenance. Upon review of any previously ordered maintenance award, the court may extend maintenance for further review, extend maintenance for a fixed non-modifiable term, extend maintenance for an indefinite term, or permanently terminate maintenance in accordance with subdivision (b-1)(1)(A) of this Section.
    (c) Maintenance during an appeal. The court may grant and enforce the payment of maintenance during the pendency of an appeal as the court shall deem reasonable and proper.
    (d) Maintenance during imprisonment. No maintenance shall accrue during the period in which a party is imprisoned for failure to comply with the court's order for the payment of such maintenance.
    (e) Fees when maintenance is paid through the clerk. When maintenance is to be paid through the clerk of the court in a county of 500,000 inhabitants or less, the order shall direct the obligor to pay to the clerk, in addition to the maintenance payments, all fees imposed by the county board under paragraph (4) of subsection (bb) of Section 27.1a of the Clerks of Courts Act. When maintenance is to be paid through the clerk of the court in a county of more than 500,000 but less than 3,000,000 inhabitants, the order shall direct the obligor to pay to the clerk, in addition to the maintenance payments, all fees imposed by the county board under paragraph (4) of subsection (bb) of Section 27.2 of the Clerks of Courts Act. Unless paid in cash or pursuant to an order for withholding, the payment of the fee shall be by a separate instrument from the support payment and shall be made to the order of the Clerk.
    (f) Maintenance secured by life insurance. An award ordered by a court upon entry of a dissolution judgment or upon entry of an award of maintenance following a reservation of maintenance in a dissolution judgment may be reasonably secured, in whole or in part, by life insurance on the payor's life on terms as to which the parties agree or, if the parties do not agree, on such terms determined by the court, subject to the following:
        (1) With respect to existing life insurance, provided
    	
the court is apprised through evidence, stipulation, or otherwise as to level of death benefits, premium, and other relevant data and makes findings relative thereto, the court may allocate death benefits, the right to assign death benefits, or the obligation for future premium payments between the parties as it deems just.
        (2) To the extent the court determines that its award
    	
should be secured, in whole or in part, by new life insurance on the payor's life, the court may only order:
            (i) that the payor cooperate on all appropriate
        	
steps for the payee to obtain such new life insurance; and
            (ii) that the payee, at his or her sole option
        	
and expense, may obtain such new life insurance on the payor's life up to a maximum level of death benefit coverage, or descending death benefit coverage, as is set by the court, such level not to exceed a reasonable amount in light of the court's award, with the payee or the payee's designee being the beneficiary of such life insurance.
    In determining the maximum level of death benefit
    	
coverage, the court shall take into account all relevant facts and circumstances, including the impact on access to life insurance by the maintenance payor. If in resolving any issues under paragraph (2) of this subsection (f) a court reviews any submitted or proposed application for new insurance on the life of a maintenance payor, the review shall be in camera.
        (3) (Blank).
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16; 99-763, eff. 1-1-17; 100-520, eff. 1-1-18 (see Section 5 of P.A. 100-565 for the effective date of P.A. 100-520); 100-923, eff. 1-1-19.)

    (750 ILCS 5/505) (from Ch. 40, par. 505)
    Sec. 505. Child support; contempt; penalties.
    (a) In a proceeding for dissolution of marriage, legal separation, declaration of invalidity of marriage, or dissolution of a civil union, a proceeding for child support following a legal separation or dissolution of the marriage or civil union by a court that lacked personal jurisdiction over the absent spouse, a proceeding for modification of a previous order for child support under Section 510 of this Act, or any proceeding authorized under Section 501 or 601 of this Act, the court may order either or both parents owing a duty of support to a child of the marriage or civil union to pay an amount reasonable and necessary for support. The duty of support owed to a child includes the obligation to provide for the reasonable and necessary physical, mental and emotional health needs of the child. For purposes of this Section, the term "child" shall include any child under age 18 and any child age 19 or younger who is still attending high school. For purposes of this Section, the term "obligor" means the parent obligated to pay support to the other parent.
        (1) Child support guidelines. The Illinois Department
    	
of Healthcare and Family Services shall adopt rules establishing child support guidelines which include worksheets to aid in the calculation of the child support obligations and a schedule of basic child support obligations that reflects the percentage of combined net income that parents living in the same household in this State ordinarily spend on their child. The child support guidelines have the following purposes:
            (A) to establish as State policy an adequate
        	
standard of support for a child, subject to the ability of parents to pay;
            (B) to make child support obligations more
        	
equitable by ensuring more consistent treatment of parents in similar circumstances;
            (C) to improve the efficiency of the court
        	
process by promoting settlements and giving courts and the parties guidance in establishing levels of child support;
            (D) to calculate child support based upon the
        	
parents' combined net income estimated to have been allocated for the support of the child if the parents and child were living in an intact household;
            (E) to adjust child support based upon the needs
        	
of the child; and
            (F) to allocate the amount of child support to be
        	
paid by each parent based upon a parent's net income and the child's physical care arrangements.
        (1.5) Computation of basic child support obligation.
    	
The court shall compute the basic child support obligation by taking the following steps:
            (A) determine each parent's monthly net income;
            (B) add the parents' monthly net incomes together
        	
to determine the combined monthly net income of the parents;
            (C) select the corresponding appropriate amount
        	
from the schedule of basic child support obligations based on the parties' combined monthly net income and number of children of the parties; and
            (D) calculate each parent's percentage share of
        	
the basic child support obligation.
        Although a monetary obligation is computed for each
    	
parent as child support, the receiving parent's share is not payable to the other parent and is presumed to be spent directly on the child.
        (2) Duty of support. The court shall determine child
    	
support in each case by applying the child support guidelines unless the court makes a finding that application of the guidelines would be inappropriate, after considering the best interests of the child and evidence which shows relevant factors including, but not limited to, one or more of the following:
            (A) the financial resources and needs of the
        	
child;
            (B) the financial resources and needs of the
        	
parents;
            (C) the standard of living the child would have
        	
enjoyed had the marriage or civil union not been dissolved; and
            (D) the physical and emotional condition of the
        	
child and his or her educational needs.
        (3) Income.
            (A) As used in this Section, "gross income" means
        	
the total of all income from all sources, except "gross income" does not include (i) benefits received by the parent from means-tested public assistance programs, including, but not limited to, Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, Supplemental Security Income, and the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program or (ii) benefits and income received by the parent for other children in the household, including, but not limited to, child support, survivor benefits, and foster care payments. Social security disability and retirement benefits paid for the benefit of the subject child must be included in the disabled or retired parent's gross income for purposes of calculating the parent's child support obligation, but the parent is entitled to a child support credit for the amount of benefits paid to the other party for the child. "Gross income" includes maintenance treated as taxable income for federal income tax purposes to the payee and received pursuant to a court order in the pending proceedings or any other proceedings and shall be included in the payee's gross income for purposes of calculating the parent's child support obligation.
            (B) As used in this Section, "net income" means
        	
gross income minus either the standardized tax amount calculated pursuant to subparagraph (C) of this paragraph (3) or the individualized tax amount calculated pursuant to subparagraph (D) of this paragraph (3), and minus any adjustments pursuant to subparagraph (F) of this paragraph (3). The standardized tax amount shall be used unless the requirements for an individualized tax amount set forth in subparagraph (E) of this paragraph (3) are met. "Net income" includes maintenance not includable in the gross taxable income of the payee for federal income tax purposes under a court order in the pending proceedings or any other proceedings and shall be included in the payee's net income for purposes of calculating the parent's child support obligation.
            (C) As used in this Section, "standardized tax
        	
amount" means the total of federal and state income taxes for a single person claiming the standard tax deduction, one personal exemption, and the applicable number of dependency exemptions for the minor child or children of the parties, and Social Security and Medicare tax calculated at the Federal Insurance Contributions Act rate.
                (I) Unless a court has determined otherwise
            	
or the parties otherwise agree, the party with the majority of parenting time shall be deemed entitled to claim the dependency exemption for the parties' minor child.
                (II) The Illinois Department of Healthcare
            	
and Family Services shall promulgate a standardized net income conversion table that computes net income by deducting the standardized tax amount from gross income.
            (D) As used in this Section, "individualized tax
        	
amount" means the aggregate of the following taxes:
                (I) federal income tax (properly calculated
            	
withholding or estimated payments);
                (II) State income tax (properly calculated
            	
withholding or estimated payments); and
                (III) Social Security or self-employment tax,
            	
if applicable (or, if none, mandatory retirement contributions required by law or as a condition of employment) and Medicare tax calculated at the Federal Insurance Contributions Act rate.
            (E) In lieu of a standardized tax amount, a
        	
determination of an individualized tax amount may be made under items (I), (II), or (III) below. If an individualized tax amount determination is made under this subparagraph (E), all relevant tax attributes (including filing status, allocation of dependency exemptions, and whether a party is to claim the use of the standard deduction or itemized deductions for federal income tax purposes) shall be as the parties agree or as the court determines. To determine a party's reported income, the court may order the party to complete an Internal Revenue Service Form 4506-T, Request for Tax Transcript.
                (I) Agreement. Irrespective of whether the
            	
parties agree on any other issue before the court, if they jointly stipulate for the record their concurrence on a computation method for the individualized tax amount that is different from the method set forth under subparagraph (D), the stipulated method shall be used by the court unless the court rejects the proposed stipulated method for good cause.
                (II) Summary hearing. If the court determines
            	
child support in a summary hearing under Section 501 and an eligible party opts in to the individualized tax amount method under this item (II), the individualized tax amount shall be determined by the court on the basis of information contained in one or both parties' Supreme Court approved Financial Affidavit (Family & Divorce Cases) and relevant supporting documents under applicable court rules. No party, however, is eligible to opt in unless the party, under applicable court rules, has served the other party with the required Supreme Court approved Financial Affidavit (Family & Divorce Cases) and has substantially produced supporting documents required by the applicable court rules.
                (III) Evidentiary hearing. If the court
            	
determines child support in an evidentiary hearing, whether for purposes of a temporary order or at the conclusion of a proceeding, item (II) of this subparagraph (E) does not apply. In each such case (unless item (I) governs), the individualized tax amount shall be as determined by the court on the basis of the record established.
            (F) Adjustments to income.
                (I) Multi-family adjustment. If a parent is
            	
also legally responsible for support of a child not shared with the other parent and not subject to the present proceeding, there shall be an adjustment to net income as follows:
                    (i) Multi-family adjustment with court
                	
order. The court shall deduct from the parent's net income the amount of child support actually paid by the parent pursuant to a support order unless the court makes a finding that it would cause economic hardship to the child.
                    (ii) Multi-family adjustment without
                	
court order. Upon the request or application of a parent actually supporting a presumed, acknowledged, or adjudicated child living in or outside of that parent's household, there shall be an adjustment to child support. The court shall deduct from the parent's net income the amount of financial support actually paid by the parent for the child or 75% of the support the parent should pay under the child support guidelines (before this adjustment), whichever is less, unless the court makes a finding that it would cause economic hardship to the child. The adjustment shall be calculated using that parent's income alone.
                (II) Spousal Maintenance adjustment.
            	
Obligations pursuant to a court order for spousal maintenance in the pending proceeding actually paid or payable to the same party to whom child support is to be payable or actually paid to a former spouse pursuant to a court order shall be deducted from the parent's after-tax income, unless the maintenance obligation is tax deductible to the payor for federal income tax purposes, in which case it shall be deducted from the payor's gross income for purposes of calculating the parent's child support obligation.
        (3.1) Business income. For purposes of calculating
    	
child support, net business income from the operation of a business means gross receipts minus ordinary and necessary expenses required to carry on the trade or business. As used in this paragraph, "business" includes, but is not limited to, sole proprietorships, closely held corporations, partnerships, other flow-through business entities, and self-employment. The court shall apply the following:
            (A) The accelerated component of depreciation and
        	
any business expenses determined either judicially or administratively to be inappropriate or excessive shall be excluded from the total of ordinary and necessary business expenses to be deducted in the determination of net business income from gross business income.
            (B) Any item of reimbursement or in-kind payment
        	
received by a parent from a business, including, but not limited to, a company car, reimbursed meals, free housing, or a housing allowance, shall be counted as income if not otherwise included in the recipient's gross income, if the item is significant in amount and reduces personal expenses.
        (3.2) Unemployment or underemployment. If a parent
    	
is voluntarily unemployed or underemployed, child support shall be calculated based on a determination of potential income. A determination of potential income shall be made by determining employment potential and probable earnings level based on the obligor's work history, occupational qualifications, prevailing job opportunities, the ownership by a parent of a substantial non-income producing asset, and earnings levels in the community. If there is insufficient work history to determine employment potential and probable earnings level, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the parent's potential income is 75% of the most recent United States Department of Health and Human Services Federal Poverty Guidelines for a family of one person.
        (3.3) Rebuttable presumption in favor of guidelines.
    	
There is a rebuttable presumption in any judicial or administrative proceeding for child support that the amount of the child support obligation that would result from the application of the child support guidelines is the correct amount of child support.
        (3.3a) Minimum child support obligation. There is a
    	
rebuttable presumption that a minimum child support obligation of $40 per month, per child, will be entered for an obligor who has actual or imputed gross income at or less than 75% of the most recent United States Department of Health and Human Services Federal Poverty Guidelines for a family of one person, with a maximum total child support obligation for that obligor of $120 per month to be divided equally among all of the obligor's children.
        (3.3b) Zero dollar child support order. For parents
    	
with no gross income, who receive only means-tested assistance, or who cannot work due to a medically proven disability, incarceration, or institutionalization, there is a rebuttable presumption that the $40 per month minimum support order is inapplicable and a zero dollar order shall be entered.
        (3.4) Deviation factors. In any action to establish
    	
or modify child support, whether pursuant to a temporary or final administrative or court order, the child support guidelines shall be used as a rebuttable presumption for the establishment or modification of the amount of child support. The court may deviate from the child support guidelines if the application would be inequitable, unjust, or inappropriate. Any deviation from the guidelines shall be accompanied by written findings by the court specifying the reasons for the deviation and the presumed amount under the child support guidelines without a deviation. These reasons may include:
            (A) extraordinary medical expenditures necessary
        	
to preserve the life or health of a party or a child of either or both of the parties;
            (B) additional expenses incurred for a child
        	
subject to the child support order who has special medical, physical, or developmental needs; and
            (C) any other factor the court determines should
        	
be applied upon a finding that the application of the child support guidelines would be inappropriate, after considering the best interest of the child.
        (3.5) Income in excess of the schedule of basic child
    	
support obligation. A court may use its discretion to determine child support if the combined adjusted net income of the parties exceeds the highest level of the schedule of basic child support obligation, except that the basic child support obligation shall not be less than the highest level of combined net income set forth in the schedule of basic child support obligation.
        (3.6) Extracurricular activities and school expenses.
    	
The court, in its discretion, in addition to the basic child support obligation, may order either or both parents owing a duty of support to the child to contribute to the reasonable school and extracurricular activity expenses incurred which are intended to enhance the educational, athletic, social, or cultural development of the child.
        (3.7) Child care expenses. The court, in its
    	
discretion, in addition to the basic child support obligation, may order either or both parents owing a duty of support to the child to contribute to the reasonable child care expenses of the child. The child care expenses shall be made payable directly to a party or directly to the child care provider at the time of child care services.
            (A) "Child care expenses" means actual expenses
        	
reasonably necessary to enable a parent or non-parent custodian to be employed, to attend educational or vocational training programs to improve employment opportunities, or to search for employment. "Child care expenses" also includes deposits for securing placement in a child care program, the cost of before and after school care, and camps when school is not in session. A child's special needs shall be a consideration in determining reasonable child care expenses.
            (B) Child care expenses shall be prorated in
        	
proportion to each parent's percentage share of combined net income, and may be added to the basic child support obligation if not paid directly by each parent to the provider of child care services. The obligor's and obligee's portion of actual child care expenses shall appear in the support order. If allowed, the value of the federal income tax credit for child care shall be subtracted from the actual cost to determine the net child care costs.
            (C) The amount of child care expenses shall be
        	
adequate to obtain reasonable and necessary child care. The actual child care expenses shall be used to calculate the child care expenses, if available. When actual child care expenses vary, the actual child care expenses may be averaged over the most recent 12-month period. When a parent is temporarily unemployed or temporarily not attending educational or vocational training programs, future child care expenses shall be based upon prospective expenses to be incurred upon return to employment or educational or vocational training programs.
            (D) An order for child care expenses may be
        	
modified upon a showing of a substantial change in circumstances. The party incurring child care expenses shall notify the other party within 14 days of any change in the amount of child care expenses that would affect the annualized child care amount as determined in the support order.
        (3.8) Shared physical care. If each parent exercises
    	
146 or more overnights per year with the child, the basic child support obligation is multiplied by 1.5 to calculate the shared care child support obligation. The court shall determine each parent's share of the shared care child support obligation based on the parent's percentage share of combined net income. The child support obligation is then computed for each parent by multiplying that parent's portion of the shared care support obligation by the percentage of time the child spends with the other parent. The respective child support obligations are then offset, with the parent owing more child support paying the difference between the child support amounts. The Illinois Department of Healthcare and Family Services shall promulgate a worksheet to calculate child support in cases in which the parents have shared physical care and use the standardized tax amount to determine net income.
        (3.9) Split physical care. When there is more than
    	
one child and each parent has physical care of at least one but not all of the children, the support is calculated by using 2 child support worksheets to determine the support each parent owes the other. The support shall be calculated as follows:
            (A) compute the support the first parent would
        	
owe to other parent as if the child in his or her care was the only child of the parties; then
            (B) compute the support the other parent would
        	
owe to the first parent as if the child in his or her care were the only child of the parties; then
            (C) subtract the lesser support obligation from
        	
the greater.
        The parent who owes the greater obligation shall be
    	
ordered to pay the difference in support to the other parent, unless the court determines, pursuant to other provisions of this Section, that it should deviate from the guidelines.
        (4) Health care.
            (A) A portion of the basic child support
        	
obligation is intended to cover basic ordinary out-of-pocket medical expenses. The court, in its discretion, in addition to the basic child support obligation, shall also provide for the child's current and future medical needs by ordering either or both parents to initiate health insurance coverage for the child through currently effective health insurance policies held by the parent or parents, purchase one or more or all health, dental, or vision insurance policies for the child, or provide for the child's current and future medical needs through some other manner.
            (B) The court, in its discretion, may order
        	
either or both parents to contribute to the reasonable health care needs of the child not covered by insurance, including, but not limited to, unreimbursed medical, dental, orthodontic, or vision expenses and any prescription medication for the child not covered under the child's health insurance.
            (C) If neither parent has access to appropriate
        	
private health insurance coverage, the court may order:
                (I) one or both parents to provide health
            	
insurance coverage at any time it becomes available at a reasonable cost; or
                (II) the parent or non-parent custodian with
            	
primary physical responsibility for the child to apply for public health insurance coverage for the child and require either or both parents to pay a reasonable amount of the cost of health insurance for the child.
            The order may also provide that any time private
        	
health insurance coverage is available at a reasonable cost to that party it will be provided instead of cash medical support. As used in this Section, "cash medical support" means an amount ordered to be paid toward the cost of health insurance provided by a public entity or by another person through employment or otherwise or for other medical costs not covered by insurance.
            (D) The amount to be added to the basic child
        	
support obligation shall be the actual amount of the total health insurance premium that is attributable to the child who is the subject of the order. If this amount is not available or cannot be verified, the total cost of the health insurance premium shall be divided by the total number of persons covered by the policy. The cost per person derived from this calculation shall be multiplied by the number of children who are the subject of the order and who are covered under the health insurance policy. This amount shall be added to the basic child support obligation and shall be allocated between the parents in proportion to their respective net incomes.
            (E) After the health insurance premium for the
        	
child is added to the basic child support obligation and allocated between the parents in proportion to their respective incomes for child support purposes, if the obligor is paying the premium, the amount calculated for the obligee's share of the health insurance premium for the child shall be deducted from the obligor's share of the total child support obligation. If the obligee is paying for private health insurance for the child, the child support obligation shall be increased by the obligor's share of the premium payment. The obligor's and obligee's portion of health insurance costs shall appear in the support order.
            (F) Prior to allowing the health insurance
        	
adjustment, the parent requesting the adjustment must submit proof that the child has been enrolled in a health insurance plan and must submit proof of the cost of the premium. The court shall require the parent receiving the adjustment to annually submit proof of continued coverage of the child to the other parent, or as designated by the court.
            (G) A reasonable cost for providing health
        	
insurance coverage for the child may not exceed 5% of the providing parent's gross income. Parents with a net income below 133% of the most recent United States Department of Health and Human Services Federal Poverty Guidelines or whose child is covered by Medicaid based on that parent's income may not be ordered to contribute toward or provide private coverage, unless private coverage is obtainable without any financial contribution by that parent.
            (H) If dental or vision insurance is included as
        	
part of the employer's medical plan, the coverage shall be maintained for the child. If not included in the employer's medical plan, adding the dental or vision insurance for the child is at the discretion of the court.
            (I) If a parent has been directed to provide
        	
health insurance pursuant to this paragraph and that parent's spouse or legally recognized partner provides the insurance for the benefit of the child either directly or through employment, a credit on the child support worksheet shall be given to that parent in the same manner as if the premium were paid by that parent.
        (4.5) In a proceeding for child support following
    	
dissolution of the marriage or civil union by a court that lacked personal jurisdiction over the absent spouse, and in which the court is requiring payment of support for the period before the date an order for current support is entered, there is a rebuttable presumption that the obligor's net income for the prior period was the same as his or her net income at the time the order for current support is entered.
        (5) If the net income cannot be determined because of
    	
default or any other reason, the court shall order support in an amount considered reasonable in the particular case. The final order in all cases shall state the support level in dollar amounts. However, if the court finds that the child support amount cannot be expressed exclusively as a dollar amount because all or a portion of the obligor's net income is uncertain as to source, time of payment, or amount, the court may order a percentage amount of support in addition to a specific dollar amount and enter such other orders as may be necessary to determine and enforce, on a timely basis, the applicable support ordered.
        (6) If (i) the obligor was properly served with a
    	
request for discovery of financial information relating to the obligor's ability to provide child support, (ii) the obligor failed to comply with the request, despite having been ordered to do so by the court, and (iii) the obligor is not present at the hearing to determine support despite having received proper notice, then any relevant financial information concerning the obligor's ability to provide child support that was obtained pursuant to subpoena and proper notice shall be admitted into evidence without the need to establish any further foundation for its admission.
    (a-5) In an action to enforce an order for child support based on the obligor's failure to make support payments as required by the order, notice of proceedings to hold the obligor in contempt for that failure may be served on the obligor by personal service or by regular mail addressed to the last known address of the obligor. The last known address of the obligor may be determined from records of the clerk of the court, from the Federal Case Registry of Child Support Orders, or by any other reasonable means.
    (b) Failure of either parent to comply with an order to pay support shall be punishable as in other cases of contempt. In addition to other penalties provided by law the court may, after finding the parent guilty of contempt, order that the parent be:
        (1) placed on probation with such conditions of
    	
probation as the court deems advisable;
        (2) sentenced to periodic imprisonment for a period
    	
not to exceed 6 months; provided, however, that the court may permit the parent to be released for periods of time during the day or night to:
            (A) work; or
            (B) conduct a business or other self-employed
        	
occupation.
    The court may further order any part or all of the earnings of a parent during a sentence of periodic imprisonment paid to the Clerk of the Circuit Court or to the parent having physical possession of the child or to the non-parent custodian having custody of the child of the sentenced parent for the support of the child until further order of the court.
    If a parent who is found guilty of contempt for failure to comply with an order to pay support is a person who conducts a business or who is self-employed, the court in addition to other penalties provided by law may order that the parent do one or more of the following: (i) provide to the court monthly financial statements showing income and expenses from the business or the self-employment; (ii) seek employment and report periodically to the court with a diary, listing, or other memorandum of his or her employment search efforts; or (iii) report to the Department of Employment Security for job search services to find employment that will be subject to withholding for child support.
    If there is a unity of interest and ownership sufficient to render no financial separation between an obligor and another person or persons or business entity, the court may pierce the ownership veil of the person, persons, or business entity to discover assets of the obligor held in the name of that person, those persons, or that business entity. The following circumstances are sufficient to authorize a court to order discovery of the assets of a person, persons, or business entity and to compel the application of any discovered assets toward payment on the judgment for support:
        (1) the obligor and the person, persons, or business
    	
entity maintain records together.
        (2) the obligor and the person, persons, or business
    	
entity fail to maintain an arm's length relationship between themselves with regard to any assets.
        (3) the obligor transfers assets to the person,
    	
persons, or business entity with the intent to perpetrate a fraud on the obligee.
    With respect to assets which are real property, no order entered under this paragraph shall affect the rights of bona fide purchasers, mortgagees, judgment creditors, or other lien holders who acquire their interests in the property prior to the time a notice of lis pendens pursuant to the Code of Civil Procedure or a copy of the order is placed of record in the office of the recorder of deeds for the county in which the real property is located.
    The court may also order in cases where the parent is 90 days or more delinquent in payment of support or has been adjudicated in arrears in an amount equal to 90 days obligation or more, that the parent's Illinois driving privileges be suspended until the court determines that the parent is in compliance with the order of support. The court may also order that the parent be issued a family financial responsibility driving permit that would allow limited driving privileges for employment and medical purposes in accordance with Section 7-702.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. The Clerk of the Circuit Court shall certify the order suspending the driving privileges of the parent or granting the issuance of a family financial responsibility driving permit to the Secretary of State on forms prescribed by the Secretary of State. Upon receipt of the authenticated documents, the Secretary of State shall suspend the parent's driving privileges until further order of the court and shall, if ordered by the court, subject to the provisions of Section 7-702.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, issue a family financial responsibility driving permit to the parent.
    In addition to the penalties or punishment that may be imposed under this Section, any person whose conduct constitutes a violation of Section 15 of the Non-Support Punishment Act may be prosecuted under that Act, and a person convicted under that Act may be sentenced in accordance with that Act. The sentence may include but need not be limited to a requirement that the person perform community service under Section 50 of that Act or participate in a work alternative program under Section 50 of that Act. A person may not be required to participate in a work alternative program under Section 50 of that Act if the person is currently participating in a work program pursuant to Section 505.1 of this Act.
    A support obligation, or any portion of a support obligation, which becomes due and remains unpaid as of the end of each month, excluding the child support that was due for that month to the extent that it was not paid in that month, shall accrue simple interest as set forth in Section 12-109 of the Code of Civil Procedure. An order for support entered or modified on or after January 1, 2006 shall contain a statement that a support obligation required under the order, or any portion of a support obligation required under the order, that becomes due and remains unpaid as of the end of each month, excluding the child support that was due for that month to the extent that it was not paid in that month, shall accrue simple interest as set forth in Section 12-109 of the Code of Civil Procedure. Failure to include the statement in the order for support does not affect the validity of the order or the accrual of interest as provided in this Section.
    (c) A one-time charge of 20% is imposable upon the amount of past-due child support owed on July 1, 1988 which has accrued under a support order entered by the court. The charge shall be imposed in accordance with the provisions of Section 10-21 of the Illinois Public Aid Code and shall be enforced by the court upon petition.
    (d) Any new or existing support order entered by the court under this Section shall be deemed to be a series of judgments against the person obligated to pay support thereunder, each such judgment to be in the amount of each payment or installment of support and each such judgment to be deemed entered as of the date the corresponding payment or installment becomes due under the terms of the support order. Each such judgment shall have the full force, effect and attributes of any other judgment of this State, including the ability to be enforced. Notwithstanding any other State or local law to the contrary, a lien arises by operation of law against the real and personal property of the obligor for each installment of overdue support owed by the obligor.
    (e) When child support is to be paid through the Clerk of the Court in a county of 500,000 inhabitants or less, the order shall direct the obligor to pay to the Clerk, in addition to the child support payments, all fees imposed by the county board under paragraph (4) of subsection (bb) of Section 27.1a of the Clerks of Courts Act. When child support is to be paid through the clerk of the court in a county of more than 500,000 but less than 3,000,000 inhabitants, the order shall direct the obligor to pay to the clerk, in addition to the child support payments, all fees imposed by the county board under paragraph (4) of subsection (bb) of Section 27.2 of the Clerks of Courts Act. Unless paid pursuant to an Income Withholding Order/Notice for Support, the payment of the fee shall be by payment acceptable to the clerk and shall be made to the order of the Clerk.
    (f) All orders for support, when entered or modified, shall include a provision requiring the obligor to notify the court and, in cases in which a party is receiving child and spouse services under Article X of the Illinois Public Aid Code, the Department of Healthcare and Family Services, within 7 days, (i) of the name and address of any new employer of the obligor, (ii) whether the obligor has access to health insurance coverage through the employer or other group coverage and, if so, the policy name and number and the names of persons covered under the policy, except only the initials of any covered minors shall be included, and (iii) of any new residential or mailing address or telephone number of the obligor. In any subsequent action to enforce a support order, upon a sufficient showing that a diligent effort has been made to ascertain the location of the obligor, service of process or provision of notice necessary in the case may be made at the last known address of the obligor in any manner expressly provided by the Code of Civil Procedure or this Act, which service shall be sufficient for purposes of due process.
    (g) An order for support shall include a date on which the current support obligation terminates. The termination date shall be no earlier than the date on which the child covered by the order will attain the age of 18. However, if the child will not graduate from high school until after attaining the age of 18, then the termination date shall be no earlier than the earlier of the date on which the child's high school graduation will occur or the date on which the child will attain the age of 19. The order for support shall state that the termination date does not apply to any arrearage that may remain unpaid on that date. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent the court from modifying the order or terminating the order in the event the child is otherwise emancipated.
    (g-5) If there is an unpaid arrearage or delinquency (as those terms are defined in the Income Withholding for Support Act) equal to at least one month's support obligation on the termination date stated in the order for support or, if there is no termination date stated in the order, on the date the child attains the age of majority or is otherwise emancipated, the periodic amount required to be paid for current support of that child immediately prior to that date shall automatically continue to be an obligation, not as current support but as periodic payment toward satisfaction of the unpaid arrearage or delinquency. That periodic payment shall be in addition to any periodic payment previously required for satisfaction of the arrearage or delinquency. The total periodic amount to be paid toward satisfaction of the arrearage or delinquency may be enforced and collected by any method provided by law for enforcement and collection of child support, including but not limited to income withholding under the Income Withholding for Support Act. Each order for support entered or modified on or after January 1, 2005 (the effective date of Public Act 93-1061) must contain a statement notifying the parties of the requirements of this subsection. Failure to include the statement in the order for support does not affect the validity of the order or the operation of the provisions of this subsection with regard to the order. This subsection shall not be construed to prevent or affect the establishment or modification of an order for support of a minor child or the establishment or modification of an order for support of a non-minor child or educational expenses under Section 513 of this Act.
    (h) An order entered under this Section shall include a provision requiring either parent to report to the other parent and to the Clerk of Court within 10 days each time either parent obtains new employment, and each time either parent's employment is terminated for any reason. The report shall be in writing and shall, in the case of new employment, include the name and address of the new employer. Failure to report new employment or the termination of current employment, if coupled with nonpayment of support for a period in excess of 60 days, is indirect criminal contempt. For either parent arrested for failure to report new employment bond shall be set in the amount of the child support that should have been paid during the period of unreported employment. An order entered under this Section shall also include a provision requiring either obligor and obligee to advise the other of a change in residence within 5 days of the change except when the court finds that the physical, mental, or emotional health of a party or that of a child, or both, would be seriously endangered by disclosure of the party's address.
    (i) The court does not lose the powers of contempt, driver's license suspension, or other child support enforcement mechanisms, including, but not limited to, criminal prosecution as set forth in this Act, upon the emancipation of the minor child.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16; 99-763, eff. 1-1-17; 99-764, eff. 7-1-17; 100-15, eff. 7-1-17; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18; 100-923, eff. 1-1-19.)

    (750 ILCS 5/505.1) (from Ch. 40, par. 505.1)
    Sec. 505.1. (a) Whenever it is determined in a proceeding to establish or enforce a child support or maintenance obligation that the person owing a duty of support is unemployed, the court may order the person to seek employment and report periodically to the court with a diary, listing or other memorandum of his or her efforts in accordance with such order. Additionally, the court may order the unemployed person to report to the Department of Employment Security for job search services or to make application with the local Job Training Partnership Act provider for participation in job search, training or work programs and where the duty of support is owed to a child receiving child support enforcement services under Article X of the Illinois Public Aid Code, as amended, the court may order the unemployed person to report to the Department of Healthcare and Family Services for participation in job search, training or work programs established under Section 9-6 and Article IXA of that Code.
    (b) Whenever it is determined that a person owes past-due support for a child or for a child and the parent with whom the child is living, and the child is receiving assistance under the Illinois Public Aid Code, the court shall order at the request of the Department of Healthcare and Family Services:
        (1) that the person pay the past-due support in
    	
accordance with a plan approved by the court; or
        (2) if the person owing past-due support is
    	
unemployed, is subject to such a plan, and is not incapacitated, that the person participate in such job search, training, or work programs established under Section 9-6 and Article IXA of the Illinois Public Aid Code as the court deems appropriate.
(Source: P.A. 95-331, eff. 8-21-07.)

    (750 ILCS 5/505.2) (from Ch. 40, par. 505.2)
    Sec. 505.2. Health insurance.
    (a) Definitions. As used in this Section:
        (1) "Obligee" means the individual to whom the duty
    	
of support is owed or the individual's legal representative.
        (2) "Obligor" means the individual who owes a duty of
    	
support pursuant to an order for support.
        (3) "Public office" means any elected official or any
    	
State or local agency which is or may become responsible by law for enforcement of, or which is or may become authorized to enforce, an order for support, including, but not limited to: the Attorney General, the Illinois Department of Healthcare and Family Services, the Illinois Department of Human Services, the Illinois Department of Children and Family Services, and the various State's Attorneys, Clerks of the Circuit Court and supervisors of general assistance.
        (4) "Child" shall have the meaning ascribed to it in
    	
Section 505.
    (b) Order.
        (1) Whenever the court establishes, modifies or
    	
enforces an order for child support or for child support and maintenance the court shall include in the order a provision for the health care coverage of the child which shall, upon request of the obligee or Public Office, require that any child covered by the order be named as a beneficiary of any health insurance plan that is available to the obligor through an employer or labor union or trade union. If the court finds that such a plan is not available to the obligor, or that the plan is not accessible to the obligee, the court may, upon request of the obligee or Public Office, order the obligor to name the child covered by the order as a beneficiary of any health insurance plan that is available to the obligor on a group basis, or as a beneficiary of an independent health insurance plan to be obtained by the obligor, after considering the following factors:
            (A) the medical needs of the child;
            (B) the availability of a plan to meet those
        	
needs; and
            (C) the cost of such a plan to the obligor.
        (2) If the employer or labor union or trade union
    	
offers more than one plan, the order shall require the obligor to name the child as a beneficiary of the plan in which the obligor is enrolled.
        (3) Nothing in this Section shall be construed to
    	
limit the authority of the court to establish or modify a support order to provide for payment of expenses, including deductibles, copayments and any other health expenses, which are in addition to expenses covered by an insurance plan of which a child is ordered to be named a beneficiary pursuant to this Section.
    (c) Implementation and enforcement.
        (1) When the court order requires that a minor child
    	
be named as a beneficiary of a health insurance plan, other than a health insurance plan available through an employer or labor union or trade union, the obligor shall provide written proof to the obligee or Public Office that the required insurance has been obtained, or that application for insurability has been made, within 30 days of receiving notice of the court order. Unless the obligor was present in court when the order was issued, notice of the order shall be given pursuant to Illinois Supreme Court Rules. If an obligor fails to provide the required proof, he may be held in contempt of court.
        (2) When the court requires that a child be named as
    	
a beneficiary of a health insurance plan available through an employer or labor union or trade union, the court's order shall be implemented in accordance with the Income Withholding for Support Act.
        (2.5) The court shall order the obligor to reimburse
    	
the obligee for 50% of the premium for placing the child on his or her health insurance policy if:
            (i) a health insurance plan is not available to
        	
the obligor through an employer or labor union or trade union and the court does not order the obligor to cover the child as a beneficiary of any health insurance plan that is available to the obligor on a group basis or as a beneficiary of an independent health insurance plan to be obtained by the obligor; or
            (ii) the obligor does not obtain medical
        	
insurance for the child within 90 days of the date of the court order requiring the obligor to obtain insurance for the child.
        The provisions of subparagraph (i) of paragraph 2.5
    	
of subsection (c) shall be applied, unless the court makes a finding that to apply those provisions would be inappropriate after considering all of the factors listed in paragraph 2 of subsection (a) of Section 505.
        The court may order the obligor to reimburse the
    	
obligee for 100% of the premium for placing the child on his or her health insurance policy.
    (d) Failure to maintain insurance. The dollar amount of the premiums for court-ordered health insurance, or that portion of the premiums for which the obligor is responsible in the case of insurance provided under a group health insurance plan through an employer or labor union or trade union where the employer or labor union or trade union pays a portion of the premiums, shall be considered an additional child support obligation owed by the obligor. Whenever the obligor fails to provide or maintain health insurance pursuant to an order for support, the obligor shall be liable to the obligee for the dollar amount of the premiums which were not paid, and shall also be liable for all medical expenses incurred by the child which would have been paid or reimbursed by the health insurance which the obligor was ordered to provide or maintain. In addition, the obligee may petition the court to modify the order based solely on the obligor's failure to pay the premiums for court-ordered health insurance.
    (e) Authorization for payment. The signature of the obligee is a valid authorization to the insurer to process a claim for payment under the insurance plan to the provider of the health care services or to the obligee.
    (f) Disclosure of information. The obligor's employer or labor union or trade union shall disclose to the obligee or Public Office, upon request, information concerning any dependent coverage plans which would be made available to a new employee or labor union member or trade union member. The employer or labor union or trade union shall disclose such information whether or not a court order for medical support has been entered.
    (g) Employer obligations. If a parent is required by an order for support to provide coverage for a child's health care expenses and if that coverage is available to the parent through an employer who does business in this State, the employer must do all of the following upon receipt of a copy of the order of support or order for withholding:
        (1) The employer shall, upon the parent's request,
    	
permit the parent to include in that coverage a child who is otherwise eligible for that coverage, without regard to any enrollment season restrictions that might otherwise be applicable as to the time period within which the child may be added to that coverage.
        (2) If the parent has health care coverage through
    	
the employer but fails to apply for coverage of the child, the employer shall include the child in the parent's coverage upon application by the child's other parent or the Department of Healthcare and Family Services.
        (3) The employer may not eliminate any child from the
    	
parent's health care coverage unless the employee is no longer employed by the employer and no longer covered under the employer's group health plan or unless the employer is provided with satisfactory written evidence of either of the following:
            (A) The order for support is no longer in effect.
            (B) The child is or will be included in a
        	
comparable health care plan obtained by the parent under such order that is currently in effect or will take effect no later than the date the prior coverage is terminated.
        The employer may eliminate a child from a parent's
    	
health care plan obtained by the parent under such order if the employer has eliminated dependent health care coverage for all of its employees.
(Source: P.A. 94-923, eff. 1-1-07; 95-331, eff. 8-21-07.)

    (750 ILCS 5/505.3)
    Sec. 505.3. Information to State Case Registry.
    (a) In this Section:
    "Order for support", "obligor", "obligee", and "business day" are defined as set forth in the Income Withholding for Support Act.
    "State Case Registry" means the State Case Registry established under Section 10-27 of the Illinois Public Aid Code.
    (b) Each order for support entered or modified by the circuit court under this Act shall require that the obligor and obligee (i) file with the clerk of the circuit court the information required by this Section (and any other information required under Title IV, Part D of the Social Security Act or by the federal Department of Health and Human Services) at the time of entry or modification of the order for support and (ii) file updated information with the clerk within 5 business days of any change. Failure of the obligor or obligee to file or update the required information shall be punishable as in cases of contempt. The failure shall not prevent the court from entering or modifying the order for support, however.
    (c) The obligor shall file the following information: the obligor's name, date of birth, social security number, and mailing address.
    If either the obligor or the obligee receives child support enforcement services from the Department of Healthcare and Family Services under Article X of the Illinois Public Aid Code, the obligor shall also file the following information: the obligor's telephone number, driver's license number, and residential address (if different from the obligor's mailing address), and the name, address, and telephone number of the obligor's employer or employers.
    (d) The obligee shall file the following information:
        (1) The names of the obligee and the child or
    	
children covered by the order for support.
        (2) The dates of birth of the obligee and the child
    	
or children covered by the order for support.
        (3) The social security numbers of the obligee and
    	
the child or children covered by the order for support.
        (4) The obligee's mailing address.
    (e) In cases in which the obligee receives child support enforcement services from the Department of Healthcare and Family Services under Article X of the Illinois Public Aid Code, the order for support shall (i) require that the obligee file the information required under subsection (d) with the Department of Healthcare and Family Services for inclusion in the State Case Registry, rather than file the information with the clerk, and (ii) require that the obligee include the following additional information:
        (1) The obligee's telephone and driver's license
    	
numbers.
        (2) The obligee's residential address, if different
    	
from the obligee's mailing address.
        (3) The name, address, and telephone number of the
    	
obligee's employer or employers.
    The order for support shall also require that the obligee update the information filed with the Department of Healthcare and Family Services within 5 business days of any change.
    (f) The clerk shall provide the information filed under this Section, together with the court docket number and county in which the order for support was entered, to the State Case Registry within 5 business days after receipt of the information.
    (g) In a case in which a party is receiving child support enforcement services under Article X of the Illinois Public Aid Code, the clerk shall provide the following additional information to the State Case Registry within 5 business days after entry or modification of an order for support or request from the Department of Healthcare and Family Services:
        (1) The amount of monthly or other periodic support
    	
owed under the order for support and other amounts, including arrearage, interest, or late payment penalties and fees, due or overdue under the order.
        (2) Any such amounts that have been received by the
    	
clerk, and the distribution of those amounts by the clerk.
    (h) Information filed by the obligor and obligee under this Section that is not specifically required to be included in the body of an order for support under other laws is not a public record and shall be treated as confidential and subject to disclosure only in accordance with the provisions of this Section, Section 10-27 of the Illinois Public Aid Code, and Title IV, Part D of the Social Security Act.
(Source: P.A. 95-331, eff. 8-21-07.)

    (750 ILCS 5/506) (from Ch. 40, par. 506)
    Sec. 506. Representation of child.
    (a) Duties. In any proceedings involving the support, custody, visitation, allocation of parental responsibilities, education, parentage, property interest, or general welfare of a minor or dependent child, the court may, on its own motion or that of any party, appoint an attorney to serve in one of the following capacities to address the issues the court delineates:
        (1) Attorney. The attorney shall provide independent
    	
legal counsel for the child and shall owe the same duties of undivided loyalty, confidentiality, and competent representation as are due an adult client.
        (2) Guardian ad litem. The guardian ad litem shall
    	
testify or submit a written report to the court regarding his or her recommendations in accordance with the best interest of the child. The report shall be made available to all parties. The guardian ad litem may be called as a witness for purposes of cross-examination regarding the guardian ad litem's report or recommendations. The guardian ad litem shall investigate the facts of the case and interview the child and the parties.
        (3) Child representative. The child representative
    	
shall advocate what the child representative finds to be in the best interests of the child after reviewing the facts and circumstances of the case. The child representative shall meet with the child and the parties, investigate the facts of the case, and encourage settlement and the use of alternative forms of dispute resolution. The child representative shall have the same authority and obligation to participate in the litigation as does an attorney for a party and shall possess all the powers of investigation as does a guardian ad litem. The child representative shall consider, but not be bound by, the expressed wishes of the child. A child representative shall have received training in child advocacy or shall possess such experience as determined to be equivalent to such training by the chief judge of the circuit where the child representative has been appointed. The child representative shall not disclose confidential communications made by the child, except as required by law or by the Rules of Professional Conduct. The child representative shall not render an opinion, recommendation, or report to the court and shall not be called as a witness, but shall offer evidence-based legal arguments. The child representative shall disclose the position as to what the child representative intends to advocate in a pre-trial memorandum that shall be served upon all counsel of record prior to the trial. The position disclosed in the pre-trial memorandum shall not be considered evidence. The court and the parties may consider the position of the child representative for purposes of a settlement conference.
    (a-3) Additional appointments. During the proceedings the court may appoint an additional attorney to serve in the capacity described in subdivision (a)(1) or an additional attorney to serve in another of the capacities described in subdivision (a)(2) or (a)(3) on the court's own motion or that of a party only for good cause shown and when the reasons for the additional appointment are set forth in specific findings.
    (a-5) Appointment considerations. In deciding whether to make an appointment of an attorney for the minor child, a guardian ad litem, or a child representative, the court shall consider the nature and adequacy of the evidence to be presented by the parties and the availability of other methods of obtaining information, including social service organizations and evaluations by mental health professions, as well as resources for payment.
    In no event is this Section intended to or designed to abrogate the decision making power of the trier of fact. Any appointment made under this Section is not intended to nor should it serve to place any appointed individual in the role of a surrogate judge.
    (b) Fees and costs. The court shall enter an order as appropriate for costs, fees, and disbursements, including a retainer, when the attorney, guardian ad litem, or child's representative is appointed. Any person appointed under this Section shall file with the court within 90 days of his or her appointment, and every subsequent 90-day period thereafter during the course of his or her representation, a detailed invoice for services rendered with a copy being sent to each party. The court shall review the invoice submitted and approve the fees, if they are reasonable and necessary. Any order approving the fees shall require payment by either or both parents, by any other party or source, or from the marital estate or the child's separate estate. The court may not order payment by the Department of Healthcare and Family Services in cases in which the Department is providing child support enforcement services under Article X of the Illinois Public Aid Code. Unless otherwise ordered by the court at the time fees and costs are approved, all fees and costs payable to an attorney, guardian ad litem, or child representative under this Section are by implication deemed to be in the nature of support of the child and are within the exceptions to discharge in bankruptcy under 11 U.S.C.A. 523. The provisions of Sections 501 and 508 of this Act shall apply to fees and costs for attorneys appointed under this Section.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/507) (from Ch. 40, par. 507)
    Sec. 507. Payment of maintenance or support to court.
    (a) In actions instituted under this Act, the court shall order that maintenance and support payments be made to the clerk of court as trustee for remittance to the person entitled to receive the payments. However, the court in its discretion may direct otherwise where circumstances so warrant.
    (b) The clerk of court shall maintain records listing the amount of payments, the date payments are required to be made and the names and addresses of the parties affected by the order. For those cases in which support is payable to the clerk of the circuit court for transmittal to the Department of Healthcare and Family Services (formerly Illinois Department of Public Aid) by order of the court or upon notification of the Department of Healthcare and Family Services (formerly Illinois Department of Public Aid), and the Department collects support by assignment, offset, withholding, deduction or other process permitted by law, the Department shall notify the clerk of the date and amount of such collection. Upon notification, the clerk shall record the collection on the payment record for the case.
    (c) The parties affected by the order shall inform the clerk of court of any change of address or of other condition that may affect the administration of the order.
    (d) The provisions of this Section shall not apply to cases that come under the provisions of Sections 709 through 712.
    (e) To the extent the provisions of this Section are inconsistent with the requirements pertaining to the State Disbursement Unit under Section 507.1 of this Act and Section 10-26 of the Illinois Public Aid Code, the requirements pertaining to the State Disbursement Unit shall apply.
(Source: P.A. 94-88, eff. 1-1-06; 95-331, eff. 8-21-07.)

    (750 ILCS 5/507.1)
    Sec. 507.1. Payment of Support to State Disbursement Unit.
    (a) As used in this Section:
    "Order for support", "obligor", "obligee", and "payor" mean those terms as defined in the Income Withholding for Support Act, except that "order for support" shall not mean orders providing for spousal maintenance under which there is no child support obligation.
    (b) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act to the contrary, each order for support entered or modified on or after October 1, 1999 shall require that support payments be made to the State Disbursement Unit established under Section 10-26 of the Illinois Public Aid Code if:
        (1) a party to the order is receiving child support
    	
enforcement services under Article X of the Illinois Public Aid Code; or
        (2) no party to the order is receiving child support
    	
enforcement services, but the support payments are made through income withholding.
    (c) Support payments shall be made to the State Disbursement Unit if:
        (1) the order for support was entered before October
    	
1, 1999, and a party to the order is receiving child support enforcement services under Article X of the Illinois Public Aid Code; or
        (2) no party to the order is receiving child support
    	
enforcement services, and the support payments are being made through income withholding.
    (c-5) If no party to the order is receiving child support enforcement services under Article X of the Illinois Public Aid Code, and the support payments are not made through income withholding, then support payments shall be made as directed by the order for support.
    (c-10) At any time, and notwithstanding the existence of an order directing payments to be made elsewhere, the Department of Healthcare and Family Services may provide notice to the obligor and, where applicable, to the obligor's payor:
        (1) to make support payments to the State
    	
Disbursement Unit if:
            (A) a party to the order for support is receiving
        	
child support enforcement services under Article X of the Illinois Public Aid Code; or
            (B) no party to the order for support is
        	
receiving child support enforcement services under Article X of the Illinois Public Aid Code, but the support payments are made through income withholding; or
        (2) to make support payments to the State
    	
Disbursement Unit of another state upon request of another state's Title IV-D child support enforcement agency, in accordance with the requirements of Title IV, Part D of the Social Security Act and regulations promulgated under that Part D.
    The Department of Healthcare and Family Services shall provide a copy of the notice to the obligee and to the clerk of the circuit court.
    (c-15) Within 15 days after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 91st General Assembly, the clerk of the circuit court shall provide written notice to the obligor to make payments directly to the clerk of the circuit court if no party to the order is receiving child support enforcement services under Article X of the Illinois Public Aid Code, the support payments are not made through income withholding, and the order for support requires support payments to be made directly to the clerk of the circuit court. The clerk shall provide a copy of the notice to the obligee.
    (c-20) If the State Disbursement Unit receives a support payment that was not appropriately made to the Unit under this Section, the Unit shall immediately return the payment to the sender, including, if possible, instructions detailing where to send the support payment.
    (d) The notices under subsections (c-10) and (c-15) may be sent by ordinary mail, certified mail, return receipt requested, facsimile transmission, or other electronic process, or may be served upon the obligor or payor using any method provided by law for service of a summons.
(Source: P.A. 95-331, eff. 8-21-07.)

    (750 ILCS 5/508) (from Ch. 40, par. 508)
    Sec. 508. Attorney's fees; client's rights and responsibilities respecting fees and costs.
    (a) The court from time to time, after due notice and hearing, and after considering the financial resources of the parties, may order any party to pay a reasonable amount for his own or the other party's costs and attorney's fees. Interim attorney's fees and costs may be awarded from the opposing party, in a pre-judgment dissolution proceeding in accordance with subsection (c-1) of Section 501 and in any other proceeding under this subsection. At the conclusion of any pre-judgment dissolution proceeding under this subsection, contribution to attorney's fees and costs may be awarded from the opposing party in accordance with subsection (j) of Section 503 and in any other proceeding under this subsection. Fees and costs may be awarded in any proceeding to counsel from a former client in accordance with subsection (c) of this Section. Awards may be made in connection with the following:
        (1) The maintenance or defense of any proceeding
    	
under this Act.
        (2) The enforcement or modification of any order or
    	
judgment under this Act.
        (3) The defense of an appeal of any order or judgment
    	
under this Act, including the defense of appeals of post-judgment orders.
        (3.1) The prosecution of any claim on appeal (if the
    	
prosecuting party has substantially prevailed).
        (4) The maintenance or defense of a petition brought
    	
under Section 2-1401 of the Code of Civil Procedure seeking relief from a final order or judgment under this Act. Fees incurred with respect to motions under Section 2-1401 of the Code of Civil Procedure may be granted only to the party who substantially prevails.
        (5) The costs and legal services of an attorney
    	
rendered in preparation of the commencement of the proceeding brought under this Act.
        (6) Ancillary litigation incident to, or reasonably
    	
connected with, a proceeding under this Act.
        (7) Costs and attorney's fees incurred in an action
    	
under the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction.
    All petitions for or relating to interim fees and costs under this subsection shall be accompanied by an affidavit as to the factual basis for the relief requested and all hearings relative to any such petition shall be scheduled expeditiously by the court. All provisions for contribution under this subsection shall also be subject to paragraphs (3), (4), and (5) of subsection (j) of Section 503.
    The court may order that the award of attorney's fees and costs (including an interim or contribution award) shall be paid directly to the attorney, who may enforce the order in his or her name, or that it shall be paid to the appropriate party. Judgment may be entered and enforcement had accordingly. Except as otherwise provided in subdivision (e)(1) of this Section, subsection (c) of this Section is exclusive as to the right of any counsel (or former counsel) of record to petition a court for an award and judgment for final fees and costs during the pendency of a proceeding under this Act.
    (a-5) A petition for temporary attorney's fees in a post-judgment case may be heard on a non-evidentiary, summary basis.
    (b) In every proceeding for the enforcement of an order or judgment when the court finds that the failure to comply with the order or judgment was without compelling cause or justification, the court shall order the party against whom the proceeding is brought to pay promptly the costs and reasonable attorney's fees of the prevailing party. If non-compliance is with respect to a discovery order, the non-compliance is presumptively without compelling cause or justification, and the presumption may only be rebutted by clear and convincing evidence. If at any time a court finds that a hearing under this Act was precipitated or conducted for any improper purpose, the court shall allocate fees and costs of all parties for the hearing to the party or counsel found to have acted improperly. Improper purposes include, but are not limited to, harassment, unnecessary delay, or other acts needlessly increasing the cost of litigation.
    (c) Final hearings for attorney's fees and costs against an attorney's own client, pursuant to a Petition for Setting Final Fees and Costs of either a counsel or a client, shall be governed by the following:
        (1) No petition of a counsel of record may be filed
    	
against a client unless the filing counsel previously has been granted leave to withdraw as counsel of record or has filed a motion for leave to withdraw as counsel. On receipt of a petition of a client under this subsection (c), the counsel of record shall promptly file a motion for leave to withdraw as counsel. If the client and the counsel of record agree, however, a hearing on the motion for leave to withdraw as counsel filed pursuant to this subdivision (c)(1) may be deferred until completion of any alternative dispute resolution procedure under subdivision (c)(4). As to any Petition for Setting Final Fees and Costs against a client or counsel over whom the court has not obtained jurisdiction, a separate summons shall issue. Whenever a separate summons is not required, original notice as to a Petition for Setting Final Fees and Costs may be given, and documents served, in accordance with Illinois Supreme Court Rules 11 and 12.
        (2) No final hearing under this subsection (c) is
    	
permitted unless: (i) the counsel and the client had entered into a written engagement agreement at the time the client retained the counsel (or reasonably soon thereafter) and the agreement meets the requirements of subsection (f); (ii) the written engagement agreement is attached to an affidavit of counsel that is filed with the petition or with the counsel's response to a client's petition; (iii) judgment in any contribution hearing on behalf of the client has been entered or the right to a contribution hearing under subsection (j) of Section 503 has been waived; (iv) the counsel has withdrawn as counsel of record; and (v) the petition seeks adjudication of all unresolved claims for fees and costs between the counsel and the client. Irrespective of a Petition for Setting Final Fees and Costs being heard in conjunction with an original proceeding under this Act, the relief requested under a Petition for Setting Final Fees and Costs constitutes a distinct cause of action. A pending but undetermined Petition for Setting Final Fees and Costs shall not affect appealability or enforceability of any judgment or other adjudication in the original proceeding.
        (3) The determination of reasonable attorney's fees
    	
and costs either under this subsection (c), whether initiated by a counsel or a client, or in an independent proceeding for services within the scope of subdivisions (1) through (5) of subsection (a), is within the sound discretion of the trial court. The court shall first consider the written engagement agreement and, if the court finds that the former client and the filing counsel, pursuant to their written engagement agreement, entered into a contract which meets applicable requirements of court rules and addresses all material terms, then the contract shall be enforceable in accordance with its terms, subject to the further requirements of this subdivision (c)(3). Before ordering enforcement, however, the court shall consider the performance pursuant to the contract. Any amount awarded by the court must be found to be fair compensation for the services, pursuant to the contract, that the court finds were reasonable and necessary. Quantum meruit principles shall govern any award for legal services performed that is not based on the terms of the written engagement agreement (except that, if a court expressly finds in a particular case that aggregate billings to a client were unconscionably excessive, the court in its discretion may reduce the award otherwise determined appropriate or deny fees altogether).
        (4) No final hearing under this subsection (c) is
    	
permitted unless any controversy over fees and costs (that is not otherwise subject to some form of alternative dispute resolution) has first been submitted to mediation, arbitration, or any other court approved alternative dispute resolution procedure, except as follows:
            (A) In any circuit court for a single county with
        	
a population in excess of 1,000,000, the requirement of the controversy being submitted to an alternative dispute resolution procedure is mandatory unless the client and the counsel both affirmatively opt out of such procedures; or
            (B) In any other circuit court, the requirement
        	
of the controversy being submitted to an alternative dispute resolution procedure is mandatory only if neither the client nor the counsel affirmatively opts out of such procedures.
        After completion of any such procedure (or after one
    	
or both sides has opted out of such procedures), if the dispute is unresolved, any pending motion for leave to withdraw as counsel shall be promptly granted and a final hearing under this subsection (c) shall be expeditiously set and completed.
        (5) A petition (or a praecipe for fee hearing without
    	
the petition) shall be filed no later than the end of the period in which it is permissible to file a motion pursuant to Section 2-1203 of the Code of Civil Procedure. A praecipe for fee hearing shall be dismissed if a Petition for Setting Final Fees and Costs is not filed within 60 days after the filing of the praecipe. A counsel who becomes a party by filing a Petition for Setting Final Fees and Costs, or as a result of the client filing a Petition for Setting Final Fees and Costs, shall not be entitled to exercise the right to a substitution of a judge without cause under subdivision (a)(2) of Section 2-1001 of the Code of Civil Procedure. Each of the foregoing deadlines for the filing of a praecipe or a petition shall be:
        (A) tolled if a motion is filed under Section 2-1203
    	
of the Code of Civil Procedure, in which instance a petition (or a praecipe) shall be filed no later than 30 days following disposition of all Section 2-1203 motions; or
        (B) tolled if a notice of appeal is filed, in which
    	
instance a petition (or praecipe) shall be filed no later than 30 days following the date jurisdiction on the issue appealed is returned to the trial court.
    If a praecipe has been timely filed, then by timely filed written stipulation between counsel and client (or former client), the deadline for the filing of a petition may be extended for a period of up to one year.
    (d) A consent judgment, in favor of a current counsel of record against his or her own client for a specific amount in a marital settlement agreement, dissolution judgment, or any other instrument involving the other litigant, is prohibited. A consent judgment between client and counsel, however, is permissible if it is entered pursuant to a verified petition for entry of consent judgment, supported by an affidavit of the counsel of record that includes the counsel's representation that the client has been provided an itemization of the billing or billings to the client, detailing hourly costs, time spent, and tasks performed, and by an affidavit of the client acknowledging receipt of that documentation, awareness of the right to a hearing, the right to be represented by counsel (other than counsel to whom the consent judgment is in favor), and the right to be present at the time of presentation of the petition, and agreement to the terms of the judgment. The petition may be filed at any time during which it is permissible for counsel of record to file a petition (or a praecipe) for a final fee hearing, except that no such petition for entry of consent judgment may be filed before adjudication (or waiver) of the client's right to contribution under subsection (j) of Section 503 or filed after the filing of a petition (or a praecipe) by counsel of record for a fee hearing under subsection (c) if the petition (or praecipe) remains pending. No consent security arrangement between a client and a counsel of record, pursuant to which assets of a client are collateralized to secure payment of legal fees or costs, is permissible unless approved in advance by the court as being reasonable under the circumstances.
    (e) Counsel may pursue an award and judgment against a former client for legal fees and costs in an independent proceeding in the following circumstances:
        (1) While a case under this Act is still pending, a
    	
former counsel may pursue such an award and judgment at any time subsequent to 90 days after the entry of an order granting counsel leave to withdraw; and
        (2) After the close of the period during which a
    	
petition (or praecipe) may be filed under subdivision (c)(5), if no such petition (or praecipe) for the counsel remains pending, any counsel or former counsel may pursue such an award and judgment in an independent proceeding.
In an independent proceeding, the prior applicability of this Section shall in no way be deemed to have diminished any other right of any counsel (or former counsel) to pursue an award and judgment for legal fees and costs on the basis of remedies that may otherwise exist under applicable law; and the limitations period for breach of contract shall apply. In an independent proceeding under subdivision (e)(1) in which the former counsel had represented a former client in a dissolution case that is still pending, the former client may bring in his or her spouse as a third-party defendant, provided on or before the final date for filing a petition (or praecipe) under subsection (c), the party files an appropriate third-party complaint under Section 2-406 of the Code of Civil Procedure. In any such case, any judgment later obtained by the former counsel shall be against both spouses or ex-spouses, jointly and severally (except that, if a hearing under subsection (j) of Section 503 has already been concluded and the court hearing the contribution issue has imposed a percentage allocation between the parties as to fees and costs otherwise being adjudicated in the independent proceeding, the allocation shall be applied without deviation by the court in the independent proceeding and a separate judgment shall be entered against each spouse for the appropriate amount). After the period for the commencement of a proceeding under subsection (c), the provisions of this Section (other than the standard set forth in subdivision (c)(3) and the terms respecting consent security arrangements in subsection (d) of this Section 508) shall be inapplicable.
    The changes made by this amendatory Act of the 94th General Assembly are declarative of existing law.
    (f) Unless the Supreme Court by rule addresses the matters set out in this subsection (f), a written engagement agreement within the scope of subdivision (c)(2) shall have appended to it verbatim the following Statement:
 
"STATEMENT OF CLIENT'S RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
    (1) WRITTEN ENGAGEMENT AGREEMENT. The written engagement agreement, prepared by the counsel, shall clearly address the objectives of representation and detail the fee arrangement, including all material terms. If fees are to be based on criteria apart from, or in addition to, hourly rates, such criteria (e.g., unique time demands and/or utilization of unique expertise) shall be delineated. The client shall receive a copy of the written engagement agreement and any additional clarification requested and is advised not to sign any such agreement which the client finds to be unsatisfactory or does not understand.
    (2) REPRESENTATION. Representation will commence upon the signing of the written engagement agreement. The counsel will provide competent representation, which requires legal knowledge, skill, thoroughness and preparation to handle those matters set forth in the written engagement agreement. Once employed, the counsel will act with reasonable diligence and promptness, as well as use his best efforts on behalf of the client, but he cannot guarantee results. The counsel will abide by the client's decision concerning the objectives of representation, including whether or not to accept an offer of settlement, and will endeavor to explain any matter to the extent reasonably necessary to permit the client to make informed decisions regarding representation. During the course of representation and afterwards, the counsel may not use or reveal a client's confidence or secrets, except as required or permitted by law.
    (3) COMMUNICATION. The counsel will keep the client reasonably informed about the status of representation and will promptly respond to reasonable requests for information, including any reasonable request for an estimate respecting future costs of the representation or an appropriate portion of it. The client shall be truthful in all discussions with the counsel and provide all information or documentation required to enable the counsel to provide competent representation. During representation, the client is entitled to receive all pleadings and substantive documents prepared on behalf of the client and every document received from any other counsel of record. At the end of the representation and on written request from the client, the counsel will return to the client all original documents and exhibits. In the event that the counsel withdraws from representation, or is discharged by the client, the counsel will turn over to the substituting counsel (or, if no substitutions, to the client) all original documents and exhibits together with complete copies of all pleadings and discovery within thirty (30) days of the counsel's withdrawal or discharge.
    (4) ETHICAL CONDUCT. The counsel cannot be required to engage in conduct which is illegal, unethical, or fraudulent. In matters involving minor children, the counsel may refuse to engage in conduct which, in the counsel's professional judgment, would be contrary to the best interest of the client's minor child or children. A counsel who cannot ethically abide by his client's directions shall be allowed to withdraw from representation.
    (5) FEES. The counsel's fee for services may not be contingent upon the securing of a dissolution of marriage or upon being allocated parental responsibility or be based upon the amount of maintenance, child support, or property settlement received, except as specifically permitted under Supreme Court rules. The counsel may not require a non-refundable retainer fee, but must remit back any overpayment at the end of the representation. The counsel may enter into a consensual security arrangement with the client whereby assets of the client are pledged to secure payment of legal fees or costs, but only if the counsel first obtains approval of the Court. The counsel will prepare and provide the client with an itemized billing statement detailing hourly rates (and/or other criteria), time spent, tasks performed, and costs incurred on a regular basis, at least quarterly. The client should review each billing statement promptly and address any objection or error in a timely manner. The client will not be billed for time spent to explain or correct a billing statement. If an appropriately detailed written estimate is submitted to a client as to future costs for a counsel's representation or a portion of the contemplated services (i.e., relative to specific steps recommended by the counsel in the estimate) and, without objection from the client, the counsel then performs the contemplated services, all such services are presumptively reasonable and necessary, as well as to be deemed pursuant to the client's direction. In an appropriate case, the client may pursue contribution to his or her fees and costs from the other party.
    (6) DISPUTES. The counsel-client relationship is regulated by the Illinois Rules of Professional Conduct (Article VIII of the Illinois Supreme Court Rules), and any dispute shall be reviewed under the terms of such Rules."
    (g) The changes to this Section 508 made by this amendatory Act of 1996 apply to cases pending on or after June 1, 1997, except as follows:
        (1) Subdivisions (c)(1) and (c)(2) of this Section
    	
508, as well as provisions of subdivision (c)(3) of this Section 508 pertaining to written engagement agreements, apply only to cases filed on or after June 1, 1997.
        (2) The following do not apply in the case of a
    	
hearing under this Section that began before June 1, 1997:
            (A) Subsection (c-1) of Section 501.
            (B) Subsection (j) of Section 503.
            (C) The changes to this Section 508 made by this
        	
amendatory Act of 1996 pertaining to the final setting of fees.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16; 99-763, eff. 1-1-17.)

    (750 ILCS 5/509) (from Ch. 40, par. 509)
    Sec. 509. Independence of Provisions of Judgment or Temporary Order. If a party fails to comply with a provision of a judgment, order or injunction, the obligation of the other party to make payments for support or maintenance or to permit visitation or parenting time is not suspended; but he may move the court to grant an appropriate order.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/510) (from Ch. 40, par. 510)
    Sec. 510. Modification and termination of provisions for maintenance, support, educational expenses, and property disposition.
    (a) Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (f) of Section 502 and in subsection (b), clause (3) of Section 505.2, the provisions of any judgment respecting maintenance or support may be modified only as to installments accruing subsequent to due notice by the moving party of the filing of the motion for modification. An order for child support may be modified as follows:
        (1) upon a showing of a substantial change in
    	
circumstances; and
        (2) without the necessity of showing a substantial
    	
change in circumstances, as follows:
            (A) upon a showing of an inconsistency of at
        	
least 20%, but no less than $10 per month, between the amount of the existing order and the amount of child support that results from application of the guidelines specified in Section 505 of this Act unless the inconsistency is due to the fact that the amount of the existing order resulted from a deviation from the guideline amount and there has not been a change in the circumstances that resulted in that deviation; or
            (B) upon a showing of a need to provide for the
        	
health care needs of the child under the order through health insurance or other means. In no event shall the eligibility for or receipt of medical assistance be considered to meet the need to provide for the child's health care needs.
    The provisions of subparagraph (a)(2)(A) shall apply only in cases in which a party is receiving child support enforcement services from the Department of Healthcare and Family Services under Article X of the Illinois Public Aid Code, and only when at least 36 months have elapsed since the order for child support was entered or last modified.
    The court may grant a petition for modification that seeks to apply the changes made to subsection (a) of Section 505 by Public Act 99-764 to an order entered before the effective date of Public Act 99-764 only upon a finding of a substantial change in circumstances that warrants application of the changes. The enactment of Public Act 99-764 itself does not constitute a substantial change in circumstances warranting a modification.
    (a-5) An order for maintenance may be modified or terminated only upon a showing of a substantial change in circumstances. The court may grant a petition for modification that seeks to apply the changes made to Section 504 by this amendatory Act of the 100th General Assembly to an order entered before the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 100th General Assembly only upon a finding of a substantial change in circumstances that warrants application of the changes. The enactment of this amendatory Act of the 100th General Assembly itself does not constitute a substantial change in circumstances warranting a modification. In all such proceedings, as well as in proceedings in which maintenance is being reviewed, the court shall consider the applicable factors set forth in subsection (a) of Section 504 and the following factors:
        (1) any change in the employment status of either
    	
party and whether the change has been made in good faith;
        (2) the efforts, if any, made by the party receiving
    	
maintenance to become self-supporting, and the reasonableness of the efforts where they are appropriate;
        (3) any impairment of the present and future earning
    	
capacity of either party;
        (4) the tax consequences of the maintenance payments
    	
upon the respective economic circumstances of the parties;
        (5) the duration of the maintenance payments
    	
previously paid (and remaining to be paid) relative to the length of the marriage;
        (6) the property, including retirement benefits,
    	
awarded to each party under the judgment of dissolution of marriage, judgment of legal separation, or judgment of declaration of invalidity of marriage and the present status of the property;
        (7) the increase or decrease in each party's income
    	
since the prior judgment or order from which a review, modification, or termination is being sought;
        (8) the property acquired and currently owned by each
    	
party after the entry of the judgment of dissolution of marriage, judgment of legal separation, or judgment of declaration of invalidity of marriage; and
        (9) any other factor that the court expressly finds
    	
to be just and equitable.
    (a-6) (Blank).
    (b) The provisions as to property disposition may not be revoked or modified, unless the court finds the existence of conditions that justify the reopening of a judgment under the laws of this State.
    (c) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties in a written agreement set forth in the judgment or otherwise approved by the court, the obligation to pay future maintenance is terminated upon the death of either party, or the remarriage of the party receiving maintenance, or if the party receiving maintenance cohabits with another person on a resident, continuing conjugal basis. An obligor's obligation to pay maintenance or unallocated maintenance terminates by operation of law on the date the obligee remarries or the date the court finds cohabitation began. The obligor is entitled to reimbursement for all maintenance paid from that date forward. Any termination of an obligation for maintenance as a result of the death of the obligor, however, shall be inapplicable to any right of the other party or such other party's designee to receive a death benefit under such insurance on the obligor's life. An obligee must advise the obligor of his or her intention to marry at least 30 days before the remarriage, unless the decision is made within this time period. In that event, he or she must notify the obligor within 72 hours of getting married.
    (c-5) In an adjudicated case, the court shall make specific factual findings as to the reason for the modification as well as the amount, nature, and duration of the modified maintenance award.
    (d) Unless otherwise provided in this Act, or as agreed in writing or expressly provided in the judgment, provisions for the support of a child are terminated by emancipation of the child, or if the child has attained the age of 18 and is still attending high school, provisions for the support of the child are terminated upon the date that the child graduates from high school or the date the child attains the age of 19, whichever is earlier, but not by the death of a parent obligated to support or educate the child. An existing obligation to pay for support or educational expenses, or both, is not terminated by the death of a parent. When a parent obligated to pay support or educational expenses, or both, dies, the amount of support or educational expenses, or both, may be enforced, modified, revoked or commuted to a lump sum payment, as equity may require, and that determination may be provided for at the time of the dissolution of the marriage or thereafter.
    (e) The right to petition for support or educational expenses, or both, under Sections 505, 513, and 513.5 is not extinguished by the death of a parent. Upon a petition filed before or after a parent's death, the court may award sums of money out of the decedent's estate for the child's support or educational expenses, or both, as equity may require. The time within which a claim may be filed against the estate of a decedent under Sections 505 and 513 and subsection (d) and this subsection shall be governed by the provisions of the Probate Act of 1975, as a barrable, noncontingent claim.
    (f) A petition to modify or terminate child support or the allocation of parental responsibilities, including parenting time, shall not delay any child support enforcement litigation or supplementary proceeding on behalf of the obligee, including, but not limited to, a petition for a rule to show cause, for non-wage garnishment, or for a restraining order.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16; 99-764, eff. 7-1-17; 100-15, eff. 7-1-17; 100-201, eff. 8-18-17; 100-923, eff. 1-1-19.)

    (750 ILCS 5/511) (from Ch. 40, par. 511)
    Sec. 511. Procedure. A judgment of dissolution or of legal separation or of declaration of invalidity of marriage may be enforced or modified by order of court pursuant to petition.
    (a) Any judgment entered within this State may be enforced or modified in the judicial circuit wherein such judgment was entered or last modified by the filing of a petition with notice mailed to the respondent at his last known address, or by the issuance of summons to the respondent. If neither party continues to reside in the county wherein such judgment was entered or last modified, the court on the motion of either party or on its own motion may transfer a post-judgment proceeding, including a proceeding under the Income Withholding for Support Act, to another county or judicial circuit, as appropriate, where either party resides. If the post-judgment proceeding is with respect to maintenance or support, any such transfer shall be to the county or judicial circuit wherein the recipient or proposed recipient of such maintenance or support resides.
    (b) In any post-judgment proceeding to enforce or modify in one judicial circuit the judgment of another judicial circuit of this State, the moving party shall commence the proceeding by filing a petition establishing the judgment and attaching a copy of the judgment as a part of the petition. The parties shall continue to be designated as in the original proceeding. Notice of the filing of the petition shall be mailed to the clerk of the court wherein the judgment was entered and last modified in the same manner as notice is mailed when registering a foreign judgment. Summons shall be served as provided by law.
    (c) In any post-judgment proceeding to enforce or modify the judgment of another state, the moving party shall commence the proceeding by filing a petition to enroll that judgment, attaching a copy thereof as a part of the petition and proceed as provided for in paragraph (b) hereof.
    (d) In any post-judgment proceeding to enforce a judgment or order for payment of maintenance or support, including a proceeding under the Income Withholding for Support Act, where the terms of such judgment or order provide that payments of such maintenance or support are to be made to the clerk of the court and where neither party continues to reside in the county wherein such judgment or order was entered or last modified, the court on the motion of either party or on its own motion may transfer the collection of the maintenance or support to the clerk of the court in another county or judicial circuit, as appropriate, wherein the recipient of the maintenance or support payments resides.
(Source: P.A. 90-673, eff. 1-1-99.)

    (750 ILCS 5/512) (from Ch. 40, par. 512)
    Sec. 512. Post-Judgment Venue. After 30 days from the entry of a judgment of dissolution of marriage or legal separation or the last modification thereof, any further proceedings to enforce or modify the judgment shall be as follows:
        (a) If the respondent does not then reside within
    	
this State, further proceedings shall be had either in the judicial circuit wherein the moving party resides or where the judgment was entered or last modified.
        (b) If one or both of the parties then resides in the
    	
judicial circuit wherein the judgment was entered or last modified, further proceedings shall be had in the judicial circuit that last exercised jurisdiction in the matter; provided, however, that the court may in its discretion, transfer matters involving a change in the allocation of parental responsibility to the judicial circuit where the minor or dependent child resides.
        (c) If neither party then resides in the judicial
    	
circuit wherein the judgment was entered or last modified, further proceedings shall be had in that circuit or in the judicial circuit wherein either party resides; provided, however, that the court may, in its discretion, transfer matters involving a change in the allocation of parental responsibility to the judicial circuit where the minor or dependent child resides.
        (d) Objection to venue is waived if not made within
    	
such time as the respondent's answer is due. Counter relief shall be heard and determined by the court hearing any matter already pending.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/513) (from Ch. 40, par. 513)
    Sec. 513. Educational expenses for a non-minor child.
    (a) The court may award sums of money out of the property and income of either or both parties or the estate of a deceased parent, as equity may require, for the educational expenses of any child of the parties. Unless otherwise agreed to by the parties, all educational expenses which are the subject of a petition brought pursuant to this Section shall be incurred no later than the student's 23rd birthday, except for good cause shown, but in no event later than the child's 25th birthday.
    (b) Regardless of whether an award has been made under subsection (a), the court may require both parties and the child to complete the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) and other financial aid forms and to submit any form of that type prior to the designated submission deadline for the form. The court may require either or both parties to provide funds for the child so as to pay for the cost of up to 5 college applications, the cost of 2 standardized college entrance examinations, and the cost of one standardized college entrance examination preparatory course.
    (c) The authority under this Section to make provision for educational expenses extends not only to periods of college education or vocational or professional or other training after graduation from high school, but also to any period during which the child of the parties is still attending high school, even though he or she attained the age of 19.
    (d) Educational expenses may include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
        (1) except for good cause shown, the actual cost of
    	
the child's post-secondary expenses, including tuition and fees, provided that the cost for tuition and fees does not exceed the amount of in-state tuition and fees paid by a student at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign for the same academic year;
        (2) except for good cause shown, the actual costs of
    	
the child's housing expenses, whether on-campus or off-campus, provided that the housing expenses do not exceed the cost for the same academic year of a double-occupancy student room, with a standard meal plan, in a residence hall operated by the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign;
        (3) the actual costs of the child's medical
    	
expenses, including medical insurance, and dental expenses;
        (4) the reasonable living expenses of the child
    	
during the academic year and periods of recess:
            (A) if the child is a resident student attending
        	
a post-secondary educational program; or
            (B) if the child is living with one party at that
        	
party's home and attending a post-secondary educational program as a non-resident student, in which case the living expenses include an amount that pays for the reasonable cost of the child's food, utilities, and transportation; and
        (5) the cost of books and other supplies necessary to
    	
attend college.
    (e) Sums may be ordered payable to the child, to either party, or to the educational institution, directly or through a special account or trust created for that purpose, as the court sees fit.
    (f) If educational expenses are ordered payable, each party and the child shall sign any consent necessary for the educational institution to provide a supporting party with access to the child's academic transcripts, records, and grade reports. The consent shall not apply to any non-academic records. Failure to execute the required consent may be a basis for a modification or termination of any order entered under this Section. Unless the court specifically finds that the child's safety would be jeopardized, each party is entitled to know the name of the educational institution the child attends.
    (g) The authority under this Section to make provision for educational expenses terminates when the child either: fails to maintain a cumulative "C" grade point average, except in the event of illness or other good cause shown; attains the age of 23; receives a baccalaureate degree; or marries. A child's enlisting in the armed forces, being incarcerated, or becoming pregnant does not terminate the court's authority to make provisions for the educational expenses for the child under this Section.
    (h) An account established prior to the dissolution that is to be used for the child's post-secondary education, that is an account in a state tuition program under Section 529 of the Internal Revenue Code, or that is some other college savings plan, is to be considered by the court to be a resource of the child, provided that any post-judgment contribution made by a party to such an account is to be considered a contribution from that party.
    (i) The child is not a third party beneficiary to the settlement agreement or judgment between the parties after trial and is not entitled to file a petition for contribution. If the parties' settlement agreement describes the manner in which a child's educational expenses will be paid, or if the court makes an award pursuant to this Section, then the parties are responsible pursuant to that agreement or award for the child's educational expenses, but in no event shall the court consider the child a third party beneficiary of that provision. In the event of the death or legal disability of a party who would have the right to file a petition for contribution, the child of the party may file a petition for contribution.
    (j) In making awards under this Section, or pursuant to a petition or motion to decrease, modify, or terminate any such award, the court shall consider all relevant factors that appear reasonable and necessary, including:
        (1) The present and future financial resources of
    	
both parties to meet their needs, including, but not limited to, savings for retirement.
        (2) The standard of living the child would have
    	
enjoyed had the marriage not been dissolved.
        (3) The financial resources of the child.
        (4) The child's academic performance.
    (k) The establishment of an obligation to pay under this Section is retroactive only to the date of filing a petition. The right to enforce a prior obligation to pay may be enforced either before or after the obligation is incurred.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16; 99-143, eff. 7-27-15; 99-642, eff. 7-28-16; 99-763, eff. 1-1-17.)

    (750 ILCS 5/513.5)
    Sec. 513.5. Support for a non-minor child with a disability.
    (a) The court may award sums of money out of the property and income of either or both parties or the estate of a deceased parent, as equity may require, for the support of a child of the parties who has attained majority when the child is mentally or physically disabled and not otherwise emancipated. The sums awarded may be paid to one of the parents, to a trust created by the parties for the benefit of the non-minor child with a disability, or irrevocably to a special needs trust, established by the parties and for the sole benefit of the non-minor child with a disability, pursuant to subdivisions (d)(4)(A) or (d)(4)(C) of 42 U.S.C. 1396p, Section 1213 of the Illinois Trust Code, and applicable provisions of the Social Security Administration Program Operating Manual System. An application for support for a non-minor disabled child may be made before or after the child has attained majority. Unless an application for educational expenses is made for a mentally or physically disabled child under Section 513, the disability that is the basis for the application for support must have arisen while the child was eligible for support under Section 505 or 513 of this Act.
    (b) In making awards under this Section, or pursuant to a petition or motion to decrease, modify, or terminate any such award, the court shall consider all relevant factors that appear reasonable and necessary, including:
        (1) the present and future financial resources of
    	
both parties to meet their needs, including, but not limited to, savings for retirement;
        (2) the standard of living the child would have
    	
enjoyed had the marriage not been dissolved. The court may consider factors that are just and equitable;
        (3) the financial resources of the child; and
        (4) any financial or other resource provided to or
    	
for the child including, but not limited to, any Supplemental Security Income, any home-based support provided pursuant to the Home-Based Support Services Law for Mentally Disabled Adults, and any other State, federal, or local benefit available to the non-minor disabled child.
    (c) As used in this Section:
    A "disabled" individual means an individual who has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits a major life activity, has a record of such an impairment, or is regarded as having such an impairment.
    "Disability" means a mental or physical impairment that substantially limits a major life activity.
(Source: P.A. 101-48, eff. 1-1-20.)

    (750 ILCS 5/514) (from Ch. 40, par. 514)
    Sec. 514. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 82-783. Repealed by P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/515) (from Ch. 40, par. 515)
    Sec. 515. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 83-358. Repealed by P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/516) (from Ch. 40, par. 516)
    Sec. 516. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 95-331, eff. 8-21-07. Repealed by P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/517)
    Sec. 517. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 95-331, eff. 8-21-07. Repealed by P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)


 
    (750 ILCS 5/Pt. VI heading)
PART VI
ALLOCATION OF PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITIES
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/600)
    Sec. 600. Definitions. For purposes of this Part VI:
    (a) "Abuse" has the meaning ascribed to that term in Section 103 of the Illinois Domestic Violence Act of 1986.
    (b) "Allocation judgment" means a judgment allocating parental responsibilities.
    (c) "Caretaking functions" means tasks that involve interaction with a child or that direct, arrange, and supervise the interaction with and care of a child provided by others, or for obtaining the resources allowing for the provision of these functions. The term includes, but is not limited to, the following:
        (1) satisfying a child's nutritional needs; managing
    	
a child's bedtime and wake-up routines; caring for a child when the child is sick or injured; being attentive to a child's personal hygiene needs, including washing, grooming, and dressing; playing with a child and ensuring the child attends scheduled extracurricular activities; protecting a child's physical safety; and providing transportation for a child;
        (2) directing a child's various developmental needs,
    	
including the acquisition of motor and language skills, toilet training, self-confidence, and maturation;
        (3) providing discipline, giving instruction in
    	
manners, assigning and supervising chores, and performing other tasks that attend to a child's needs for behavioral control and self-restraint;
        (4) ensuring the child attends school, including
    	
remedial and special services appropriate to the child's needs and interests, communicating with teachers and counselors, and supervising homework;
        (5) helping a child develop and maintain appropriate
    	
interpersonal relationships with peers, siblings, and other family members;
        (6) ensuring the child attends medical appointments
    	
and is available for medical follow-up and meeting the medical needs of the child in the home;
        (7) providing moral and ethical guidance for a child;
    	
and
        (8) arranging alternative care for a child by a
    	
family member, babysitter, or other child care provider or facility, including investigating such alternatives, communicating with providers, and supervising such care.
    (d) "Parental responsibilities" means both parenting time and significant decision-making responsibilities with respect to a child.
    (e) "Parenting time" means the time during which a parent is responsible for exercising caretaking functions and non-significant decision-making responsibilities with respect to the child.
    (f) "Parenting plan" means a written agreement that allocates significant decision-making responsibilities, parenting time, or both.
    (g) "Relocation" means:
        (1) a change of residence from the child's current
    	
primary residence located in the county of Cook, DuPage, Kane, Lake, McHenry, or Will to a new residence within this State that is more than 25 miles from the child's current residence, as measured by an Internet mapping service;
        (2) a change of residence from the child's current
    	
primary residence located in a county not listed in paragraph (1) to a new residence within this State that is more than 50 miles from the child's current primary residence, as measured by an Internet mapping service; or
        (3) a change of residence from the child's current
    	
primary residence to a residence outside the borders of this State that is more than 25 miles from the current primary residence, as measured by an Internet mapping service.
    (h) "Religious upbringing" means the choice of religion or denomination of a religion, religious schooling, religious training, or participation in religious customs or practices.
    (i) "Restriction of parenting time" means any limitation or condition placed on parenting time, including supervision.
    (j) "Right of first refusal" has the meaning provided in subsection (b) of Section 602.3 of this Act.
    (k) "Significant decision-making" means deciding issues of long-term importance in the life of a child.
    (l) "Step-parent" means a person married to a child's parent, including a person married to the child's parent immediately prior to the parent's death.
    (m) "Supervision" means the presence of a third party during a parent's exercise of parenting time.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16; 99-763, eff. 1-1-17.)

    (750 ILCS 5/601) (from Ch. 40, par. 601)
    Sec. 601. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 99-78, eff. 7-20-15; 99-143, eff. 7-27-15. Repealed by P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/601.2)
    Sec. 601.2. Jurisdiction; commencement of proceeding.
    (a) A court of this State that is competent to allocate parental responsibilities has jurisdiction to make such an allocation in original or modification proceedings as provided in Section 201 of the Uniform Child-Custody Jurisdiction and Enforcement Act as adopted by this State.
    (b) A proceeding for allocation of parental responsibilities with respect to a child is commenced in the court:
        (1) by filing a petition for dissolution of marriage
    	
or legal separation or declaration of invalidity of marriage;
        (2) by filing a petition for allocation of parental
    	
responsibilities with respect to the child in the county in which the child resides;
        (3) by a person other than a parent, by filing a
    	
petition for allocation of parental responsibilities in the county in which the child is permanently resident or found, but only if he or she is not in the physical custody of one of his or her parents;
        (4) by a step-parent, by filing a petition, if all of
    	
the following circumstances are met:
            (A) the parent having the majority of parenting
        	
time is deceased or is disabled and cannot perform the duties of a parent to the child;
            (B) the step-parent provided for the care,
        	
control, and welfare of the child prior to the initiation of proceedings for allocation of parental responsibilities;
            (C) the child wishes to live with the
        	
step-parent; and
            (D) it is alleged to be in the best interests and
        	
welfare of the child to live with the step-parent as provided in Section 602.5 of this Act; or
        (5) when one of the parents is deceased, by a
    	
grandparent who is a parent or step-parent of a deceased parent, by filing a petition, if one or more of the following existed at the time of the parent's death:
            (A) the surviving parent had been absent from the
        	
marital abode for more than one month without the spouse knowing his or her whereabouts;
            (B) the surviving parent was in State or federal
        	
custody; or
            (C) the surviving parent had: (i) received
        	
supervision for or been convicted of any violation of Section 11-1.20, 11-1.30, 11-1.40, 11-1.50, 11-1.60, 11-1.70, 12C-5, 12C-10, 12C-35, 12C-40, 12C-45, 18-6, 19-6, or Article 12 of the Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012 directed towards the deceased parent or the child; or (ii) received supervision or been convicted of violating an order of protection entered under Section 217, 218, or 219 of the Illinois Domestic Violence Act of 1986 for the protection of the deceased parent or the child.
    (c) When a proceeding for allocation of parental responsibilities is commenced, the party commencing the action must, at least 30 days before any hearing on the petition, serve a written notice and a copy of the petition on the child's parent, guardian, person currently allocated parental responsibilities pursuant to subdivision (b)(4) or (b)(5) of Section 601.2, and any person with a pending motion for allocation of parental responsibilities with respect to the child. Nothing in this Section shall preclude a party in a proceeding for allocation of parental responsibilities from moving for a temporary order under Section 603.5.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/601.5)
    Sec. 601.5. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 94-377, eff. 7-29-05; 95-331, eff. 8-21-07. Repealed by P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/602) (from Ch. 40, par. 602)
    Sec. 602. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 96-676, eff. 1-1-10. Repealed by P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/602.1) (from Ch. 40, par. 602.1)
    Sec. 602.1. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 96-651, eff. 1-1-10. Repealed by P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/602.3)
    Sec. 602.3. Care of minor children; right of first refusal.
    (a) If the court awards parenting time to both parents under Section 602.7 or 602.8, the court may consider, consistent with the best interests of the child as defined in Section 602.7, whether to award to one or both of the parties the right of first refusal to provide child care for the minor child or children during the other parent's normal parenting time, unless the need for child care is attributable to an emergency.
    (b) As used in this Section, "right of first refusal" means that if a party intends to leave the minor child or children with a substitute child-care provider for a significant period of time, that party must first offer the other party an opportunity to personally care for the minor child or children. The parties may agree to a right of first refusal that is consistent with the best interests of the minor child or children. If there is no agreement and the court determines that a right of first refusal is in the best interests of the minor child or children, the court shall consider and make provisions in its order for:
        (1) the length and kind of child-care requirements
    	
invoking the right of first refusal;
        (2) notification to the other parent and for his or
    	
her response;
        (3) transportation requirements; and
        (4) any other action necessary to protect and promote
    	
the best interest of the minor child or children.
    (c) The right of first refusal may be enforced under Section 607.5 of this Act.
    (d) The right of first refusal is terminated upon the termination of the allocation of parental responsibilities or parenting time.
(Source: P.A. 98-462, eff. 1-1-14; 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/602.5)
    Sec. 602.5. Allocation of parental responsibilities: decision-making.
    (a) Generally. The court shall allocate decision-making responsibilities according to the child's best interests. Nothing in this Act requires that each parent be allocated decision-making responsibilities.
    (b) Allocation of significant decision-making responsibilities. Unless the parents otherwise agree in writing on an allocation of significant decision-making responsibilities, or the issue of the allocation of parental responsibilities has been reserved under Section 401, the court shall make the determination. The court shall allocate to one or both of the parents the significant decision-making responsibility for each significant issue affecting the child. Those significant issues shall include, without limitation, the following:
        (1) Education, including the choice of schools and
    	
tutors.
        (2) Health, including all decisions relating to the
    	
medical, dental, and psychological needs of the child and to the treatments arising or resulting from those needs.
        (3) Religion, subject to the following provisions:
            (A) The court shall allocate decision-making
        	
responsibility for the child's religious upbringing in accordance with any express or implied agreement between the parents.
            (B) The court shall consider evidence of the
        	
parents' past conduct as to the child's religious upbringing in allocating decision-making responsibilities consistent with demonstrated past conduct in the absence of an express or implied agreement between the parents.
            (C) The court shall not allocate any aspect of
        	
the child's religious upbringing if it determines that the parents do not or did not have an express or implied agreement for such religious upbringing or that there is insufficient evidence to demonstrate a course of conduct regarding the child's religious upbringing that could serve as a basis for any such order.
        (4) Extracurricular activities.
    (c) Determination of child's best interests. In determining the child's best interests for purposes of allocating significant decision-making responsibilities, the court shall consider all relevant factors, including, without limitation, the following:
        (1) the wishes of the child, taking into account the
    	
child's maturity and ability to express reasoned and independent preferences as to decision-making;
        (2) the child's adjustment to his or her home,
    	
school, and community;
        (3) the mental and physical health of all individuals
    	
involved;
        (4) the ability of the parents to cooperate to make
    	
decisions, or the level of conflict between the parties that may affect their ability to share decision-making;
        (5) the level of each parent's participation in past
    	
significant decision-making with respect to the child;
        (6) any prior agreement or course of conduct between
    	
the parents relating to decision-making with respect to the child;
        (7) the wishes of the parents;
        (8) the child's needs;
        (9) the distance between the parents' residences, the
    	
cost and difficulty of transporting the child, each parent's and the child's daily schedules, and the ability of the parents to cooperate in the arrangement;
        (10) whether a restriction on decision-making is
    	
appropriate under Section 603.10;
        (11) the willingness and ability of each parent to
    	
facilitate and encourage a close and continuing relationship between the other parent and the child;
        (12) the physical violence or threat of physical
    	
violence by the child's parent directed against the child;
        (13) the occurrence of abuse against the child or
    	
other member of the child's household;
        (14) whether one of the parents is a sex offender,
    	
and if so, the exact nature of the offense and what, if any, treatment in which the parent has successfully participated; and
        (15) any other factor that the court expressly finds
    	
to be relevant.
    (d) A parent shall have sole responsibility for making routine decisions with respect to the child and for emergency decisions affecting the child's health and safety during that parent's parenting time.
    (e) In allocating significant decision-making responsibilities, the court shall not consider conduct of a parent that does not affect that parent's relationship to the child.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/602.7)
    Sec. 602.7. Allocation of parental responsibilities: parenting time.
    (a) Best interests. The court shall allocate parenting time according to the child's best interests.
    (b) Allocation of parenting time. Unless the parents present a mutually agreed written parenting plan and that plan is approved by the court, the court shall allocate parenting time. It is presumed both parents are fit and the court shall not place any restrictions on parenting time as defined in Section 600 and described in Section 603.10, unless it finds by a preponderance of the evidence that a parent's exercise of parenting time would seriously endanger the child's physical, mental, moral, or emotional health.
    In determining the child's best interests for purposes of allocating parenting time, the court shall consider all relevant factors, including, without limitation, the following:
        (1) the wishes of each parent seeking parenting time;
        (2) the wishes of the child, taking into account the
    	
child's maturity and ability to express reasoned and independent preferences as to parenting time;
        (3) the amount of time each parent spent performing
    	
caretaking functions with respect to the child in the 24 months preceding the filing of any petition for allocation of parental responsibilities or, if the child is under 2 years of age, since the child's birth;
        (4) any prior agreement or course of conduct between
    	
the parents relating to caretaking functions with respect to the child;
        (5) the interaction and interrelationship of the
    	
child with his or her parents and siblings and with any other person who may significantly affect the child's best interests;
        (6) the child's adjustment to his or her home,
    	
school, and community;
        (7) the mental and physical health of all individuals
    	
involved;
        (8) the child's needs;
        (9) the distance between the parents' residences, the
    	
cost and difficulty of transporting the child, each parent's and the child's daily schedules, and the ability of the parents to cooperate in the arrangement;
        (10) whether a restriction on parenting time is
    	
appropriate;
        (11) the physical violence or threat of physical
    	
violence by the child's parent directed against the child or other member of the child's household;
        (12) the willingness and ability of each parent to
    	
place the needs of the child ahead of his or her own needs;
        (13) the willingness and ability of each parent to
    	
facilitate and encourage a close and continuing relationship between the other parent and the child;
        (14) the occurrence of abuse against the child or
    	
other member of the child's household;
        (15) whether one of the parents is a convicted sex
    	
offender or lives with a convicted sex offender and, if so, the exact nature of the offense and what if any treatment the offender has successfully participated in; the parties are entitled to a hearing on the issues raised in this paragraph (15);
        (16) the terms of a parent's military family-care
    	
plan that a parent must complete before deployment if a parent is a member of the United States Armed Forces who is being deployed; and
        (17) any other factor that the court expressly finds
    	
to be relevant.
    (c) In allocating parenting time, the court shall not consider conduct of a parent that does not affect that parent's relationship to the child.
    (d) Upon motion, the court may allow a parent who is deployed or who has orders to be deployed as a member of the United States Armed Forces to designate a person known to the child to exercise reasonable substitute visitation on behalf of the deployed parent, if the court determines that substitute visitation is in the best interests of the child. In determining whether substitute visitation is in the best interests of the child, the court shall consider all of the relevant factors listed in subsection (b) of this Section and apply those factors to the person designated as a substitute for the deployed parent for visitation purposes. Visitation orders entered under this subsection are subject to subsections (e) and (f) of Section 602.9 and subsections (c) and (d) of Section 603.10.
    (e) If the street address of a parent is not identified pursuant to Section 708 of this Act, the court shall require the parties to identify reasonable alternative arrangements for parenting time by the other parent including, but not limited to, parenting time of the minor child at the residence of another person or at a local public or private facility.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/602.8)
    Sec. 602.8. Parenting time by parents not allocated significant decision-making responsibilities.
    (a) A parent who has established parentage under the laws of this State and who is not granted significant decision-making responsibilities for a child is entitled to reasonable parenting time with the child, subject to subsections (d) and (e) of Section 603.10 of this Act, unless the court finds, after a hearing, that the parenting time would seriously endanger the child's mental, moral, or physical health or significantly impair the child's emotional development. The order setting forth parenting time shall be in the child's best interests pursuant to the factors set forth in subsection (b) of Section 602.7 of this Act.
    (b) The court may modify an order granting or denying parenting time pursuant to Section 610.5 of this Act. The court may restrict parenting time, and modify an order restricting parenting time, pursuant to Section 603.10 of this Act.
    (c) If the street address of the parent allocated parental responsibilities is not identified, pursuant to Section 708 of this Act, the court shall require the parties to identify reasonable alternative arrangements for parenting time by a parent not allocated parental responsibilities, including but not limited to parenting time of the minor child at the residence of another person or at a local public or private facility.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/602.9)
    Sec. 602.9. Visitation by certain non-parents.
    (a) As used in this Section:
        (1) "electronic communication" means time that a
    	
grandparent, great-grandparent, sibling, or step-parent spends with a child during which the child is not in the person's actual physical custody, but which is facilitated by the use of communication tools such as the telephone, electronic mail, instant messaging, video conferencing or other wired or wireless technologies via the Internet, or another medium of communication;
        (2) "sibling" means a brother or sister either of
    	
the whole blood or the half blood, stepbrother, or stepsister of the minor child;
        (3) "step-parent" means a person married to a
    	
child's parent, including a person married to the child's parent immediately prior to the parent's death; and
        (4) "visitation" means in-person time spent between a
    	
child and the child's grandparent, great-grandparent, sibling, step-parent, or any person designated under subsection (d) of Section 602.7. In appropriate circumstances, visitation may include electronic communication under conditions and at times determined by the court.
    (b) General provisions.
        (1) An appropriate person, as identified in
    	
subsection (c) of this Section, may bring an action in circuit court by petition, or by filing a petition in a pending dissolution proceeding or any other proceeding that involves parental responsibilities or visitation issues regarding the child, requesting visitation with the child pursuant to this Section. If there is not a pending proceeding involving parental responsibilities or visitation with the child, the petition for visitation with the child must be filed in the county in which the child resides. Notice of the petition shall be given as provided in subsection (c) of Section 601.2 of this Act.
        (2) This Section does not apply to a child:
            (A) in whose interests a petition is pending
        	
under Section 2-13 of the Juvenile Court Act of 1987; or
            (B) in whose interests a petition to adopt by an
        	
unrelated person is pending under the Adoption Act; or
            (C) who has been voluntarily surrendered by the
        	
parent or parents, except for a surrender to the Department of Children and Family Services or a foster care facility; or
            (D) who has been previously adopted by an
        	
individual or individuals who are not related to the biological parents of the child or who is the subject of a pending adoption petition by an individual or individuals who are not related to the biological parents of the child; or
            (E) who has been relinquished pursuant to the
        	
Abandoned Newborn Infant Protection Act.
        (3) A petition for visitation may be filed under this
    	
Section only if there has been an unreasonable denial of visitation by a parent and the denial has caused the child undue mental, physical, or emotional harm.
        (4) There is a rebuttable presumption that a fit
    	
parent's actions and decisions regarding grandparent, great-grandparent, sibling, or step-parent visitation are not harmful to the child's mental, physical, or emotional health. The burden is on the party filing a petition under this Section to prove that the parent's actions and decisions regarding visitation will cause undue harm to the child's mental, physical, or emotional health.
        (5) In determining whether to grant visitation, the
    	
court shall consider the following:
            (A) the wishes of the child, taking into account
        	
the child's maturity and ability to express reasoned and independent preferences as to visitation;
            (B) the mental and physical health of the child;
            (C) the mental and physical health of the
        	
grandparent, great-grandparent, sibling, or step-parent;
            (D) the length and quality of the prior
        	
relationship between the child and the grandparent, great-grandparent, sibling, or step-parent;
            (E) the good faith of the party in filing the
        	
petition;
            (F) the good faith of the person denying
        	
visitation;
            (G) the quantity of the visitation time requested
        	
and the potential adverse impact that visitation would have on the child's customary activities;
            (H) any other fact that establishes that the loss
        	
of the relationship between the petitioner and the child is likely to unduly harm the child's mental, physical, or emotional health; and
            (I) whether visitation can be structured in a way
        	
to minimize the child's exposure to conflicts between the adults.
        (6) Any visitation rights granted under this Section
    	
before the filing of a petition for adoption of the child shall automatically terminate by operation of law upon the entry of an order terminating parental rights or granting the adoption of the child, whichever is earlier. If the person or persons who adopted the child are related to the child, as defined by Section 1 of the Adoption Act, any person who was related to the child as grandparent, great-grandparent, or sibling prior to the adoption shall have standing to bring an action under this Section requesting visitation with the child.
        (7) The court may order visitation rights for the
    	
grandparent, great-grandparent, sibling, or step-parent that include reasonable access without requiring overnight or possessory visitation.
    (c) Visitation by grandparents, great-grandparents, step-parents, and siblings.
        (1) Grandparents, great-grandparents, step-parents,
    	
and siblings of a minor child who is one year old or older may bring a petition for visitation and electronic communication under this Section if there is an unreasonable denial of visitation by a parent that causes undue mental, physical, or emotional harm to the child and if at least one of the following conditions exists:
            (A) the child's other parent is deceased or has
        	
been missing for at least 90 days. For the purposes of this subsection a parent is considered to be missing if the parent's location has not been determined and the parent has been reported as missing to a law enforcement agency; or
            (B) a parent of the child is incompetent as a
        	
matter of law; or
            (C) a parent has been incarcerated in jail or
        	
prison for a period in excess of 90 days immediately prior to the filing of the petition; or
            (D) the child's parents have been granted a
        	
dissolution of marriage or have been legally separated from each other or there is pending a dissolution proceeding involving a parent of the child or another court proceeding involving parental responsibilities or visitation of the child (other than an adoption proceeding of an unrelated child, a proceeding under Article II of the Juvenile Court Act of 1987, or an action for an order of protection under the Illinois Domestic Violence Act of 1986 or Article 112A of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963) and at least one parent does not object to the grandparent, great-grandparent, step-parent, or sibling having visitation with the child. The visitation of the grandparent, great-grandparent, step-parent, or sibling must not diminish the parenting time of the parent who is not related to the grandparent, great-grandparent, step-parent, or sibling seeking visitation; or
            (E) (i) the child is born to parents who are not
        	
married to each other; (ii) the parents are not living together; (iii) the petitioner is a grandparent, great-grandparent, step-parent, or sibling of the child; and (iv) the parent-child relationship has been legally established. For purposes of this subdivision (E), if the petitioner is a grandparent or great-grandparent, the parent-child relationship need be legally established only with respect to the parent who is related to the grandparent or great-grandparent. For purposes of this subdivision (E), if the petitioner is a step-parent, the parent-child relationship need be legally established only with respect to the parent who is married to the petitioner or was married to the petitioner immediately before the parent's death.
        (2) In addition to the factors set forth in
    	
subdivision (b)(5) of this Section, the court should consider:
            (A) whether the child resided with the petitioner
        	
for at least 6 consecutive months with or without a parent present;
            (B) whether the child had frequent and regular
        	
contact or visitation with the petitioner for at least 12 consecutive months; and
            (C) whether the grandparent, great-grandparent,
        	
sibling, or step-parent was a primary caretaker of the child for a period of not less than 6 consecutive months within the 24-month period immediately preceding the commencement of the proceeding.
        (3) An order granting visitation privileges under
    	
this Section is subject to subsections (c) and (d) of Section 603.10.
        (4) A petition for visitation privileges may not be
    	
filed pursuant to this subsection (c) by the parents or grandparents of a parent of the child if parentage between the child and the related parent has not been legally established.
    (d) Modification of visitation orders.
        (1) Unless by stipulation of the parties, no motion
    	
to modify a grandparent, great-grandparent, sibling, or step-parent visitation order may be made earlier than 2 years after the date the order was filed, unless the court permits it to be made on the basis of affidavits that there is reason to believe the child's present environment may endanger seriously the child's mental, physical, or emotional health.
        (2) The court shall not modify an order that grants
    	
visitation to a grandparent, great-grandparent, sibling, or step-parent unless it finds by clear and convincing evidence, upon the basis of facts that have arisen since the prior visitation order or that were unknown to the court at the time of entry of the prior visitation order, that a change has occurred in the circumstances of the child or his or her parent, and that the modification is necessary to protect the mental, physical, or emotional health of the child. The court shall state in its decision specific findings of fact in support of its modification or termination of the grandparent, great-grandparent, sibling, or step-parent visitation. A child's parent may always petition to modify visitation upon changed circumstances when necessary to promote the child's best interests.
        (3) Notice of a motion requesting modification of a
    	
visitation order shall be provided as set forth in subsection (c) of Section 601.2 of this Act.
        (4) Attorney's fees and costs shall be assessed
    	
against a party seeking modification of the visitation order if the court finds that the modification action is vexatious and constitutes harassment.
    (e) No child's grandparent, great-grandparent, sibling, or step-parent, or any person to whom the court is considering granting visitation privileges pursuant to subsection (d) of Section 602.7, who was convicted of any offense involving an illegal sex act perpetrated upon a victim less than 18 years of age including, but not limited to, offenses for violations of Section 11-1.20, 11-1.30, 11-1.40, 11-1.50, 11-1.60, 11-1.70, or Article 12 of the Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012, is entitled to visitation while incarcerated or while on parole, probation, conditional discharge, periodic imprisonment, or mandatory supervised release for that offense, and upon discharge from incarceration for a misdemeanor offense or upon discharge from parole, probation, conditional discharge, periodic imprisonment, or mandatory supervised release for a felony offense. Visitation shall be denied until the person successfully completes a treatment program approved by the court. Upon completion of treatment, the court may deny visitation based on the factors listed in subdivision (b)(5) of this Section.
    (f) No child's grandparent, great-grandparent, sibling, or step-parent, or any person to whom the court is considering granting visitation privileges pursuant to subsection (d) of Section 602.7, may be granted visitation if he or she has been convicted of first degree murder of a parent, grandparent, great-grandparent, or sibling of the child who is the subject of the visitation request. Pursuant to a motion to modify visitation, the court shall revoke visitation rights previously granted to any person who would otherwise be entitled to petition for visitation rights under this Section or granted visitation under subsection (d) of Section 602.7, if the person has been convicted of first degree murder of a parent, grandparent, great-grandparent, or sibling of the child who is the subject of the visitation order. Until an order is entered pursuant to this subsection, no person may visit, with the child present, a person who has been convicted of first degree murder of the parent, grandparent, great-grandparent, or sibling of the child without the consent of the child's parent, other than a parent convicted of first degree murder as set forth herein, or legal guardian.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16; 99-763, eff. 1-1-17; 100-706, eff. 1-1-19.)

    (750 ILCS 5/602.10)
    Sec. 602.10. Parenting plan.
    (a) Filing of parenting plan. All parents, within 120 days after service or filing of any petition for allocation of parental responsibilities, must file with the court, either jointly or separately, a proposed parenting plan. The time period for filing a parenting plan may be extended by the court for good cause shown. If no appearance has been filed by the respondent, no parenting plan is required unless ordered by the court.
    (b) No parenting plan filed. In the absence of filing of one or more parenting plans, the court must conduct an evidentiary hearing to allocate parental responsibilities.
    (c) Mediation. The court shall order mediation to assist the parents in formulating or modifying a parenting plan or in implementing a parenting plan unless the court determines that impediments to mediation exist. Costs under this subsection shall be allocated between the parties pursuant to the applicable statute or Supreme Court Rule.
    (d) Parents' agreement on parenting plan. The parenting plan must be in writing and signed by both parents. The parents must submit the parenting plan to the court for approval within 120 days after service of a petition for allocation of parental responsibilities or the filing of an appearance, except for good cause shown. Notwithstanding the provisions above, the parents may agree upon and submit a parenting plan at any time after the commencement of a proceeding until prior to the entry of a judgment of dissolution of marriage. The agreement is binding upon the court unless it finds, after considering the circumstances of the parties and any other relevant evidence produced by the parties, that the agreement is not in the best interests of the child. If the court does not approve the parenting plan, the court shall make express findings of the reason or reasons for its refusal to approve the plan. The court, on its own motion, may conduct an evidentiary hearing to determine whether the parenting plan is in the child's best interests.
    (e) Parents cannot agree on parenting plan. When parents fail to submit an agreed parenting plan, each parent must file and submit a written, signed parenting plan to the court within 120 days after the filing of an appearance, except for good cause shown. The court's determination of parenting time should be based on the child's best interests. The filing of the plan may be excused by the court if:
        (1) the parties have commenced mediation for the
    	
purpose of formulating a parenting plan; or
        (2) the parents have agreed in writing to extend the
    	
time for filing a proposed plan and the court has approved such an extension; or
        (3) the court orders otherwise for good cause shown.
    (f) Parenting plan contents. At a minimum, a parenting plan must set forth the following:
        (1) an allocation of significant decision-making
    	
responsibilities;
        (2) provisions for the child's living arrangements
    	
and for each parent's parenting time, including either:
            (A) a schedule that designates in which parent's
        	
home the minor child will reside on given days; or
            (B) a formula or method for determining such a
        	
schedule in sufficient detail to be enforced in a subsequent proceeding;
        (3) a mediation provision addressing any proposed
    	
reallocation of parenting time or regarding the terms of allocation of parental responsibilities, except that this provision is not required if one parent is allocated all significant decision-making responsibilities;
        (4) each parent's right of access to medical, dental,
    	
and psychological records (subject to the Mental Health and Developmental Disabilities Confidentiality Act), child care records, and school and extracurricular records, reports, and schedules, unless expressly denied by a court order or denied under Section 602.11;
        (5) a designation of the parent who will be
    	
denominated as the parent with the majority of parenting time for purposes of Section 606.10;
        (6) the child's residential address for school
    	
enrollment purposes only;
        (7) each parent's residence address and phone number,
    	
and each parent's place of employment and employment address and phone number;
        (8) a requirement that a parent changing his or her
    	
residence provide at least 60 days prior written notice of the change to any other parent under the parenting plan or allocation judgment, unless such notice is impracticable or unless otherwise ordered by the court. If such notice is impracticable, written notice shall be given at the earliest date practicable. At a minimum, the notice shall set forth the following:
            (A) the intended date of the change of residence;
        	
and
            (B) the address of the new residence;
        (9) provisions requiring each parent to notify the
    	
other of emergencies, health care, travel plans, or other significant child-related issues;
        (10) transportation arrangements between the parents;
        (11) provisions for communications, including
    	
electronic communications, with the child during the other parent's parenting time;
        (12) provisions for resolving issues arising from a
    	
parent's future relocation, if applicable;
        (13) provisions for future modifications of the
    	
parenting plan, if specified events occur;
        (14) provisions for the exercise of the right of
    	
first refusal, if so desired, that are consistent with the best interests of the minor child; provisions in the plan for the exercise of the right of first refusal must include:
            (i) the length and kind of child-care
        	
requirements invoking the right of first refusal;
            (ii) notification to the other parent and for his
        	
or her response;
            (iii) transportation requirements; and
            (iv) any other provision related to the exercise
        	
of the right of first refusal necessary to protect and promote the best interests of the minor child; and
        (15) any other provision that addresses the child's
    	
best interests or that will otherwise facilitate cooperation between the parents.
    The personal information under items (6), (7), and (8) of this subsection is not required if there is evidence of or the parenting plan states that there is a history of domestic violence or abuse, or it is shown that the release of the information is not in the child's or parent's best interests.
    (g) The court shall conduct a trial or hearing to determine a plan which maximizes the child's relationship and access to both parents and shall ensure that the access and the overall plan are in the best interests of the child. The court shall take the parenting plans into consideration when determining parenting time and responsibilities at trial or hearing.
    (h) The court may consider, consistent with the best interests of the child as defined in Section 602.7 of this Act, whether to award to one or both of the parties the right of first refusal in accordance with Section 602.3 of this Act.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16; 99-763, eff. 1-1-17.)

    (750 ILCS 5/602.11)
    Sec. 602.11. Access to health care, child care, and school records by parents.
    (a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, access to records and information pertaining to a child including, but not limited to, medical, dental, child care, and school records shall not be denied to a parent for the reason that such parent has not been allocated parental responsibility; however, no parent shall have access to the school records of a child if the parent is prohibited by an order of protection from inspecting or obtaining such records pursuant to the Domestic Violence Act of 1986 or the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963.
    (b) Health care professionals and health care providers shall grant access to health care records and information pertaining to a child to both parents, unless the health care professional or health care provider receives a court order or judgment that denies access to a specific individual. Except as may be provided by court order, no parent who is a named respondent in an order of protection issued pursuant to the Illinois Domestic Violence Act of 1986 or the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 shall have access to the health care records of a child who is a protected person under the order of protection provided the health care professional or health care provider has received a copy of the order of protection. Access to health care records is denied under this Section for as long as the order of protection remains in effect as specified in the order of protection or as otherwise determined by court order.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16; 99-763, eff. 1-1-17.)

    (750 ILCS 5/603) (from Ch. 40, par. 603)
    Sec. 603. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-659, eff. 6-1-12. Repealed by P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/603.5)
    Sec. 603.5. Temporary orders.
    (a) A court may order a temporary allocation of parental responsibilities in the child's best interests before the entry of a final allocation judgment. Any temporary allocation shall be made in accordance with the standards set forth in Sections 602.5 and 602.7: (i) after a hearing; or (ii) if there is no objection, on the basis of a parenting plan that, at a minimum, complies with subsection (f) of Section 602.10.
    (b) A temporary order allocating parental responsibilities shall be deemed vacated when the action in which it was granted is dismissed, unless a parent moves to continue the action for allocation of parental responsibilities filed under Section 601.5.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/603.10)
    Sec. 603.10. Restriction of parental responsibilities.
    (a) After a hearing, if the court finds by a preponderance of the evidence that a parent engaged in any conduct that seriously endangered the child's mental, moral, or physical health or that significantly impaired the child's emotional development, the court shall enter orders as necessary to protect the child. Such orders may include, but are not limited to, orders for one or more of the following:
        (1) a reduction, elimination, or other adjustment of
    	
the parent's decision-making responsibilities or parenting time, or both decision-making responsibilities and parenting time;
        (2) supervision, including ordering the Department of
    	
Children and Family Services to exercise continuing supervision under Section 5 of the Children and Family Services Act;
        (3) requiring the exchange of the child between the
    	
parents through an intermediary or in a protected setting;
        (4) restraining a parent's communication with or
    	
proximity to the other parent or the child;
        (5) requiring a parent to abstain from possessing or
    	
consuming alcohol or non-prescribed drugs while exercising parenting time with the child and within a specified period immediately preceding the exercise of parenting time;
        (6) restricting the presence of specific persons
    	
while a parent is exercising parenting time with the child;
        (7) requiring a parent to post a bond to secure the
    	
return of the child following the parent's exercise of parenting time or to secure other performance required by the court;
        (8) requiring a parent to complete a treatment
    	
program for perpetrators of abuse, for drug or alcohol abuse, or for other behavior that is the basis for restricting parental responsibilities under this Section; and
        (9) any other constraints or conditions that the
    	
court deems necessary to provide for the child's safety or welfare.
    (b) The court may modify an order restricting parental responsibilities if, after a hearing, the court finds by a preponderance of the evidence that a modification is in the child's best interests based on (i) a change of circumstances that occurred after the entry of an order restricting parental responsibilities; or (ii) conduct of which the court was previously unaware that seriously endangers the child. In determining whether to modify an order under this subsection, the court must consider factors that include, but need not be limited to, the following:
        (1) abuse, neglect, or abandonment of the child;
        (2) abusing or allowing abuse of another person that
    	
had an impact upon the child;
        (3) use of drugs, alcohol, or any other substance in
    	
a way that interferes with the parent's ability to perform caretaking functions with respect to the child; and
        (4) persistent continuing interference with the other
    	
parent's access to the child, except for actions taken with a reasonable, good-faith belief that they are necessary to protect the child's safety pending adjudication of the facts underlying that belief, provided that the interfering parent initiates a proceeding to determine those facts as soon as practicable.
    (c) An order granting parenting time to a parent or visitation to another person may be revoked by the court if that parent or other person is found to have knowingly used his or her parenting time or visitation to facilitate contact between the child and a parent who has been barred from contact with the child or to have knowingly used his or her parenting time or visitation to facilitate contact with the child that violates any restrictions imposed on a parent's parenting time by a court of competent jurisdiction. Nothing in this subsection limits a court's authority to enforce its orders in any other manner authorized by law.
    (d) If parenting time of a parent is restricted, an order granting visitation to a non-parent with a child or an order granting parenting time to the other parent shall contain the following language:
        "If a person granted parenting time or visitation
    	
under this order uses that time to facilitate contact between the child and a parent whose parenting time is restricted, or if such a person violates any restrictions placed on parenting time or visitation by the court, the parenting time or visitation granted under this order shall be revoked until further order of court."
    (e) A parent who, after a hearing, is determined by the court to have been convicted of any offense involving an illegal sex act perpetrated upon a victim less than 18 years of age, including but not limited to an offense under Article 11 of the Criminal Code of 2012, is not entitled to parenting time while incarcerated or while on parole, probation, conditional discharge, periodic imprisonment, or mandatory supervised release for a felony offense, until the parent complies with such terms and conditions as the court determines are in the child's best interests, taking into account the exact nature of the offense and what, if any, treatment in which the parent successfully participated.
    (f) A parent may not, while the child is present, visit any person granted visitation or parenting time who has been convicted of first degree murder, unless the court finds, after considering all relevant factors, including those set forth in subsection (b) of Section 602.7, that it would be in the child's best interests to allow the child to be present during such a visit.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/603.11)
    Sec. 603.11. Special immigrant child findings.
    (a) For the purpose of making a finding under this Section:
        "Abuse" has the meaning ascribed to that term in
    	
subsection (1) of Section 103 of the Illinois Domestic Violence Act of 1986.
        "Abandonment" includes, but is not limited to, the
    	
failure of a parent to maintain a reasonable degree of interest, concern, or responsibility for the welfare of the child or when one or both of the child's parents are deceased or cannot be reasonably located.
        "Neglect" includes the meaning ascribed to the term
    	
in paragraph (a) of subsection (1) of Section 2-3 of the Juvenile Court Act of 1987 and the failure to perform caretaking functions as defined in subsection (c) of Section 600.
    (b) A court of this State that is competent to allocate parenting responsibilities has jurisdiction to make the findings necessary to enable a child, who is the subject of a petition to allocate parenting responsibilities, to petition the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services for classification as a Special Immigrant Juvenile under Section 1101(a)(27)(J) of Title 8 of the United States Code.
    (c) If a motion requests findings regarding Special Immigrant Juvenile Status under Section 1101(a)(27)(J) of Title 8 of the United States Code, and the evidence, which may consist solely of, but is not limited to, a declaration by the child, supports the findings, the court shall issue an order, that includes the following findings:
        (1)(A) the child is declared a dependent of the
    	
court; or (B) the child is placed under the custody of an individual or entity appointed by the court; and
        (2) that reunification of the child with one or both
    	
of the child's parents is not viable due to abuse, neglect, abandonment, or other similar basis; and
        (3) that it is not in the best interest of the child
    	
to be returned to the child's or parent's previous country of nationality or last habitual residence.
    (d) In any proceedings in response to a motion that the court make the findings necessary to support a petition for classification as a Special Immigrant Juvenile, information regarding the immigration status of the child, the child's parent, or the child's guardian that is not otherwise protected by State confidentiality laws shall remain confidential and shall be available for inspection only by the court, the child who is the subject of the proceeding, the parties, the attorneys for the parties, the child's counsel, and the child's parent or guardian.
(Source: P.A. 101-121, eff. 11-25-19 (see P.A. 101-592 for the effective date of changes made by P.A. 101-121).)

    (750 ILCS 5/604) (from Ch. 40, par. 604)
    Sec. 604. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-47, eff. 1-1-12. Repealed by P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/604.5)
    Sec. 604.5. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 91-746, eff. 6-2-00. Repealed by P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/604.10)
    Sec. 604.10. Interviews; evaluations; investigation.
    (a) Court's interview of child. The court may interview the child in chambers to ascertain the child's wishes as to the allocation of parental responsibilities. Counsel shall be present at the interview unless otherwise agreed upon by the parties. The entire interview shall be recorded by a court reporter. The transcript of the interview shall be filed under seal and released only upon order of the court.
    (b) Court's professional. The court may seek the advice of any professional, whether or not regularly employed by the court, to assist the court in determining the child's best interests. The advice to the court shall be in writing and sent by the professional to counsel for the parties and to the court not later than 60 days before the date on which the trial court reasonably anticipates the hearing on the allocation of parental responsibilities will commence. The court may review the writing upon receipt. The writing may be admitted into evidence without testimony from its author, unless a party objects. A professional consulted by the court shall testify as the court's witness and be subject to cross-examination. The court shall order all costs and fees of the professional to be paid by one or more of the parties, subject to reallocation in accordance with subsection (a) of Section 508.
    The professional's report must, at a minimum, set forth the following:
        (1) a description of the procedures employed during
    	
the evaluation;
        (2) a report of the data collected;
        (3) all test results;
        (4) any conclusions of the professional relating to
    	
the allocation of parental responsibilities under Sections 602.5 and 602.7;
        (5) any recommendations of the professional
    	
concerning the allocation of parental responsibilities or the child's relocation; and
        (6) an explanation of any limitations in the
    	
evaluation or any reservations of the professional regarding the resulting recommendations.
    (c) Evaluation by a party's retained professional. In a proceeding to allocate parental responsibilities or to relocate a child, upon notice and motion made by a parent or any party to the litigation within a reasonable time before trial, the court shall order an evaluation to assist the court in determining the child's best interests unless the court finds that an evaluation under this Section is untimely or not in the best interests of the child. The evaluation may be in place of or in addition to any advice given to the court by a professional under subsection (b). A motion for an evaluation under this subsection must, at a minimum, identify the proposed evaluator and the evaluator's specialty or discipline. An order for an evaluation under this subsection must set forth the evaluator's name, address, and telephone number and the time, place, conditions, and scope of the evaluation. No person shall be required to travel an unreasonable distance for the evaluation. The party requesting the evaluation shall pay the evaluator's fees and costs unless otherwise ordered by the court.
    The evaluator's report must, at a minimum, set forth the following:
        (1) a description of the procedures employed during
    	
the evaluation;
        (2) a report of the data collected;
        (3) all test results;
        (4) any conclusions of the evaluator relating to the
    	
allocation of parental responsibilities under Sections 602.5 and 602.7;
        (5) any recommendations of the evaluator concerning
    	
the allocation of parental responsibilities or the child's relocation; and
        (6) an explanation of any limitations in the
    	
evaluation or any reservations of the evaluator regarding the resulting recommendations.
    A party who retains a professional to conduct an evaluation under this subsection shall cause the evaluator's written report to be sent to the attorneys of record no less than 60 days before the hearing on the allocation of parental responsibilities, unless otherwise ordered by the court; if a party fails to comply with this provision, the court may not admit the evaluator's report into evidence and may not allow the evaluator to testify.
    The party calling an evaluator to testify at trial shall disclose the evaluator as a controlled expert witness in accordance with the Supreme Court Rules.
    Any party to the litigation may call the evaluator as a witness. That party shall pay the evaluator's fees and costs for testifying, unless otherwise ordered by the court.
    (d) Investigation. Upon notice and a motion by a parent or any party to the litigation, or upon the court's own motion, the court may order an investigation and report to assist the court in allocating parental responsibilities. The investigation may be made by any agency, private entity, or individual deemed appropriate by the court. The agency, private entity, or individual appointed by the court must have expertise in the area of allocation of parental responsibilities. The court shall specify the purpose and scope of the investigation.
    The investigator's report must, at a minimum, set forth the following:
        (1) a description of the procedures employed during
    	
the investigation;
        (2) a report of the data collected;
        (3) all test results;
        (4) any conclusions of the investigator relating to
    	
the allocation of parental responsibilities under Sections 602.5 and 602.7;
        (5) any recommendations of the investigator
    	
concerning the allocation of parental responsibilities or the child's relocation; and
        (6) an explanation of any limitations in the
    	
investigation or any reservations of the investigator regarding the resulting recommendations.
    The investigator shall send his or her report to all attorneys of record, and to any party not represented, at least 60 days before the hearing on the allocation of parental responsibilities. The court shall examine and consider the investigator's report only after it has been admitted into evidence or after the parties have waived their right to cross-examine the investigator.
    The investigator shall make available to all attorneys of record, and to any party not represented, the investigator's file, and the names and addresses of all persons whom the investigator has consulted, except that if such disclosure would risk abuse to the party or any member of the party's immediate family or household or reveal the confidential address of a shelter for domestic violence victims, that address may be omitted from the report. Any party to the proceeding may call the investigator, or any person consulted by the investigator as a court's witness, for cross-examination. No fees shall be paid for any investigation by a governmental agency. The fees incurred by any other investigator shall be allocated in accordance with Section 508.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16; 99-763, eff. 1-1-17.)

    (750 ILCS 5/605) (from Ch. 40, par. 605)
    Sec. 605. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 86-659. Repealed by P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/606) (from Ch. 40, par. 606)
    Sec. 606. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-659, eff. 6-1-12. Repealed by P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/606.5)
    Sec. 606.5. Hearings.
    (a) Proceedings to allocate parental responsibilities shall receive priority in being set for hearing.
    (a-5) The court may tax as costs the payment of necessary travel and other expenses incurred by any person whose presence at the hearing the court deems necessary to determine the best interest of the child.
    (b) The court, without a jury, shall determine questions of law and fact.
    (c) Previous statements made by the child relating to any allegations that the child is an abused or neglected child within the meaning of the Abused and Neglected Child Reporting Act, or an abused or neglected minor within the meaning of the Juvenile Court Act of 1987, shall be admissible in evidence in a hearing concerning allocation of parental responsibilities in accordance with Section 11.1 of the Abused and Neglected Child Reporting Act. No such statement, however, if uncorroborated and not subject to cross-examination, shall be sufficient in itself to support a finding of abuse or neglect.
    (d) If the court finds that a public hearing may be detrimental to the child's best interests, the court shall exclude the public from the hearing, but the court may admit any person having:
        (1) a direct and legitimate interest in the case; or
        (2) a legitimate educational or research interest in
    	
the work of the court, but only with the permission of both parties and subject to court approval.
    (e) The court may make an appropriate order sealing the records of any interview, report, investigation, or testimony.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16; 99-763, eff. 1-1-17.)

    (750 ILCS 5/606.10)
    Sec. 606.10. Designation of custodian for purposes of other statutes. Solely for the purposes of all State and federal statutes that require a designation or determination of custody or a custodian, a parenting plan shall designate the parent who is allocated the majority of parenting time. This designation shall not affect parents' rights and responsibilities under the parenting plan. For purposes of Section 10-20.12b of the School Code only, the parent with the majority of parenting time is considered to have legal custody.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/607) (from Ch. 40, par. 607)
    Sec. 607. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 99-143, eff. 7-27-15. Repealed by P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/607.1) (from Ch. 40, par. 607.1)
    Sec. 607.1. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-1150, eff. 1-25-13. Repealed by P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/607.5)
    Sec. 607.5. Abuse of allocated parenting time.
    (a) The court shall provide an expedited procedure for the enforcement of allocated parenting time.
    (b) An action for the enforcement of allocated parenting time may be commenced by a parent or a person appointed under Section 506 by filing a petition setting forth: (i) the petitioner's name and residence address or mailing address, except that if the petition states that disclosure of petitioner's address would risk abuse of petitioner or any member of petitioner's family or household or reveal the confidential address of a shelter for domestic violence victims, that address may be omitted from the petition; (ii) the respondent's name and place of residence, place of employment, or mailing address; (iii) the terms of the parenting plan or allocation judgment then in effect; (iv) the nature of the violation of the allocation of parenting time, giving dates and other relevant information; and (v) that a reasonable attempt was made to resolve the dispute.
    (c) If the court finds by a preponderance of the evidence that a parent has not complied with allocated parenting time according to an approved parenting plan or a court order, the court, in the child's best interests, shall issue an order that may include one or more of the following:
        (1) an imposition of additional terms and conditions
    	
consistent with the court's previous allocation of parenting time or other order;
        (2) a requirement that either or both of the parties
    	
attend a parental education program at the expense of the non-complying parent;
        (3) upon consideration of all relevant factors,
    	
particularly a history or possibility of domestic violence, a requirement that the parties participate in family or individual counseling, the expense of which shall be allocated by the court; if counseling is ordered, all counseling sessions shall be confidential, and the communications in counseling shall not be used in any manner in litigation nor relied upon by an expert appointed by the court or retained by any party;
        (4) a requirement that the non-complying parent post
    	
a cash bond or other security to ensure future compliance, including a provision that the bond or other security may be forfeited to the other parent for payment of expenses on behalf of the child as the court shall direct;
        (5) a requirement that makeup parenting time be
    	
provided for the aggrieved parent or child under the following conditions:
            (A) that the parenting time is of the same type
        	
and duration as the parenting time that was denied, including but not limited to parenting time during weekends, on holidays, and on weekdays and during times when the child is not in school;
            (B) that the parenting time is made up within 6
        	
months after the noncompliance occurs, unless the period of time or holiday cannot be made up within 6 months, in which case the parenting time shall be made up within one year after the noncompliance occurs;
        (6) a finding that the non-complying parent is in
    	
contempt of court;
        (7) an imposition on the non-complying parent of an
    	
appropriate civil fine per incident of denied parenting time;
        (8) a requirement that the non-complying parent
    	
reimburse the other parent for all reasonable expenses incurred as a result of the violation of the parenting plan or court order; and
        (9) any other provision that may promote the child's
    	
best interests.
    (d) In addition to any other order entered under subsection (c), except for good cause shown, the court shall order a parent who has failed to provide allocated parenting time or to exercise allocated parenting time to pay the aggrieved party his or her reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and expenses associated with an action brought under this Section. If the court finds that the respondent in an action brought under this Section has not violated the allocated parenting time, the court may order the petitioner to pay the respondent's reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and expenses incurred in the action.
    (e) Nothing in this Section precludes a party from maintaining any other action as provided by law.
    (f) When the court issues an order holding a party in contempt for violation of a parenting time order and finds that the party engaged in parenting time abuse, the court may order one or more of the following:
        (1) Suspension of a party's Illinois driving
    	
privileges pursuant to Section 7-703 of the Illinois Vehicle Code until the court determines that the party is in compliance with the parenting time order. The court may also order that a party be issued a family financial responsibility driving permit that would allow limited driving privileges for employment, for medical purposes, and to transport a child to or from scheduled parenting time in order to comply with a parenting time order in accordance with subsection (a-1) of Section 7-702.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
        (2) Placement of a party on probation with such
    	
conditions of probation as the court deems advisable.
        (3) Sentencing of a party to periodic imprisonment
    	
for a period not to exceed 6 months; provided, that the court may permit the party to be released for periods of time during the day or night to:
            (A) work; or
            (B) conduct a business or other self-employed
        	
occupation.
        (4) Find that a party in engaging in parenting time
    	
abuse is guilty of a petty offense and should be fined an amount of no more than $500 for each finding of parenting time abuse.
    (g) When the court issues an order holding a party in contempt of court for violation of a parenting order, the clerk shall transmit a copy of the contempt order to the sheriff of the county. The sheriff shall furnish a copy of each contempt order to the Department of State Police on a daily basis in the form and manner required by the Department. The Department shall maintain a complete record and index of the contempt orders and make this data available to all local law enforcement agencies.
    (h) Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed to limit the court's contempt power.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16; 99-763, eff. 1-1-17.)

    (750 ILCS 5/607.6)
    Sec. 607.6. Counseling.
    (a) The court may order individual counseling for the child, family counseling for one or more of the parties and the child, or parental education for one or more of the parties, if it finds one or more of the following:
        (1) both parents or all parties agree to the order;
        (2) the child's physical health is endangered or that
    	
the child's emotional development is impaired;
        (3) abuse of allocated parenting time under Section
    	
607.5 has occurred; or
        (4) one or both of the parties have violated the
    	
allocation judgment with regard to conduct affecting or in the presence of the child.
    (b) The court may apportion the costs of counseling between the parties as appropriate.
    (c) The remedies provided in this Section are in addition to, and do not diminish or abridge in any way, the court's power to exercise its authority through contempt or other proceedings.
    (d) All counseling sessions shall be confidential. The communications in counseling shall not be used in any manner in litigation nor relied upon by any expert appointed by the court or retained by any party.
(Source: P.A. 99-763, eff. 1-1-17.)

    (750 ILCS 5/608) (from Ch. 40, par. 608)
    Sec. 608. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 94-640, eff. 1-1-06. Repealed by P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/609) (from Ch. 40, par. 609)
    Sec. 609. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 96-331, eff. 1-1-10. Repealed by P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/609.2)
    Sec. 609.2. Parent's relocation.
    (a) A parent's relocation constitutes a substantial change in circumstances for purposes of Section 610.5.
    (b) A parent who has been allocated a majority of parenting time or either parent who has been allocated equal parenting time may seek to relocate with a child.
    (c) A parent intending a relocation, as that term is defined in paragraph (1), (2), or (3) of subsection (g) of Section 600 of this Act, must provide written notice of the relocation to the other parent under the parenting plan or allocation judgment. A copy of the notice required under this Section shall be filed with the clerk of the circuit court. The court may waive or seal some or all of the information required in the notice if there is a history of domestic violence.
    (d) The notice must provide at least 60 days' written notice before the relocation unless such notice is impracticable (in which case written notice shall be given at the earliest date practicable) or unless otherwise ordered by the court. At a minimum, the notice must set forth the following:
        (1) the intended date of the parent's relocation;
        (2) the address of the parent's intended new
    	
residence, if known; and
        (3) the length of time the relocation will last, if
    	
the relocation is not for an indefinite or permanent period.
    The court may consider a parent's failure to comply with the notice requirements of this Section without good cause (i) as a factor in determining whether the parent's relocation is in good faith; and (ii) as a basis for awarding reasonable attorney's fees and costs resulting from the parent's failure to comply with these provisions.
    (e) If the non-relocating parent signs the notice that was provided pursuant to subsection (c) and the relocating parent files the notice with the court, relocation shall be allowed without any further court action. The court shall modify the parenting plan or allocation judgment to accommodate a parent's relocation as agreed by the parents, as long as the agreed modification is in the child's best interests.
    (f) If the non-relocating parent objects to the relocation, fails to sign the notice provided under subsection (c), or the parents cannot agree on modification of the parenting plan or allocation judgment, the parent seeking relocation must file a petition seeking permission to relocate.
    (g) The court shall modify the parenting plan or allocation judgment in accordance with the child's best interests. The court shall consider the following factors:
        (1) the circumstances and reasons for the intended
    	
relocation;
        (2) the reasons, if any, why a parent is objecting to
    	
the intended relocation;
        (3) the history and quality of each parent's
    	
relationship with the child and specifically whether a parent has substantially failed or refused to exercise the parental responsibilities allocated to him or her under the parenting plan or allocation judgment;
        (4) the educational opportunities for the child at
    	
the existing location and at the proposed new location;
        (5) the presence or absence of extended family at the
    	
existing location and at the proposed new location;
        (6) the anticipated impact of the relocation on the
    	
child;
        (7) whether the court will be able to fashion a
    	
reasonable allocation of parental responsibilities between all parents if the relocation occurs;
        (8) the wishes of the child, taking into account the
    	
child's maturity and ability to express reasoned and independent preferences as to relocation;
        (9) possible arrangements for the exercise of
    	
parental responsibilities appropriate to the parents' resources and circumstances and the developmental level of the child;
        (10) minimization of the impairment to a parent-child
    	
relationship caused by a parent's relocation; and
        (11) any other relevant factors bearing on the
    	
child's best interests.
    (h) If a parent moves with the child 25 miles or less from the child's current primary residence to a new primary residence outside Illinois, Illinois continues to be the home state of the child under subsection (c) of Section 202 of the Uniform Child-Custody Jurisdiction and Enforcement Act. Any subsequent move from the new primary residence outside Illinois greater than 25 miles from the child's original primary residence in Illinois must be in compliance with the provisions of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/609.5)
    Sec. 609.5. Notification of remarriage or residency with a sex offender. A parent who intends to marry or reside with a sex offender, and knows or should know that the person with whom he or she intends to marry or reside is a sex offender, shall provide reasonable notice to the other parent with whom he or she has a minor child prior to the marriage or the commencement of the residency.
(Source: P.A. 94-643, eff. 1-1-06.)

    (750 ILCS 5/610) (from Ch. 40, par. 610)
    Sec. 610. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-659, eff. 6-1-12. Repealed by P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/610.5)
    Sec. 610.5. Modification.
    (a) Unless by stipulation of the parties or except as provided in Section 603.10 of this Act, no motion to modify an order allocating parental decision-making responsibilities, not including parenting time, may be made earlier than 2 years after its date, unless the court permits it to be made on the basis of affidavits that there is reason to believe the child's present environment may endanger seriously his or her mental, moral, or physical health or significantly impair the child's emotional development. Parenting time may be modified at any time, without a showing of serious endangerment, upon a showing of changed circumstances that necessitates modification to serve the best interests of the child.
    (b) (Blank).
    (c) Except in a case concerning the modification of any restriction of parental responsibilities under Section 603.10, the court shall modify a parenting plan or allocation judgment when necessary to serve the child's best interests if the court finds, by a preponderance of the evidence, that on the basis of facts that have arisen since the entry of the existing parenting plan or allocation judgment or were not anticipated therein, a substantial change has occurred in the circumstances of the child or of either parent and that a modification is necessary to serve the child's best interests.
    (d) The court shall modify a parenting plan or allocation judgment in accordance with a parental agreement, unless it finds that the modification is not in the child's best interests.
    (e) The court may modify a parenting plan or allocation judgment without a showing of changed circumstances if (i) the modification is in the child's best interests; and (ii) any of the following are proven as to the modification:
        (1) the modification reflects the actual arrangement
    	
under which the child has been receiving care, without parental objection, for the 6 months preceding the filing of the petition for modification, provided that the arrangement is not the result of a parent's acquiescence resulting from circumstances that negated the parent's ability to give meaningful consent;
        (2) the modification constitutes a minor modification
    	
in the parenting plan or allocation judgment;
        (3) the modification is necessary to modify an agreed
    	
parenting plan or allocation judgment that the court would not have ordered or approved under Section 602.5 or 602.7 had the court been aware of the circumstances at the time of the order or approval; or
        (4) the parties agree to the modification.
    (f) Attorney's fees and costs shall be assessed against a party seeking modification if the court finds that the modification action is vexatious or constitutes harassment. If the court finds that a parent has repeatedly filed frivolous motions for modification, the court may bar the parent from filing a motion for modification for a period of time.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16; 99-763, eff. 1-1-17.)

    (750 ILCS 5/611) (from Ch. 40, par. 611)
    Sec. 611. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 83-1396. Repealed by P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)


 
    (750 ILCS 5/Pt. VII heading)
PART VII
MISCELLANEOUS

    (750 ILCS 5/701) (from Ch. 40, par. 701)
    Sec. 701. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 80-923. Repealed by P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/702) (from Ch. 40, par. 702)
    Sec. 702. Maintenance in Case of Bigamy.) When a dissolution of marriage is granted to a person who shall, in good faith, have intermarried with a person having at the time of such marriage, another spouse or spouses living, the court may, nevertheless, allow the petitioner maintenance in the same manner as in other cases of dissolution of marriage; but no such allowance shall be made as will be inconsistent with the rights of such other spouse or spouses, which shall first be ascertained by the court before the granting of such maintenance.
(Source: P.A. 80-923.)

    (750 ILCS 5/703) (from Ch. 40, par. 703)
    Sec. 703. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 81-231. Repealed by P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/704) (from Ch. 40, par. 704)
    Sec. 704. Public Aid Provisions.) Except as provided in Sections 709 through 712, if maintenance, child support or both, is awarded to persons who are recipients of aid under "The Illinois Public Aid Code", the court shall direct the husband or wife, as the case may be, to make the payments to (1) the Department of Healthcare and Family Services if the persons are recipients under Articles III, IV or V of the Code, or (2) the local governmental unit responsible for their support if they are recipients under Article VI or VII of the Code. The order shall permit the Department of Healthcare and Family Services or the local governmental unit, as the case may be, to direct that subsequent payments be made directly to the former spouse, the children, or both, or to some person or agency in their behalf, upon removal of the former spouse or children from the public aid rolls; and upon such direction and removal of the recipients from the public aid rolls, the Department or local governmental unit, as the case requires, shall give written notice of such action to the court.
(Source: P.A. 95-331, eff. 8-21-07.)

    (750 ILCS 5/705) (from Ch. 40, par. 705)
    Sec. 705. Support payments; receiving and disbursing agents.
    (1) The provisions of this Section shall apply, except as provided in Sections 709 through 712.
    (2) In a dissolution of marriage action filed in a county of less than 3 million population in which an order or judgment for child support is entered, and in supplementary proceedings in any such county to enforce or vary the terms of such order or judgment arising out of an action for dissolution of marriage filed in such county, the court, except as it otherwise orders, under subsection (4) of this Section, may direct that child support payments be made to the clerk of the court.
    (3) In a dissolution of marriage action filed in any county of 3 million or more population in which an order or judgment for child support is entered, and in supplementary proceedings in any such county to enforce or vary the terms of such order or judgment arising out of an action for dissolution of marriage filed in such county, the court, except as it otherwise orders under subsection (4) of this Section, may direct that child support payments be made either to the clerk of the court or to the Court Service Division of the County Department of Public Aid. After the effective date of this Act, the court, except as it otherwise orders under subsection (4) of this Section, may direct that child support payments be made either to the clerk of the court or to the Department of Healthcare and Family Services.
    (4) In a dissolution of marriage action or supplementary proceedings involving maintenance or child support payments, or both, to persons who are recipients of aid under the Illinois Public Aid Code, the court shall direct that such payments be made to (a) the Department of Healthcare and Family Services if the persons are recipients under Articles III, IV, or V of the Code, or (b) the local governmental unit responsible for their support if they are recipients under Articles VI or VII of the Code. In accordance with federal law and regulations, the Department of Healthcare and Family Services may continue to collect current maintenance payments or child support payments, or both, after those persons cease to receive public assistance and until termination of services under Article X of the Illinois Public Aid Code. The Department of Healthcare and Family Services shall pay the net amount collected to those persons after deducting any costs incurred in making the collection or any collection fee from the amount of any recovery made. The order shall permit the Department of Healthcare and Family Services or the local governmental unit, as the case may be, to direct that payments be made directly to the former spouse, the children, or both, or to some person or agency in their behalf, upon removal of the former spouse or children from the public aid rolls or upon termination of services under Article X of the Illinois Public Aid Code; and upon such direction, the Department or local governmental unit, as the case requires, shall give notice of such action to the court in writing or by electronic transmission.
    (5) All clerks of the court and the Court Service Division of a County Department of Public Aid and, after the effective date of this Act, all clerks of the court and the Department of Healthcare and Family Services, receiving child support payments under subsections (2) and (3) of this Section shall disburse the payments to the person or persons entitled thereto under the terms of the order or judgment. They shall establish and maintain current records of all moneys received and disbursed and of defaults and delinquencies in required payments. The court, by order or rule, shall make provision for the carrying out of these duties.
    Payments under this Section to the Department of Healthcare and Family Services pursuant to the Child Support Enforcement Program established by Title IV-D of the Social Security Act shall be paid into the Child Support Enforcement Trust Fund. All payments under this Section to the Illinois Department of Human Services shall be deposited in the DHS Recoveries Trust Fund. Disbursements from these funds shall be as provided in the Illinois Public Aid Code. Payments received by a local governmental unit shall be deposited in that unit's General Assistance Fund. Any order of court directing payment of child support to a clerk of court or the Court Service Division of a County Department of Public Aid, which order has been entered on or after August 14, 1961, and prior to the effective date of this Act, may be amended by the court in line with this Act; and orders involving payments of maintenance or child support to recipients of public aid may in like manner be amended to conform to this Act.
    (6) No filing fee or costs will be required in any action brought at the request of the Department of Healthcare and Family Services in any proceeding under this Act. However, any such fees or costs may be assessed by the court against the respondent in the court's order of support or any modification thereof in a proceeding under this Act.
    (7) For those cases in which child support is payable to the clerk of the circuit court for transmittal to the Department of Healthcare and Family Services (formerly Illinois Department of Public Aid) by order of court or upon notification by the Department of Healthcare and Family Services (formerly Illinois Department of Public Aid), the clerk shall transmit all such payments, within 4 working days of receipt, to insure that funds are available for immediate distribution by the Department to the person or entity entitled thereto in accordance with standards of the Child Support Enforcement Program established under Title IV-D of the Social Security Act. The clerk shall notify the Department of the date of receipt and amount thereof at the time of transmittal. Where the clerk has entered into an agreement of cooperation with the Department to record the terms of child support orders and payments made thereunder directly into the Department's automated data processing system, the clerk shall account for, transmit and otherwise distribute child support payments in accordance with such agreement in lieu of the requirements contained herein.
    In any action filed in a county with a population of 1,000,000 or less, the court shall assess against the respondent in any order of maintenance or child support any sum up to $36 annually authorized by ordinance of the county board to be collected by the clerk of the court as costs for administering the collection and disbursement of maintenance and child support payments. Such sum shall be in addition to and separate from amounts ordered to be paid as maintenance or child support.
    (8) To the extent the provisions of this Section are inconsistent with the requirements pertaining to the State Disbursement Unit under Section 507.1 of this Act and Section 10-26 of the Illinois Public Aid Code, the requirements pertaining to the State Disbursement Unit shall apply.
(Source: P.A. 94-88, eff. 1-1-06; 95-331, eff. 8-21-07.)

    (750 ILCS 5/706.1) (from Ch. 40, par. 706.1)
    Sec. 706.1. Withholding of Income to Secure Payment of Support. Orders for support entered under this Act are subject to the Income Withholding for Support Act.
(Source: P.A. 90-18, eff. 7-1-97; 90-425, eff. 8-15-97; 90-655, eff. 7-30-98; 90-673, eff. 1-1-99; 90-790, eff. 8-14-98; 91-357, eff. 7-29-99.)

    (750 ILCS 5/706.2) (from Ch. 40, par. 706.2)
    Sec. 706.2. Posting Security, Bond or Guarantee to Secure Payment. The court may require a parent to post security, bond or give some other guarantee of a character and amount sufficient to assure payment of any amount of support due.
(Source: P.A. 84-758.)

    (750 ILCS 5/706.3)
    Sec. 706.3. Information concerning obligors.
    (a) In this Section:
    "Arrearage", "delinquency", "obligor", and "order for support" have the meanings attributed to those terms in the Income Withholding for Support Act.
    "Consumer reporting agency" has the meaning attributed to that term in Section 603(f) of the Fair Credit Reporting Act, 15 U.S.C. 1681a(f).
    (b) Whenever a court of competent jurisdiction finds that an obligor either owes an arrearage of more than $10,000, is delinquent in payment of an amount equal to at least 3 months' support obligation pursuant to an order for support, or fails to pay the child support annual fee for a period of 3 years, the court shall direct the clerk of the court to make information concerning the obligor available to consumer reporting agencies.
    (c) Whenever a court of competent jurisdiction finds that an obligor either owes an arrearage of more than $10,000 or is delinquent in payment of an amount equal to at least 3 months' support obligation pursuant to an order for support, the court shall direct the clerk of the court to cause the obligor's name and address to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the area in which the obligor resides. The clerk shall cause the obligor's name and address to be published only after sending to the obligor at the obligor's last known address, by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice of intent to publish the information. This subsection (c) applies only if the obligor resides in the county in which the clerk of the court holds office.
(Source: P.A. 93-836, eff. 1-1-05.)

    (750 ILCS 5/707) (from Ch. 40, par. 707)
    Sec. 707. Certificate of Dissolution or Invalidity of Marriage - Filing with Department of Public Health.) A certificate of each dissolution of marriage or declaration of invalidity of marriage ordered in this State shall be filed with the Illinois Department of Public Health on a form furnished by such Department. The form shall contain the social security numbers of the parties whose marriage has been dissolved or declared invalid. This form shall be prepared by the person filing the petition for dissolution of marriage or declaration of invalidity of marriage and shall be presented to the judge of the court for his inspection prior to the entry of the final order. Failure to comply with this Act shall not invalidate any judgment of dissolution of marriage or declaration of invalidity of marriage. Immediately after the judgment is granted, the clerk of the court shall complete the remaining entries on the certificate. Within 45 days after the close of the month in which the judgment is rendered, the clerk shall forward the certificate to the Illinois Department of Public Health.
(Source: P.A. 90-18, eff. 7-1-97.)

    (750 ILCS 5/708) (from Ch. 40, par. 708)
    Sec. 708. In any proceeding brought under this Act, the identification of a party's street address shall not be required for any purpose if the court finds that the physical, mental or emotional health of a party or that of a minor child, or both, would be seriously endangered by disclosure of the party's address.
(Source: P.A. 81-419.)

    (750 ILCS 5/709) (from Ch. 40, par. 709)
    Sec. 709. Mandatory child support payments to clerk.
    (a) As of January 1, 1982, child support orders entered in any county covered by this subsection shall be made pursuant to the provisions of Sections 709 through 712 of this Act. For purposes of these Sections, the term "child support payment" or "payment" shall include any payment ordered to be made solely for the purpose of the support of a child or children or any payment ordered for general support which includes any amount for support of any child or children.
    The provisions of Sections 709 through 712 shall be applicable to any county with a population of 2 million or more and to any other county which notifies the Supreme Court of its desire to be included within the coverage of these Sections and is certified pursuant to Supreme Court Rules.
    The effective date of inclusion, however, shall be subject to approval of the application for reimbursement of the costs of the support program by the Department of Healthcare and Family Services as provided in Section 712.
    (b) In any proceeding for a dissolution of marriage, legal separation, or declaration of invalidity of marriage, or in any supplementary proceedings in which a judgment or modification thereof for the payment of child support is entered on or after January 1, 1982, in any county covered by Sections 709 through 712, and the person entitled to payment is receiving a grant of financial aid under Article IV of the Illinois Public Aid Code or has applied and qualified for child support enforcement services under Section 10-1 of that Code, the court shall direct: (1) that such payments be made to the clerk of the court and (2) that the parties affected shall each thereafter notify the clerk of any change of address or change in other conditions that may affect the administration of the order, including the fact that a party who was previously not on public aid has become a recipient of public aid, within 10 days of such change. All notices sent to the obligor's last known address on file with the clerk shall be deemed sufficient to proceed with enforcement pursuant to the provisions of Sections 709 through 712.
    In all other cases, the court may direct that payments be made to the clerk of the court.
    (c) Except as provided in subsection (d) of this Section, the clerk shall disburse the payments to the person or persons entitled thereto under the terms of the order or judgment.
    (d) The court shall determine, prior to the entry of the support order, if the party who is to receive the support is presently receiving public aid or has a current application for public aid pending and shall enter the finding on the record.
    If the person entitled to payment is a recipient of aid under the Illinois Public Aid Code, the clerk, upon being informed of this fact by finding of the court, by notification by the party entitled to payment, by the Department of Healthcare and Family Services (formerly Illinois Department of Public Aid) or by the local governmental unit, shall make all payments to: (1) the Department of Healthcare and Family Services if the person is a recipient under Article III, IV, or V of the Code or (2) the local governmental unit responsible for his or her support if the person is a recipient under Article VI or VII of the Code. In accordance with federal law and regulations, the Department of Healthcare and Family Services may continue to collect current maintenance payments or child support payments, or both, after those persons cease to receive public assistance and until termination of services under Article X of the Illinois Public Aid Code. The Department of Healthcare and Family Services shall pay the net amount collected to those persons after deducting any costs incurred in making the collection or any collection fee from the amount of any recovery made. Upon termination of public aid payments to such a recipient or termination of services under Article X of the Illinois Public Aid Code, the Department of Healthcare and Family Services or the appropriate local governmental unit shall notify the clerk in writing or by electronic transmission that all subsequent payments are to be sent directly to the person entitled thereto.
    Payments under this Section to the Department of Healthcare and Family Services pursuant to the Child Support Enforcement Program established by Title IV-D of the Social Security Act shall be paid into the Child Support Enforcement Trust Fund. All payments under this Section to the Illinois Department of Human Services shall be deposited in the DHS Recoveries Trust Fund. Disbursements from these funds shall be as provided in the Illinois Public Aid Code. Payments received by a local governmental unit shall be deposited in that unit's General Assistance Fund.
    (e) Any order or judgment may be amended by the court, upon its own motion or upon the motion of either party, to conform with the provisions of Sections 709 through 712, either as to the requirement of making payments to the clerk or, where payments are already being made to the clerk, as to the statutory fees provided for under Section 711.
    (f) The clerk may invest in any interest bearing account or in any securities, monies collected for the benefit of a payee, where such payee cannot be found; however, the investment may be only for the period until the clerk is able to locate and present the payee with such monies. The clerk may invest in any interest bearing account, or in any securities, monies collected for the benefit of any other payee; however, this does not alter the clerk's obligation to make payments to the payee in a timely manner. Any interest or capital gains accrued shall be for the benefit of the county and shall be paid into the special fund established in subsection (b) of Section 711.
    (g) The clerk shall establish and maintain a payment record of all monies received and disbursed and such record shall constitute prima facie evidence of such payment and non-payment, as the case may be.
    (h) For those cases in which child support is payable to the clerk of the circuit court for transmittal to the Department of Healthcare and Family Services (formerly Illinois Department of Public Aid) by order of court or upon notification by the Department of Healthcare and Family Services (formerly Illinois Department of Public Aid), the clerk shall transmit all such payments, within 4 working days of receipt, to insure that funds are available for immediate distribution by the Department to the person or entity entitled thereto in accordance with standards of the Child Support Enforcement Program established under Title IV-D of the Social Security Act. The clerk shall notify the Department of the date of receipt and amount thereof at the time of transmittal. Where the clerk has entered into an agreement of cooperation with the Department to record the terms of child support orders and payments made thereunder directly into the Department's automated data processing system, the clerk shall account for, transmit and otherwise distribute child support payments in accordance with such agreement in lieu of the requirements contained herein.
    (i) To the extent the provisions of this Section are inconsistent with the requirements pertaining to the State Disbursement Unit under Section 507.1 of this Act and Section 10-26 of the Illinois Public Aid Code, the requirements pertaining to the State Disbursement Unit shall apply.
(Source: P.A. 94-88, eff. 1-1-06; 95-331, eff. 8-21-07.)

    (750 ILCS 5/710) (from Ch. 40, par. 710)
    Sec. 710. Enforcement; Penalties.
    (a) In counties certified as included under the provisions of Sections 709 through 712 and whose application for reimbursement is approved, there shall be instituted a child support enforcement program to be conducted by the clerk of the circuit court and the state's attorney of the county. The program is to be limited to enforcement of child support orders entered pursuant to this Act.
    The child support enforcement program is to be conducted only on behalf of dependent children included in a grant of financial aid under Article IV of The Illinois Public Aid Code and parties who apply and qualify for child support enforcement services pursuant to Section 10-1 of such Code.
    Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit the establishment of a child support enforcement program by the clerk of the circuit court in cooperation with the State's Attorney of the county.
    (b) In the event of a delinquency in payment, as determined from the record maintained by the clerk in a county covered by the child support enforcement program, such clerk shall notify both the party obligated to make the payment, hereinafter called the payor, and the recipient of such payment, hereinafter called the payee, of such delinquency and that if the amount then due and owing is not remitted in the time period required by circuit court rules, the matter will be referred to the state's attorney for enforcement proceedings. Upon failure of the payor to remit as required, the clerk shall refer the matter to the state's attorney, except as provided by rule of the circuit court.
    (c) Upon referral from the clerk, the state's attorney shall promptly initiate enforcement proceedings against the payor. Legal representation by the state's attorney shall be limited to child support and shall not extend to visitation, custody, property or other matters; however, if the payor properly files pleadings raising such matters during the course of the child support hearing and the court finds that it has jurisdiction of such matters, the payee shall be granted the opportunity to obtain a continuance in order to secure representation for those other matters, and the court shall not delay entry of an appropriate support order pending the disposition of such other matters.
    If the state's attorney does not commence enforcement proceedings within 30 days, the clerk shall inform the court which, upon its own motion, shall appoint counsel for purposes of enforcement. The fees and expenses of such counsel shall be paid by the payor and shall not be paid by the State.
    Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prevent a payee from instituting independent enforcement proceedings or limit the remedies available to payee in such proceedings. However, absent the exercise under this provision of a private right of enforcement, enforcement shall be as otherwise provided in this Section.
    (d) At the time any support order is entered, the payee shall be informed of the procedure used for enforcement and shall be given the address and telephone number both of the clerk and of the Child and Spouse Support Unit as provided in Section 712.
    The payee shall be informed that, if no action is taken within 2 months of any complaint to the clerk, payee may contact the Unit to seek assistance in obtaining enforcement.
    (e) Upon a finding that payor is in default and that such non-payment is for a period of two months and that such non-payment is without good cause, the court shall order the payor to pay a sum equal to 2% of the arrearage as a penalty along with his payment.
    The court may further assess against the payor any fees and expenses incurred in the enforcement of any order or the reasonable value thereof and may impose any penalty otherwise available to it in a case of contempt.
    All penalties, fees and expenses assessed against the payor pursuant to this subsection are to cover the expenses of enforcement, are to be paid to the clerk and are to be placed by him in the special fund provided for in Section 711.
    (f) Any person not covered by the child support enforcement program may institute private and independent proceedings to enforce payment of support.
(Source: P.A. 92-590, eff. 7-1-02.)

    (750 ILCS 5/711) (from Ch. 40, par. 711)
    Sec. 711. Fees. (a) To reimburse any covered county for the cost of maintaining the child support enforcement program pursuant to Section 710, the court shall order any payor making payments directly to the clerk to pay the clerk a fee at the rate of $3.00 per month for every month the order is in effect. However, any fee collected for any case not included in such program as provided in subsection (a) of Section 710 may be used by the county for any purpose.
    The fee shall be payable semi-annually, being due with the support payment due on or next immediately following January 1 and July 1. The fee shall be payable in advance as herein provided, except for the initial payment which shall be paid at the time of the initial child support payment to the clerk. The amount of the fee due for the initial period shall be computed from the date the support order first takes effect to the next January 1 or July 1, whichever occurs first.
    Unless paid in cash, the payment of the fee shall be by a separate instrument from the support payment and shall be made to the order of the clerk.
    (b) All monies collected in fees by the clerk and all monies received by him upon assessment under Section 710 for reimbursement for the costs of enforcement shall be held in a special fund, the contents of which the clerk shall pay over to the county treasury every month or at such other period as the treasurer shall determine.
(Source: P.A. 82-1002.)

    (750 ILCS 5/712) (from Ch. 40, par. 712)
    Sec. 712. (a) The Supreme Court may make Rules concerning the certification of counties for inclusion in the child support enforcement program and the application of the procedures created by Sections 709 through 712 in the various counties.
    The Supreme Court shall inform each circuit court and clerk of the court of the availability of the program to reimburse counties desiring to participate in the program of enforcement of child support payments.
    The Supreme Court shall also distribute to each circuit court and clerk of the court any materials prepared by the Child and Spouse Support Unit comparing child support enforcement in counties included and not included in this program.
    (b) The Department of Healthcare and Family Services, through the Child and Spouse Support Unit provided for by Section 10-3.1 of the Illinois Public Aid Code, shall have general supervision of the child support programs created by Sections 709 through 712 and shall have the powers and duties provided in this Section, including the following:
        (1) to make advance payments to any county included
    	
in the program for expenses in preparing programs to enforce payment of child support to the clerk from appropriations made for such purposes by the General Assembly;
        (2) to make payments to each covered county to pay
    	
for its reasonable expenses actually necessary to maintain a continuing program not paid for by fees, penalties, or other monies; provided that, with respect to that portion of the program on behalf of dependent children included in a grant of financial aid under Article IV of the Illinois Public Aid Code the Unit shall pay only such expenses as is its current practice or as it may deem appropriate; provided further that the Unit shall only pay expenses of the entire program subject to the availability of federal monies to pay the majority of expenses of the entire child support enforcement program; provided further that the Unit or Department may set standards relating to enforcement which have to be met by any county seeking to enter a contract with the Department for reimbursement of expenses of the entire enforcement program prior to an application for reimbursement being approved and the contract granted; and provided further that such standards may relate to, but are not limited to the following factors: maintenance of the payment record, the definition of delinquency; the period of time in which a delinquency must be determined, the payor notified, the remittance received, the referral to the state's attorney made, and the payment remitted by the clerk to the payee or other party entitled to the payment; the conditions under which referral will not be made to the state's attorney; and the definitions and procedures for other matters necessary for the conduct and operation of the program;
        (3) to monitor the various local programs for
    	
enforcement of child support payments to the clerk;
        (4) to act to encourage enforcement whenever local
    	
enforcement procedures are inadequate;
        (5) to receive monies from any source for assistance
    	
in enforcement of child support; and
        (6) to assist any county desirous of assistance in
    	
establishing and maintaining a child support enforcement program.
    (c) Any county may apply for financial assistance to the Unit to initiate or maintain a program of child support enforcement. Every county which desires such assistance shall apply according to procedures established by the Unit. In its application, it shall state the following: financial needs, personnel requirements, anticipated caseloads, any amounts collected or anticipated in fees or penalties, and any other information required by the Unit.
    (d) In the case that any advance money is given to any county under this Section to initiate an enforcement system, the county shall reimburse the state within 2 years from the date such monies are given to it. The Unit may establish an appropriate schedule of reimbursement for any county.
    (e) In the event of the unavailability of federal monies to pay for the greater part of the costs to a county of the child support enforcement program under Sections 709 through 712 and the resulting cessation of state participation, the operation of the child support enforcement program under Sections 709 through 712 shall terminate. The date and the method of termination shall be determined by Supreme Court Rule.
(Source: P.A. 95-331, eff. 8-21-07.)

    (750 ILCS 5/713) (from Ch. 40, par. 713)
    Sec. 713. Attachment of the Body. As used in this Section, "obligor" has the same meaning ascribed to such term in the Income Withholding for Support Act.
    (a) In any proceeding to enforce an order for support, where the obligor has failed to appear in court pursuant to order of court and after due notice thereof, the court may enter an order for the attachment of the body of the obligor. Notices under this Section shall be served upon the obligor by any means authorized under subsection (a-5) of Section 505. The attachment order shall fix an amount of escrow which is equal to a minimum of 20% of the total child support arrearage alleged by the obligee in sworn testimony to be due and owing. The attachment order shall direct the Sheriff of any county in Illinois to take the obligor into custody and shall set the number of days following release from custody for a hearing to be held at which the obligor must appear, if he is released under subsection (b) of this Section.
    (b) If the obligor is taken into custody, the Sheriff shall take the obligor before the court which entered the attachment order. However, the Sheriff may release the person after he or she has deposited the amount of escrow ordered by the court pursuant to local procedures for the posting of bond. The Sheriff shall advise the obligor of the hearing date at which the obligor is required to appear.
    (c) Any escrow deposited pursuant to this Section shall be transmitted to the Clerk of the Circuit Court for the county in which the order for attachment of the body of the obligor was entered. Any Clerk who receives money deposited into escrow pursuant to this Section shall notify the obligee, public office or legal counsel whose name appears on the attachment order of the court date at which the obligor is required to appear and the amount deposited into escrow. The Clerk shall disburse such money to the obligee only under an order from the court that entered the attachment order pursuant to this Section.
    (d) Whenever an obligor is taken before the court by the Sheriff, or appears in court after the court has ordered the attachment of his body, the court shall:
        (1) hold a hearing on the complaint or petition that
    	
gave rise to the attachment order. For purposes of determining arrearages that are due and owing by the obligor, the court shall accept the previous sworn testimony of the obligee as true and the appearance of the obligee shall not be required. The court shall require sworn testimony of the obligor as to the last 4 digits of his or her Social Security number, income, employment, bank accounts, property and any other assets. If there is a dispute as to the total amount of arrearages, the court shall proceed as in any other case as to the undisputed amounts; and
        (2) order the Clerk of the Circuit Court to disburse
    	
to the obligee or public office money held in escrow pursuant to this Section if the court finds that the amount of arrearages exceeds the amount of the escrow. Amounts received by the obligee or public office shall be deducted from the amount of the arrearages.
    (e) If the obligor fails to appear in court after being notified of the court date by the Sheriff upon release from custody, the court shall order any monies deposited into escrow to be immediately released to the obligee or public office and shall proceed under subsection (a) of this Section by entering another order for the attachment of the body of the obligor.
    (f) This Section shall apply to any order for support issued under the "Illinois Marriage and Dissolution of Marriage Act", approved September 22, 1977, as amended; the Illinois Parentage Act of 2015; the "Illinois Parentage Act of 1984", effective July 1, 1985, as amended; the "Revised Uniform Reciprocal Enforcement of Support Act", approved August 28, 1969, as amended; "The Illinois Public Aid Code", approved April 11, 1967, as amended; the Non-Support Punishment Act; and the "Non-support of Spouse and Children Act", approved June 8, 1953, as amended.
    (g) Any escrow established pursuant to this Section for the purpose of providing support shall not be subject to fees collected by the Clerk of the Circuit Court for any other escrow.
(Source: P.A. 99-85, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/714)
    Sec. 714. Information to locate putative fathers and noncustodial parents.
    (a) Upon request by a public office, employers, labor unions, and telephone companies shall provide location information concerning putative fathers and noncustodial parents for the purpose of establishing a child's paternity or establishing, enforcing, or modifying a child support obligation. The term "public office" is defined as set forth in the Income Withholding for Support Act. In this Section, "location information" means information about (i) the physical whereabouts of a putative father or noncustodial parent, (ii) the employer of the putative father or noncustodial parent, or (iii) the salary, wages, and other compensation paid and the health insurance coverage provided to the putative father or noncustodial parent by the employer of the putative father or noncustodial parent or by a labor union of which the putative father or noncustodial parent is a member. An employer, labor union, or telephone company shall respond to the request of the public office within 15 days after receiving the request. Any employer, labor union, or telephone company that willfully fails to fully respond within the 15-day period shall be subject to a penalty of $100 for each day that the response is not provided to the public office after the 15-day period has expired. The penalty may be collected in a civil action, which may be brought against the employer, labor union, or telephone company in favor of the public office.
    (b) Upon being served with a subpoena (including an administrative subpoena as authorized by law), a utility company or cable television company must provide location information to a public office for the purpose of establishing a child's paternity or establishing, enforcing, or modifying a child support obligation.
    (c) Notwithstanding the provisions of any other State or local law to the contrary, an employer, labor union, telephone company, utility company, or cable television company shall not be liable to any person for disclosure of location information under the requirements of this Section, except for willful and wanton misconduct.
(Source: P.A. 93-116, eff. 7-10-03.)


 
    (750 ILCS 5/Pt. VIII heading)
PART VIII
APPLICATION AND SEVERABILITY

    (750 ILCS 5/801) (from Ch. 40, par. 801)
    Sec. 801. Application.
    (a) This Act applies to all proceedings commenced on or after its effective date.
    (b) This Act applies to all pending actions and proceedings commenced prior to its effective date with respect to issues on which a judgment has not been entered. Evidence adduced after the effective date of this Act shall be in compliance with this Act.
    (c) This Act applies to all proceedings commenced after its effective date for the modification of a judgment or order entered prior to the effective date of this Act.
    (d) In any action or proceeding in which an appeal was pending or a new trial was ordered prior to the effective date of this Act, the law in effect at the time of the order sustaining the appeal or the new trial governs the appeal, the new trial, and any subsequent trial or appeal.
    (e) On and after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 99th General Assembly, the term "parenting time" is used in place of "visitation" with respect to time during which a parent is responsible for exercising caretaking functions and non-significant decision-making responsibilities concerning the child. On and after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 99th General Assembly, the term "parental responsibility" is used in place of "custody" and related terms such as "custodial" and "custodian". It is not the intent of the General Assembly to modify or change the rights arising under any order entered concerning custody or visitation prior to the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 99th General Assembly.
(Source: P.A. 99-90, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (750 ILCS 5/802) (from Ch. 40, par. 802)
    Sec. 802. Court Rules.) The Supreme Court and, subject to the Rules of the Supreme Court, the respective circuit courts, may adopt such rules as they deem necessary and expedient to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(Source: P.A. 80-923.)