HUMAN RIGHTS
(775 ILCS 5/) Illinois Human Rights Act.

 
    (775 ILCS 5/Art. 1 heading)
ARTICLE 1.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Source: P.A. 93-1078, eff. 1-1-06.)

    (775 ILCS 5/1-101) (from Ch. 68, par. 1-101)
    Sec. 1-101. Short Title. This Act shall be known and may be cited as the Illinois Human Rights Act.
(Source: P.A. 81-1216.)

    (775 ILCS 5/1-101.1)
    Sec. 1-101.1. Construction. Nothing in this Act shall be construed as requiring any employer, employment agency, or labor organization to give preferential treatment or special rights based on sexual orientation or to implement affirmative action policies or programs based on sexual orientation.
(Source: P.A. 93-1078, eff. 1-1-06.)

    (775 ILCS 5/1-102) (from Ch. 68, par. 1-102)
    Sec. 1-102. Declaration of Policy. It is the public policy of this State:
    (A) Freedom from Unlawful Discrimination. To secure for all individuals within Illinois the freedom from discrimination against any individual because of his or her race, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, age, order of protection status, marital status, physical or mental disability, military status, sexual orientation, pregnancy, or unfavorable discharge from military service in connection with employment, real estate transactions, access to financial credit, and the availability of public accommodations.
    (B) Freedom from Sexual Harassment-Employment and Elementary, Secondary, and Higher Education. To prevent sexual harassment in employment and sexual harassment in elementary, secondary, and higher education.
    (C) Freedom from Discrimination Based on Citizenship Status-Employment. To prevent discrimination based on citizenship status in employment.
    (D) Freedom from Discrimination Based on Familial Status-Real Estate Transactions. To prevent discrimination based on familial status in real estate transactions.
    (E) Public Health, Welfare and Safety. To promote the public health, welfare and safety by protecting the interest of all people in Illinois in maintaining personal dignity, in realizing their full productive capacities, and in furthering their interests, rights and privileges as citizens of this State.
    (F) Implementation of Constitutional Guarantees. To secure and guarantee the rights established by Sections 17, 18 and 19 of Article I of the Illinois Constitution of 1970.
    (G) Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action. To establish Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action as the policies of this State in all of its decisions, programs and activities, and to assure that all State departments, boards, commissions and instrumentalities rigorously take affirmative action to provide equality of opportunity and eliminate the effects of past discrimination in the internal affairs of State government and in their relations with the public.
    (H) Unfounded Charges. To protect citizens of this State against unfounded charges of unlawful discrimination, sexual harassment in employment and sexual harassment in elementary, secondary, and higher education, and discrimination based on citizenship status in employment.
(Source: P.A. 98-1050, eff. 1-1-15.)

    (775 ILCS 5/1-103) (from Ch. 68, par. 1-103)
    Sec. 1-103. General definitions. When used in this Act, unless the context requires otherwise, the term:
    (A) Age. "Age" means the chronological age of a person who is at least 40 years old, except with regard to any practice described in Section 2-102, insofar as that practice concerns training or apprenticeship programs. In the case of training or apprenticeship programs, for the purposes of Section 2-102, "age" means the chronological age of a person who is 18 but not yet 40 years old.
    (B) Aggrieved party. "Aggrieved party" means a person who is alleged or proved to have been injured by a civil rights violation or believes he or she will be injured by a civil rights violation under Article 3 that is about to occur.
    (B-5) Arrest record. "Arrest record" means:
        (1) an arrest not leading to a conviction;
        (2) a juvenile record; or
        (3) criminal history record information ordered
    	
expunged, sealed, or impounded under Section 5.2 of the Criminal Identification Act.
    (C) Charge. "Charge" means an allegation filed with the Department by an aggrieved party or initiated by the Department under its authority.
    (D) Civil rights violation. "Civil rights violation" includes and shall be limited to only those specific acts set forth in Sections 2-102, 2-103, 2-105, 3-102, 3-102.1, 3-103, 3-104, 3-104.1, 3-105, 3-105.1, 4-102, 4-103, 5-102, 5A-102, 6-101, and 6-102 of this Act.
    (E) Commission. "Commission" means the Human Rights Commission created by this Act.
    (F) Complaint. "Complaint" means the formal pleading filed by the Department with the Commission following an investigation and finding of substantial evidence of a civil rights violation.
    (G) Complainant. "Complainant" means a person including the Department who files a charge of civil rights violation with the Department or the Commission.
    (G-5) Conviction record. "Conviction record" means information indicating that a person has been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or other criminal offense, placed on probation, fined, imprisoned, or paroled pursuant to any law enforcement or military authority.
    (H) Department. "Department" means the Department of Human Rights created by this Act.
    (I) Disability. "Disability" means a determinable physical or mental characteristic of a person, including, but not limited to, a determinable physical characteristic which necessitates the person's use of a guide, hearing or support dog, the history of such characteristic, or the perception of such characteristic by the person complained against, which may result from disease, injury, congenital condition of birth or functional disorder and which characteristic:
        (1) For purposes of Article 2, is unrelated to the
    	
person's ability to perform the duties of a particular job or position and, pursuant to Section 2-104 of this Act, a person's illegal use of drugs or alcohol is not a disability;
        (2) For purposes of Article 3, is unrelated to the
    	
person's ability to acquire, rent, or maintain a housing accommodation;
        (3) For purposes of Article 4, is unrelated to a
    	
person's ability to repay;
        (4) For purposes of Article 5, is unrelated to a
    	
person's ability to utilize and benefit from a place of public accommodation;
        (5) For purposes of Article 5, also includes any
    	
mental, psychological, or developmental disability, including autism spectrum disorders.
    (J) Marital status. "Marital status" means the legal status of being married, single, separated, divorced, or widowed.
    (J-1) Military status. "Military status" means a person's status on active duty in or status as a veteran of the armed forces of the United States, status as a current member or veteran of any reserve component of the armed forces of the United States, including the United States Army Reserve, United States Marine Corps Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Air Force Reserve, and United States Coast Guard Reserve, or status as a current member or veteran of the Illinois Army National Guard or Illinois Air National Guard.
    (K) National origin. "National origin" means the place in which a person or one of his or her ancestors was born.
    (K-5) "Order of protection status" means a person's status as being a person protected under an order of protection issued pursuant to the Illinois Domestic Violence Act of 1986, Article 112A of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963, the Stalking No Contact Order Act, or the Civil No Contact Order Act, or an order of protection issued by a court of another state.
    (L) Person. "Person" includes one or more individuals, partnerships, associations or organizations, labor organizations, labor unions, joint apprenticeship committees, or union labor associations, corporations, the State of Illinois and its instrumentalities, political subdivisions, units of local government, legal representatives, trustees in bankruptcy or receivers.
    (L-5) Pregnancy. "Pregnancy" means pregnancy, childbirth, or medical or common conditions related to pregnancy or childbirth.
    (M) Public contract. "Public contract" includes every contract to which the State, any of its political subdivisions, or any municipal corporation is a party.
    (N) Religion. "Religion" includes all aspects of religious observance and practice, as well as belief, except that with respect to employers, for the purposes of Article 2, "religion" has the meaning ascribed to it in paragraph (F) of Section 2-101.
    (O) Sex. "Sex" means the status of being male or female.
    (O-1) Sexual orientation. "Sexual orientation" means actual or perceived heterosexuality, homosexuality, bisexuality, or gender-related identity, whether or not traditionally associated with the person's designated sex at birth. "Sexual orientation" does not include a physical or sexual attraction to a minor by an adult.
    (P) Unfavorable military discharge. "Unfavorable military discharge" includes discharges from the Armed Forces of the United States, their Reserve components, or any National Guard or Naval Militia which are classified as RE-3 or the equivalent thereof, but does not include those characterized as RE-4 or "Dishonorable".
    (Q) Unlawful discrimination. "Unlawful discrimination" means discrimination against a person because of his or her actual or perceived: race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, age, sex, marital status, order of protection status, disability, military status, sexual orientation, pregnancy, or unfavorable discharge from military service as those terms are defined in this Section.
(Source: P.A. 100-714, eff. 1-1-19; 101-81, eff. 7-12-19; 101-221, eff. 1-1-20; 101-565, eff. 1-1-20; 101-656, eff. 3-23-21.)


 
    (775 ILCS 5/Art. 2 heading)
ARTICLE 2. EMPLOYMENT

    (775 ILCS 5/2-101) (from Ch. 68, par. 2-101)
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-221)
    Sec. 2-101. Definitions. The following definitions are applicable strictly in the context of this Article.
    (A) Employee.
        (1) "Employee" includes:
            (a) Any individual performing services for
        	
remuneration within this State for an employer;
            (b) An apprentice;
            (c) An applicant for any apprenticeship.
        For purposes of subsection (D) of Section 2-102 of
    	
this Act, "employee" also includes an unpaid intern. An unpaid intern is a person who performs work for an employer under the following circumstances:
            (i) the employer is not committed to hiring the
        	
person performing the work at the conclusion of the intern's tenure;
            (ii) the employer and the person performing the
        	
work agree that the person is not entitled to wages for the work performed; and
            (iii) the work performed:
                (I) supplements training given in an
            	
educational environment that may enhance the employability of the intern;
                (II) provides experience for the benefit of
            	
the person performing the work;
                (III) does not displace regular employees;
                (IV) is performed under the close supervision
            	
of existing staff; and
                (V) provides no immediate advantage to the
            	
employer providing the training and may occasionally impede the operations of the employer.
        (2) "Employee" does not include:
            (a) (Blank);
            (b) Individuals employed by persons who are not
        	
"employers" as defined by this Act;
            (c) Elected public officials or the members of
        	
their immediate personal staffs;
            (d) Principal administrative officers of the
        	
State or of any political subdivision, municipal corporation or other governmental unit or agency;
            (e) A person in a vocational rehabilitation
        	
facility certified under federal law who has been designated an evaluee, trainee, or work activity client.
    (B) Employer.
        (1) "Employer" includes:
            (a) Any person employing 15 or more employees
        	
within Illinois during 20 or more calendar weeks within the calendar year of or preceding the alleged violation;
            (b) Any person employing one or more employees
        	
when a complainant alleges civil rights violation due to unlawful discrimination based upon his or her physical or mental disability unrelated to ability, pregnancy, or sexual harassment;
            (c) The State and any political subdivision,
        	
municipal corporation or other governmental unit or agency, without regard to the number of employees;
            (d) Any party to a public contract without regard
        	
to the number of employees;
            (e) A joint apprenticeship or training committee
        	
without regard to the number of employees.
        (2) "Employer" does not include any religious
    	
corporation, association, educational institution, society, or non-profit nursing institution conducted by and for those who rely upon treatment by prayer through spiritual means in accordance with the tenets of a recognized church or religious denomination with respect to the employment of individuals of a particular religion to perform work connected with the carrying on by such corporation, association, educational institution, society or non-profit nursing institution of its activities.
    (C) Employment Agency. "Employment Agency" includes both public and private employment agencies and any person, labor organization, or labor union having a hiring hall or hiring office regularly undertaking, with or without compensation, to procure opportunities to work, or to procure, recruit, refer or place employees.
    (D) Labor Organization. "Labor Organization" includes any organization, labor union, craft union, or any voluntary unincorporated association designed to further the cause of the rights of union labor which is constituted for the purpose, in whole or in part, of collective bargaining or of dealing with employers concerning grievances, terms or conditions of employment, or apprenticeships or applications for apprenticeships, or of other mutual aid or protection in connection with employment, including apprenticeships or applications for apprenticeships.
    (E) Sexual Harassment. "Sexual harassment" means any unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors or any conduct of a sexual nature when (1) submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of an individual's employment, (2) submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual, or (3) such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment.
    For purposes of this definition, the phrase "working environment" is not limited to a physical location an employee is assigned to perform his or her duties.
    (E-1) Harassment. "Harassment" means any unwelcome conduct on the basis of an individual's actual or perceived race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, age, sex, marital status, order of protection status, disability, military status, sexual orientation, pregnancy, unfavorable discharge from military service, or citizenship status that has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with the individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive working environment. For purposes of this definition, the phrase "working environment" is not limited to a physical location an employee is assigned to perform his or her duties.
    (F) Religion. "Religion" with respect to employers includes all aspects of religious observance and practice, as well as belief, unless an employer demonstrates that he is unable to reasonably accommodate an employee's or prospective employee's religious observance or practice without undue hardship on the conduct of the employer's business.
    (G) Public Employer. "Public employer" means the State, an agency or department thereof, unit of local government, school district, instrumentality or political subdivision.
    (H) Public Employee. "Public employee" means an employee of the State, agency or department thereof, unit of local government, school district, instrumentality or political subdivision. "Public employee" does not include public officers or employees of the General Assembly or agencies thereof.
    (I) Public Officer. "Public officer" means a person who is elected to office pursuant to the Constitution or a statute or ordinance, or who is appointed to an office which is established, and the qualifications and duties of which are prescribed, by the Constitution or a statute or ordinance, to discharge a public duty for the State, agency or department thereof, unit of local government, school district, instrumentality or political subdivision.
    (J) Eligible Bidder. "Eligible bidder" means a person who, prior to contract award or prior to bid opening for State contracts for construction or construction-related services, has filed with the Department a properly completed, sworn and currently valid employer report form, pursuant to the Department's regulations. The provisions of this Article relating to eligible bidders apply only to bids on contracts with the State and its departments, agencies, boards, and commissions, and the provisions do not apply to bids on contracts with units of local government or school districts.
    (K) Citizenship Status. "Citizenship status" means the status of being:
        (1) a born U.S. citizen;
        (2) a naturalized U.S. citizen;
        (3) a U.S. national; or
        (4) a person born outside the United States and not a
    	
U.S. citizen who is not an unauthorized alien and who is protected from discrimination under the provisions of Section 1324b of Title 8 of the United States Code, as now or hereafter amended.
(Source: P.A. 100-43, eff. 8-9-17; 101-221, eff. 1-1-20.)
 
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-430)
    Sec. 2-101. Definitions. The following definitions are applicable strictly in the context of this Article.
    (A) Employee.
        (1) "Employee" includes:
            (a) Any individual performing services for
        	
remuneration within this State for an employer;
            (b) An apprentice;
            (c) An applicant for any apprenticeship.
        For purposes of subsection (D) of Section 2-102 of
    	
this Act, "employee" also includes an unpaid intern. An unpaid intern is a person who performs work for an employer under the following circumstances:
            (i) the employer is not committed to hiring the
        	
person performing the work at the conclusion of the intern's tenure;
            (ii) the employer and the person performing the
        	
work agree that the person is not entitled to wages for the work performed; and
            (iii) the work performed:
                (I) supplements training given in an
            	
educational environment that may enhance the employability of the intern;
                (II) provides experience for the benefit of
            	
the person performing the work;
                (III) does not displace regular employees;
                (IV) is performed under the close supervision
            	
of existing staff; and
                (V) provides no immediate advantage to the
            	
employer providing the training and may occasionally impede the operations of the employer.
        (2) "Employee" does not include:
            (a) (Blank);
            (b) Individuals employed by persons who are not
        	
"employers" as defined by this Act;
            (c) Elected public officials or the members of
        	
their immediate personal staffs;
            (d) Principal administrative officers of the
        	
State or of any political subdivision, municipal corporation or other governmental unit or agency;
            (e) A person in a vocational rehabilitation
        	
facility certified under federal law who has been designated an evaluee, trainee, or work activity client.
    (B) Employer.
        (1) "Employer" includes:
            (a) Any person employing one or more employees
        	
within Illinois during 20 or more calendar weeks within the calendar year of or preceding the alleged violation;
            (b) Any person employing one or more employees
        	
when a complainant alleges civil rights violation due to unlawful discrimination based upon his or her physical or mental disability unrelated to ability, pregnancy, or sexual harassment;
            (c) The State and any political subdivision,
        	
municipal corporation or other governmental unit or agency, without regard to the number of employees;
            (d) Any party to a public contract without regard
        	
to the number of employees;
            (e) A joint apprenticeship or training committee
        	
without regard to the number of employees.
        (2) "Employer" does not include any place of worship,
    	
religious corporation, association, educational institution, society, or non-profit nursing institution conducted by and for those who rely upon treatment by prayer through spiritual means in accordance with the tenets of a recognized church or religious denomination with respect to the employment of individuals of a particular religion to perform work connected with the carrying on by such place of worship, corporation, association, educational institution, society or non-profit nursing institution of its activities.
    (C) Employment Agency. "Employment Agency" includes both public and private employment agencies and any person, labor organization, or labor union having a hiring hall or hiring office regularly undertaking, with or without compensation, to procure opportunities to work, or to procure, recruit, refer or place employees.
    (D) Labor Organization. "Labor Organization" includes any organization, labor union, craft union, or any voluntary unincorporated association designed to further the cause of the rights of union labor which is constituted for the purpose, in whole or in part, of collective bargaining or of dealing with employers concerning grievances, terms or conditions of employment, or apprenticeships or applications for apprenticeships, or of other mutual aid or protection in connection with employment, including apprenticeships or applications for apprenticeships.
    (E) Sexual Harassment. "Sexual harassment" means any unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors or any conduct of a sexual nature when (1) submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of an individual's employment, (2) submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual, or (3) such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment.
    (F) Religion. "Religion" with respect to employers includes all aspects of religious observance and practice, as well as belief, unless an employer demonstrates that he is unable to reasonably accommodate an employee's or prospective employee's religious observance or practice without undue hardship on the conduct of the employer's business.
    (G) Public Employer. "Public employer" means the State, an agency or department thereof, unit of local government, school district, instrumentality or political subdivision.
    (H) Public Employee. "Public employee" means an employee of the State, agency or department thereof, unit of local government, school district, instrumentality or political subdivision. "Public employee" does not include public officers or employees of the General Assembly or agencies thereof.
    (I) Public Officer. "Public officer" means a person who is elected to office pursuant to the Constitution or a statute or ordinance, or who is appointed to an office which is established, and the qualifications and duties of which are prescribed, by the Constitution or a statute or ordinance, to discharge a public duty for the State, agency or department thereof, unit of local government, school district, instrumentality or political subdivision.
    (J) Eligible Bidder. "Eligible bidder" means a person who, prior to contract award or prior to bid opening for State contracts for construction or construction-related services, has filed with the Department a properly completed, sworn and currently valid employer report form, pursuant to the Department's regulations. The provisions of this Article relating to eligible bidders apply only to bids on contracts with the State and its departments, agencies, boards, and commissions, and the provisions do not apply to bids on contracts with units of local government or school districts.
    (K) Citizenship Status. "Citizenship status" means the status of being:
        (1) a born U.S. citizen;
        (2) a naturalized U.S. citizen;
        (3) a U.S. national; or
        (4) a person born outside the United States and not a
    	
U.S. citizen who is not an unauthorized alien and who is protected from discrimination under the provisions of Section 1324b of Title 8 of the United States Code, as now or hereafter amended.
(Source: P.A. 100-43, eff. 8-9-17; 101-430, eff. 7-1-20.)

    (775 ILCS 5/2-102) (from Ch. 68, par. 2-102)
    Sec. 2-102. Civil rights violations - employment. It is a civil rights violation:
        (A) Employers. For any employer to refuse to hire, to
    	
segregate, to engage in harassment as defined in subsection (E-1) of Section 2-101, or to act with respect to recruitment, hiring, promotion, renewal of employment, selection for training or apprenticeship, discharge, discipline, tenure or terms, privileges or conditions of employment on the basis of unlawful discrimination or citizenship status. An employer is responsible for harassment by the employer's nonmanagerial and nonsupervisory employees only if the employer becomes aware of the conduct and fails to take reasonable corrective measures.
        (A-5) Language. For an employer to impose a
    	
restriction that has the effect of prohibiting a language from being spoken by an employee in communications that are unrelated to the employee's duties.
        For the purposes of this subdivision (A-5),
    	
"language" means a person's native tongue, such as Polish, Spanish, or Chinese. "Language" does not include such things as slang, jargon, profanity, or vulgarity.
        (A-10) Harassment of nonemployees. For any employer,
    	
employment agency, or labor organization to engage in harassment of nonemployees in the workplace. An employer is responsible for harassment of nonemployees by the employer's nonmanagerial and nonsupervisory employees only if the employer becomes aware of the conduct and fails to take reasonable corrective measures. For the purposes of this subdivision (A-10), "nonemployee" means a person who is not otherwise an employee of the employer and is directly performing services for the employer pursuant to a contract with that employer. "Nonemployee" includes contractors and consultants. This subdivision applies to harassment occurring on or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 101st General Assembly.
        (B) Employment agency. For any employment agency to
    	
fail or refuse to classify properly, accept applications and register for employment referral or apprenticeship referral, refer for employment, or refer for apprenticeship on the basis of unlawful discrimination or citizenship status or to accept from any person any job order, requisition or request for referral of applicants for employment or apprenticeship which makes or has the effect of making unlawful discrimination or discrimination on the basis of citizenship status a condition of referral.
        (C) Labor organization. For any labor organization to
    	
limit, segregate or classify its membership, or to limit employment opportunities, selection and training for apprenticeship in any trade or craft, or otherwise to take, or fail to take, any action which affects adversely any person's status as an employee or as an applicant for employment or as an apprentice, or as an applicant for apprenticeships, or wages, tenure, hours of employment or apprenticeship conditions on the basis of unlawful discrimination or citizenship status.
        (D) Sexual harassment. For any employer, employee,
    	
agent of any employer, employment agency or labor organization to engage in sexual harassment; provided, that an employer shall be responsible for sexual harassment of the employer's employees by nonemployees or nonmanagerial and nonsupervisory employees only if the employer becomes aware of the conduct and fails to take reasonable corrective measures.
        (D-5) Sexual harassment of nonemployees. For any
    	
employer, employee, agent of any employer, employment agency, or labor organization to engage in sexual harassment of nonemployees in the workplace. An employer is responsible for sexual harassment of nonemployees by the employer's nonmanagerial and nonsupervisory employees only if the employer becomes aware of the conduct and fails to take reasonable corrective measures. For the purposes of this subdivision (D-5), "nonemployee" means a person who is not otherwise an employee of the employer and is directly performing services for the employer pursuant to a contract with that employer. "Nonemployee" includes contractors and consultants. This subdivision applies to sexual harassment occurring on or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 101st General Assembly.
        (E) Public employers. For any public employer to
    	
refuse to permit a public employee under its jurisdiction who takes time off from work in order to practice his or her religious beliefs to engage in work, during hours other than such employee's regular working hours, consistent with the operational needs of the employer and in order to compensate for work time lost for such religious reasons. Any employee who elects such deferred work shall be compensated at the wage rate which he or she would have earned during the originally scheduled work period. The employer may require that an employee who plans to take time off from work in order to practice his or her religious beliefs provide the employer with a notice of his or her intention to be absent from work not exceeding 5 days prior to the date of absence.
        (E-5) Religious discrimination. For any employer to
    	
impose upon a person as a condition of obtaining or retaining employment, including opportunities for promotion, advancement, or transfer, any terms or conditions that would require such person to violate or forgo a sincerely held practice of his or her religion including, but not limited to, the wearing of any attire, clothing, or facial hair in accordance with the requirements of his or her religion, unless, after engaging in a bona fide effort, the employer demonstrates that it is unable to reasonably accommodate the employee's or prospective employee's sincerely held religious belief, practice, or observance without undue hardship on the conduct of the employer's business.
        Nothing in this Section prohibits an employer from
    	
enacting a dress code or grooming policy that may include restrictions on attire, clothing, or facial hair to maintain workplace safety or food sanitation.
        (F) Training and apprenticeship programs. For any
    	
employer, employment agency or labor organization to discriminate against a person on the basis of age in the selection, referral for or conduct of apprenticeship or training programs.
        (G) Immigration-related practices.
            (1) for an employer to request for purposes of
        	
satisfying the requirements of Section 1324a(b) of Title 8 of the United States Code, as now or hereafter amended, more or different documents than are required under such Section or to refuse to honor documents tendered that on their face reasonably appear to be genuine; or
            (2) for an employer participating in the E-Verify
        	
Program, as authorized by 8 U.S.C. 1324a, Notes, Pilot Programs for Employment Eligibility Confirmation (enacted by PL 104-208, div. C title IV, subtitle A) to refuse to hire, to segregate, or to act with respect to recruitment, hiring, promotion, renewal of employment, selection for training or apprenticeship, discharge, discipline, tenure or terms, privileges or conditions of employment without following the procedures under the E-Verify Program.
        (H) (Blank).
        (I) Pregnancy. For an employer to refuse to hire, to
    	
segregate, or to act with respect to recruitment, hiring, promotion, renewal of employment, selection for training or apprenticeship, discharge, discipline, tenure or terms, privileges or conditions of employment on the basis of pregnancy, childbirth, or medical or common conditions related to pregnancy or childbirth. Women affected by pregnancy, childbirth, or medical or common conditions related to pregnancy or childbirth shall be treated the same for all employment-related purposes, including receipt of benefits under fringe benefit programs, as other persons not so affected but similar in their ability or inability to work, regardless of the source of the inability to work or employment classification or status.
        (J) Pregnancy; reasonable accommodations.
            (1) If after a job applicant or employee,
        	
including a part-time, full-time, or probationary employee, requests a reasonable accommodation, for an employer to not make reasonable accommodations for any medical or common condition of a job applicant or employee related to pregnancy or childbirth, unless the employer can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the ordinary operation of the business of the employer. The employer may request documentation from the employee's health care provider concerning the need for the requested reasonable accommodation or accommodations to the same extent documentation is requested for conditions related to disability if the employer's request for documentation is job-related and consistent with business necessity. The employer may require only the medical justification for the requested accommodation or accommodations, a description of the reasonable accommodation or accommodations medically advisable, the date the reasonable accommodation or accommodations became medically advisable, and the probable duration of the reasonable accommodation or accommodations. It is the duty of the individual seeking a reasonable accommodation or accommodations to submit to the employer any documentation that is requested in accordance with this paragraph. Notwithstanding the provisions of this paragraph, the employer may require documentation by the employee's health care provider to determine compliance with other laws. The employee and employer shall engage in a timely, good faith, and meaningful exchange to determine effective reasonable accommodations.
            (2) For an employer to deny employment
        	
opportunities or benefits to or take adverse action against an otherwise qualified job applicant or employee, including a part-time, full-time, or probationary employee, if the denial or adverse action is based on the need of the employer to make reasonable accommodations to the known medical or common conditions related to the pregnancy or childbirth of the applicant or employee.
            (3) For an employer to require a job applicant
        	
or employee, including a part-time, full-time, or probationary employee, affected by pregnancy, childbirth, or medical or common conditions related to pregnancy or childbirth to accept an accommodation when the applicant or employee did not request an accommodation and the applicant or employee chooses not to accept the employer's accommodation.
            (4) For an employer to require an employee,
        	
including a part-time, full-time, or probationary employee, to take leave under any leave law or policy of the employer if another reasonable accommodation can be provided to the known medical or common conditions related to the pregnancy or childbirth of an employee. No employer shall fail or refuse to reinstate the employee affected by pregnancy, childbirth, or medical or common conditions related to pregnancy or childbirth to her original job or to an equivalent position with equivalent pay and accumulated seniority, retirement, fringe benefits, and other applicable service credits upon her signifying her intent to return or when her need for reasonable accommodation ceases, unless the employer can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the ordinary operation of the business of the employer.
        For the purposes of this subdivision (J), "reasonable
    	
accommodations" means reasonable modifications or adjustments to the job application process or work environment, or to the manner or circumstances under which the position desired or held is customarily performed, that enable an applicant or employee affected by pregnancy, childbirth, or medical or common conditions related to pregnancy or childbirth to be considered for the position the applicant desires or to perform the essential functions of that position, and may include, but is not limited to: more frequent or longer bathroom breaks, breaks for increased water intake, and breaks for periodic rest; private non-bathroom space for expressing breast milk and breastfeeding; seating; assistance with manual labor; light duty; temporary transfer to a less strenuous or hazardous position; the provision of an accessible worksite; acquisition or modification of equipment; job restructuring; a part-time or modified work schedule; appropriate adjustment or modifications of examinations, training materials, or policies; reassignment to a vacant position; time off to recover from conditions related to childbirth; and leave necessitated by pregnancy, childbirth, or medical or common conditions resulting from pregnancy or childbirth.
        For the purposes of this subdivision (J), "undue
    	
hardship" means an action that is prohibitively expensive or disruptive when considered in light of the following factors: (i) the nature and cost of the accommodation needed; (ii) the overall financial resources of the facility or facilities involved in the provision of the reasonable accommodation, the number of persons employed at the facility, the effect on expenses and resources, or the impact otherwise of the accommodation upon the operation of the facility; (iii) the overall financial resources of the employer, the overall size of the business of the employer with respect to the number of its employees, and the number, type, and location of its facilities; and (iv) the type of operation or operations of the employer, including the composition, structure, and functions of the workforce of the employer, the geographic separateness, administrative, or fiscal relationship of the facility or facilities in question to the employer. The employer has the burden of proving undue hardship. The fact that the employer provides or would be required to provide a similar accommodation to similarly situated employees creates a rebuttable presumption that the accommodation does not impose an undue hardship on the employer.
        No employer is required by this subdivision (J) to
    	
create additional employment that the employer would not otherwise have created, unless the employer does so or would do so for other classes of employees who need accommodation. The employer is not required to discharge any employee, transfer any employee with more seniority, or promote any employee who is not qualified to perform the job, unless the employer does so or would do so to accommodate other classes of employees who need it.
        (K) Notice.
            (1) For an employer to fail to post or keep
        	
posted in a conspicuous location on the premises of the employer where notices to employees are customarily posted, or fail to include in any employee handbook information concerning an employee's rights under this Article, a notice, to be prepared or approved by the Department, summarizing the requirements of this Article and information pertaining to the filing of a charge, including the right to be free from unlawful discrimination, the right to be free from sexual harassment, and the right to certain reasonable accommodations. The Department shall make the documents required under this paragraph available for retrieval from the Department's website.
            (2) Upon notification of a violation of paragraph
        	
(1) of this subdivision (K), the Department may launch a preliminary investigation. If the Department finds a violation, the Department may issue a notice to show cause giving the employer 30 days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected, the Department may initiate a charge of a civil rights violation.
(Source: P.A. 100-100, eff. 8-11-17; 100-588, eff. 6-8-18; 101-221, eff. 1-1-20.)

    (775 ILCS 5/2-103) (from Ch. 68, par. 2-103)
    Sec. 2-103. Arrest record.
    (A) Unless otherwise authorized by law, it is a civil rights violation for any employer, employment agency or labor organization to inquire into or to use an arrest record, as defined under subsection (B-5) of Section 1-103, as a basis to refuse to hire, to segregate, or to act with respect to recruitment, hiring, promotion, renewal of employment, selection for training or apprenticeship, discharge, discipline, tenure or terms, privileges or conditions of employment. This Section does not prohibit a State agency, unit of local government or school district, or private organization from requesting or utilizing sealed felony conviction information obtained from the Department of State Police under the provisions of Section 3 of the Criminal Identification Act or under other State or federal laws or regulations that require criminal background checks in evaluating the qualifications and character of an employee or a prospective employee.
    (B) The prohibition against the use of an arrest record, as defined under paragraph (1) of subsection (B-5) of Section 1-103, contained in this Act shall not be construed to prohibit an employer, employment agency, or labor organization from obtaining or using other information which indicates that a person actually engaged in the conduct for which he or she was arrested.
(Source: P.A. 101-565, eff. 1-1-20.)

    (775 ILCS 5/2-103.1)
    Sec. 2-103.1. Conviction record.
    (A) Unless otherwise authorized by law, it is a civil rights violation for any employer, employment agency or labor organization to use a conviction record, as defined under subsection (G-5) of Section 1-103, as a basis to refuse to hire, to segregate, or to act with respect to recruitment, hiring, promotion, renewal of employment, selection for training or apprenticeship, discharge, discipline, tenure or terms, privileges or conditions of employment (whether "disqualification" or "adverse action"), unless:
        (1) there is a substantial relationship between one
    	
or more of the previous criminal offenses and the employment sought or held; or
        (2) the granting or continuation of the employment
    	
would involve an unreasonable risk to property or to the safety or welfare of specific individuals or the general public.
    For the purposes of this subsection (A), "substantial relationship" means a consideration of whether the employment position offers the opportunity for the same or a similar offense to occur and whether the circumstances leading to the conduct for which the person was convicted will recur in the employment position.
    (B) Factors considered. In making a determination pursuant to subsection (A), the employer shall consider the following factors:
        (1) the length of time since the conviction;
        (2) the number of convictions that appear on the
    	
conviction record;
        (3) the nature and severity of the conviction and its
    	
relationship to the safety and security of others;
        (4) the facts or circumstances surrounding the
    	
conviction;
        (5) the age of the employee at the time of the
    	
conviction; and
        (6) evidence of rehabilitation efforts.
    (C) Interactive assessment required for disqualifying conviction. If, after considering the mitigating factors in subsection (B), the employer makes a preliminary decision that the employee's conviction record disqualifies the employee, the employer shall notify the employee of this preliminary decision in writing.
        (1) Notification. The notification shall contain all
    	
of the following:
            (a) notice of the disqualifying conviction or
        	
convictions that are the basis for the preliminary decision and the employer's reasoning for the disqualification;
            (b) a copy of the conviction history report, if
        	
any; and
            (c) an explanation of the employee's right to
        	
respond to the notice of the employer's preliminary decision before that decision becomes final. The explanation shall inform the employee that the response may include, but is not limited to, submission of evidence challenging the accuracy of the conviction record that is the basis for the disqualification, or evidence in mitigation, such as rehabilitation.
        (2) Employee response. The employee shall have at
    	
least 5 business days to respond to the notification provided to the employee before the employer may make a final decision.
        (3) Final decision. The employer shall consider
    	
information submitted by the employee before making a final decision. If an employer makes a final decision to disqualify or take an adverse action solely or in part because of the employee's conviction record, the employer shall notify the employee in writing of the following:
            (a) notice of the disqualifying conviction or
        	
convictions that are the basis for the final decision and the employer's reasoning for the disqualification;
            (b) any existing procedure the employer has for
        	
the employee to challenge the decision or request reconsideration; and
            (c) the right to file a charge with the
        	
Department.
(Source: P.A. 101-656, eff. 3-23-21.)

    (775 ILCS 5/2-104) (from Ch. 68, par. 2-104)
    Sec. 2-104. Exemptions.
    (A) Nothing contained in this Act shall prohibit an employer, employment agency, or labor organization from:
        (1) Bona Fide Qualification. Hiring or selecting
    	
between persons for bona fide occupational qualifications or any reason except those civil-rights violations specifically identified in this Article.
        (2) Veterans. Giving preferential treatment to
    	
veterans and their relatives as required by the laws or regulations of the United States or this State or a unit of local government, or pursuant to a private employer's voluntary veterans' preference employment policy authorized by the Veterans Preference in Private Employment Act.
        (3) Unfavorable Discharge From Military Service.
            (a) Using unfavorable discharge from military
        	
service as a valid employment criterion when authorized by federal law or regulation or when a position of employment involves the exercise of fiduciary responsibilities as defined by rules and regulations which the Department shall adopt; or
            (b) Participating in a bona fide recruiting
        	
incentive program, sponsored by a branch of the United States Armed Forces, a reserve component of the United States Armed Forces, or any National Guard or Naval Militia, where participation in the program is limited by the sponsoring branch based upon the service member's discharge status.
        (4) Ability Tests. Giving or acting upon the results
    	
of any professionally developed ability test provided that such test, its administration, or action upon the results, is not used as a subterfuge for or does not have the effect of unlawful discrimination.
        (5) Merit and Retirement Systems.
            (a) Applying different standards of compensation,
        	
or different terms, conditions or privileges of employment pursuant to a merit or retirement system provided that such system or its administration is not used as a subterfuge for or does not have the effect of unlawful discrimination.
            (b) Effecting compulsory retirement of any
        	
employee who has attained 65 years of age and who, for the 2-year period immediately preceding retirement, is employed in a bona fide executive or a high policymaking position, if such employee is entitled to an immediate nonforfeitable annual retirement benefit from a pension, profit-sharing, savings, or deferred compensation plan, or any combination of such plans of the employer of such employee, which equals, in the aggregate, at least $44,000. If any such retirement benefit is in a form other than a straight life annuity (with no ancillary benefits) or if the employees contribute to any such plan or make rollover contributions, the retirement benefit shall be adjusted in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Department, so that the benefit is the equivalent of a straight life annuity (with no ancillary benefits) under a plan to which employees do not contribute and under which no rollover contributions are made.
            (c) Until January 1, 1994, effecting compulsory
        	
retirement of any employee who has attained 70 years of age, and who is serving under a contract of unlimited tenure (or similar arrangement providing for unlimited tenure) at an institution of higher education as defined by Section 1201(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965.
        (6) Training and Apprenticeship programs.
    	
Establishing an educational requirement as a prerequisite to selection for a training or apprenticeship program, provided such requirement does not operate to discriminate on the basis of any prohibited classification except age.
        (7) Police and Firefighter/Paramedic Retirement.
    	
Imposing a mandatory retirement age for firefighters/paramedics or law enforcement officers and discharging or retiring such individuals pursuant to the mandatory retirement age if such action is taken pursuant to a bona fide retirement plan provided that the law enforcement officer or firefighter/paramedic has attained:
            (a) the age of retirement in effect under
        	
applicable State or local law on March 3, 1983; or
            (b) if the applicable State or local law was
        	
enacted after the date of enactment of the federal Age Discrimination in Employment Act Amendments of 1996 (P.L. 104-208), the age of retirement in effect on the date of such discharge under such law.
        This paragraph (7) shall not apply with respect to
    	
any cause of action arising under the Illinois Human Rights Act as in effect prior to the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1997.
        (8) Police and Firefighter/Paramedic Appointment.
    	
Failing or refusing to hire any individual because of such individual's age if such action is taken with respect to the employment of an individual as a firefighter/paramedic or as a law enforcement officer and the individual has attained:
            (a) the age of hiring or appointment in effect
        	
under applicable State or local law on March 3, 1983; or
            (b) the age of hiring in effect on the date of
        	
such failure or refusal to hire under applicable State or local law enacted after the date of enactment of the federal Age Discrimination in Employment Act Amendments of 1996 (P.L. 104-208).
        As used in paragraph (7) or (8):
        "Firefighter/paramedic" means an employee, the duties
    	
of whose position are primarily to perform work directly connected with the control and extinguishment of fires or the maintenance and use of firefighting apparatus and equipment, or to provide emergency medical services, including an employee engaged in this activity who is transferred to a supervisory or administrative position.
        "Law enforcement officer" means an employee, the
    	
duties of whose position are primarily the investigation, apprehension, or detention of individuals suspected or convicted of criminal offenses, including an employee engaged in this activity who is transferred to a supervisory or administrative position.
        (9) Citizenship Status. Making legitimate
    	
distinctions based on citizenship status if specifically authorized or required by State or federal law.
    (B) With respect to any employee who is subject to a collective bargaining agreement:
        (a) which is in effect on June 30, 1986,
        (b) which terminates after January 1, 1987,
        (c) any provision of which was entered into by a
    	
labor organization as defined by Section 6(d)(4) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 206(d)(4)), and
        (d) which contains any provision that would be
    	
superseded by Public Act 85-748,
Public Act 85-748 shall not apply until the termination of such collective bargaining agreement or January 1, 1990, whichever occurs first.
    (C)(1) For purposes of this Act, the term "disability" shall not include any employee or applicant who is currently engaging in the illegal use of drugs, when an employer acts on the basis of such use.
    (2) Paragraph (1) shall not apply where an employee or applicant for employment:
        (a) has successfully completed a supervised drug
    	
rehabilitation program and is no longer engaging in the illegal use of drugs, or has otherwise been rehabilitated successfully and is no longer engaging in such use;
        (b) is participating in a supervised rehabilitation
    	
program and is no longer engaging in such use; or
        (c) is erroneously regarded as engaging in such use,
    	
but is not engaging in such use.
    It shall not be a violation of this Act for an employer to adopt or administer reasonable policies or procedures, including but not limited to drug testing, designed to ensure that an individual described in subparagraph (a) or (b) is no longer engaging in the illegal use of drugs.
    (3) An employer:
        (a) may prohibit the illegal use of drugs and the use
    	
of alcohol at the workplace by all employees;
        (b) may require that employees shall not be under the
    	
influence of alcohol or be engaging in the illegal use of drugs at the workplace;
        (c) may require that employees behave in conformance
    	
with the requirements established under the federal Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988 (41 U.S.C. 701 et seq.) and the Drug Free Workplace Act;
        (d) may hold an employee who engages in the illegal
    	
use of drugs or who is an alcoholic to the same qualification standards for employment or job performance and behavior that such employer holds other employees, even if any unsatisfactory performance or behavior is related to the drug use or alcoholism of such employee; and
        (e) may, with respect to federal regulations
    	
regarding alcohol and the illegal use of drugs, require that:
            (i) employees comply with the standards
        	
established in such regulations of the United States Department of Defense, if the employees of the employer are employed in an industry subject to such regulations, including complying with regulations (if any) that apply to employment in sensitive positions in such an industry, in the case of employees of the employer who are employed in such positions (as defined in the regulations of the Department of Defense);
            (ii) employees comply with the standards
        	
established in such regulations of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, if the employees of the employer are employed in an industry subject to such regulations, including complying with regulations (if any) that apply to employment in sensitive positions in such an industry, in the case of employees of the employer who are employed in such positions (as defined in the regulations of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission); and
            (iii) employees comply with the standards
        	
established in such regulations of the United States Department of Transportation, if the employees of the employer are employed in a transportation industry subject to such regulations, including complying with such regulations (if any) that apply to employment in sensitive positions in such an industry, in the case of employees of the employer who are employed in such positions (as defined in the regulations of the United States Department of Transportation).
    (4) For purposes of this Act, a test to determine the illegal use of drugs shall not be considered a medical examination. Nothing in this Act shall be construed to encourage, prohibit, or authorize the conducting of drug testing for the illegal use of drugs by job applicants or employees or making employment decisions based on such test results.
    (5) Nothing in this Act shall be construed to encourage, prohibit, restrict, or authorize the otherwise lawful exercise by an employer subject to the jurisdiction of the United States Department of Transportation of authority to:
        (a) test employees of such employer in, and
    	
applicants for, positions involving safety-sensitive duties for the illegal use of drugs and for on-duty impairment by alcohol; and
        (b) remove such persons who test positive for illegal
    	
use of drugs and on-duty impairment by alcohol pursuant to subparagraph (a) from safety-sensitive duties in implementing paragraph (3).
(Source: P.A. 99-152, eff. 1-1-16, 99-165, eff. 7-28-15; 99-642, eff. 7-28-16.)

    (775 ILCS 5/2-105) (from Ch. 68, par. 2-105)
    Sec. 2-105. Equal Employment Opportunities; Affirmative Action.
    (A) Public Contracts. Every party to a public contract and every eligible bidder shall:
        (1) Refrain from unlawful discrimination and
    	
discrimination based on citizenship status in employment and undertake affirmative action to assure equality of employment opportunity and eliminate the effects of past discrimination;
        (2) Comply with the procedures and requirements of
    	
the Department's regulations concerning equal employment opportunities and affirmative action;
        (3) Provide such information, with respect to its
    	
employees and applicants for employment, and assistance as the Department may reasonably request;
        (4) Have written sexual harassment policies that
    	
shall include, at a minimum, the following information: (i) the illegality of sexual harassment; (ii) the definition of sexual harassment under State law; (iii) a description of sexual harassment, utilizing examples; (iv) the vendor's internal complaint process including penalties; (v) the legal recourse, investigative and complaint process available through the Department and the Commission; (vi) directions on how to contact the Department and Commission; and (vii) protection against retaliation as provided by Section 6-101 of this Act. A copy of the policies shall be provided to the Department upon request. Additionally, each bidder who submits a bid or offer for a State contract under the Illinois Procurement Code shall have a written copy of the bidder's sexual harassment policy as required under this paragraph (4). A copy of the policy shall be provided to the State agency entering into the contract upon request.
    (B) State Agencies. Every State executive department, State agency, board, commission, and instrumentality shall:
        (1) Comply with the procedures and requirements of
    	
the Department's regulations concerning equal employment opportunities and affirmative action;
        (2) Provide such information and assistance as the
    	
Department may request.
        (3) Establish, maintain, and carry out a continuing
    	
affirmative action plan consistent with this Act and the regulations of the Department designed to promote equal opportunity for all State residents in every aspect of agency personnel policy and practice. For purposes of these affirmative action plans, the race and national origin categories to be included in the plans are: American Indian or Alaska Native, Asian, Black or African American, Hispanic or Latino, Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander.
        This plan shall include a current detailed status
    	
report:
            (a) indicating, by each position in State
        	
service, the number, percentage, and average salary of individuals employed by race, national origin, sex and disability, and any other category that the Department may require by rule;
            (b) identifying all positions in which the
        	
percentage of the people employed by race, national origin, sex and disability, and any other category that the Department may require by rule, is less than four-fifths of the percentage of each of those components in the State work force;
            (c) specifying the goals and methods for
        	
increasing the percentage by race, national origin, sex and disability, and any other category that the Department may require by rule, in State positions;
            (d) indicating progress and problems toward
        	
meeting equal employment opportunity goals, including, if applicable, but not limited to, Department of Central Management Services recruitment efforts, publicity, promotions, and use of options designating positions by linguistic abilities;
            (e) establishing a numerical hiring goal for the
        	
employment of qualified persons with disabilities in the agency as a whole, to be based on the proportion of people with work disabilities in the Illinois labor force as reflected in the most recent employment data made available by the United States Census Bureau.
        (4) If the agency has 1000 or more employees, appoint
    	
a full-time Equal Employment Opportunity officer, subject to the Department's approval, whose duties shall include:
            (a) Advising the head of the particular State
        	
agency with respect to the preparation of equal employment opportunity programs, procedures, regulations, reports, and the agency's affirmative action plan.
            (b) Evaluating in writing each fiscal year the
        	
sufficiency of the total agency program for equal employment opportunity and reporting thereon to the head of the agency with recommendations as to any improvement or correction in recruiting, hiring or promotion needed, including remedial or disciplinary action with respect to managerial or supervisory employees who have failed to cooperate fully or who are in violation of the program.
            (c) Making changes in recruitment, training and
        	
promotion programs and in hiring and promotion procedures designed to eliminate discriminatory practices when authorized.
            (d) Evaluating tests, employment policies,
        	
practices and qualifications and reporting to the head of the agency and to the Department any policies, practices and qualifications that have unequal impact by race, national origin as required by Department rule, sex or disability or any other category that the Department may require by rule, and to assist in the recruitment of people in underrepresented classifications. This function shall be performed in cooperation with the State Department of Central Management Services.
            (e) Making any aggrieved employee or applicant
        	
for employment aware of his or her remedies under this Act.
            In any meeting, investigation, negotiation,
        	
conference, or other proceeding between a State employee and an Equal Employment Opportunity officer, a State employee (1) who is not covered by a collective bargaining agreement and (2) who is the complaining party or the subject of such proceeding may be accompanied, advised and represented by (1) an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of Illinois or (2) a representative of an employee organization whose membership is composed of employees of the State and of which the employee is a member. A representative of an employee, other than an attorney, may observe but may not actively participate, or advise the State employee during the course of such meeting, investigation, negotiation, conference or other proceeding. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to permit any person who is not licensed to practice law in Illinois to deliver any legal services or otherwise engage in any activities that would constitute the unauthorized practice of law. Any representative of an employee who is present with the consent of the employee, shall not, during or after termination of the relationship permitted by this Section with the State employee, use or reveal any information obtained during the course of the meeting, investigation, negotiation, conference or other proceeding without the consent of the complaining party and any State employee who is the subject of the proceeding and pursuant to rules and regulations governing confidentiality of such information as promulgated by the appropriate State agency. Intentional or reckless disclosure of information in violation of these confidentiality requirements shall constitute a Class B misdemeanor.
        (5) Establish, maintain and carry out a continuing
    	
sexual harassment program that shall include the following:
            (a) Develop a written sexual harassment policy
        	
that includes at a minimum the following information: (i) the illegality of sexual harassment; (ii) the definition of sexual harassment under State law; (iii) a description of sexual harassment, utilizing examples; (iv) the agency's internal complaint process including penalties; (v) the legal recourse, investigative and complaint process available through the Department and the Commission; (vi) directions on how to contact the Department and Commission; and (vii) protection against retaliation as provided by Section 6-101 of this Act. The policy shall be reviewed annually.
            (b) Post in a prominent and accessible location
        	
and distribute in a manner to assure notice to all agency employees without exception the agency's sexual harassment policy. Such documents may meet, but shall not exceed, the 6th grade literacy level. Distribution shall be effectuated within 90 days of the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1992 and shall occur annually thereafter.
            (c) Provide training on sexual harassment
        	
prevention and the agency's sexual harassment policy as a component of all ongoing or new employee training programs.
        (6) Notify the Department 30 days before effecting
    	
any layoff. Once notice is given, the following shall occur:
            (a) No layoff may be effective earlier than 10
        	
working days after notice to the Department, unless an emergency layoff situation exists.
            (b) The State executive department, State agency,
        	
board, commission, or instrumentality in which the layoffs are to occur must notify each employee targeted for layoff, the employee's union representative (if applicable), and the State Dislocated Worker Unit at the Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity.
            (c) The State executive department, State agency,
        	
board, commission, or instrumentality in which the layoffs are to occur must conform to applicable collective bargaining agreements.
            (d) The State executive department, State agency,
        	
board, commission, or instrumentality in which the layoffs are to occur should notify each employee targeted for layoff that transitional assistance may be available to him or her under the Economic Dislocation and Worker Adjustment Assistance Act administered by the Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity. Failure to give such notice shall not invalidate the layoff or postpone its effective date.
     As used in this subsection (B), "disability" shall be defined in rules promulgated under the Illinois Administrative Procedure Act.
    (C) Civil Rights Violations. It is a civil rights violation for any public contractor or eligible bidder to:
        (1) fail to comply with the public contractor's or
    	
eligible bidder's duty to refrain from unlawful discrimination and discrimination based on citizenship status in employment under subsection (A)(1) of this Section; or
        (2) fail to comply with the public contractor's or
    	
eligible bidder's duties of affirmative action under subsection (A) of this Section, provided however, that the Department has notified the public contractor or eligible bidder in writing by certified mail that the public contractor or eligible bidder may not be in compliance with affirmative action requirements of subsection (A). A minimum of 60 days to comply with the requirements shall be afforded to the public contractor or eligible bidder before the Department may issue formal notice of non-compliance.
    (D) As used in this Section:
        (1) "American Indian or Alaska Native" means a person
    	
having origins in any of the original peoples of North and South America, including Central America, and who maintains tribal affiliation or community attachment.
        (2) "Asian" means a person having origins in any of
    	
the original peoples of the Far East, Southeast Asia, or the Indian subcontinent, including, but not limited to, Cambodia, China, India, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, the Philippine Islands, Thailand, and Vietnam.
        (3) "Black or African American" means a person having
    	
origins in any of the black racial groups of Africa. Terms such as "Haitian" or "Negro" can be used in addition to "Black or African American".
        (4) "Hispanic or Latino" means a person of Cuban,
    	
Mexican, Puerto Rican, South or Central American, or other Spanish culture or origin, regardless of race.
        (5) "Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander" means
    	
a person having origins in any of the original peoples of Hawaii, Guam, Samoa, or other Pacific Islands.
(Source: P.A. 99-933, eff. 1-27-17; 100-698, eff. 1-1-19.)

    (775 ILCS 5/2-106)
    Sec. 2-106. Interagency Committee on Employees with Disabilities.
    (A) As used in this Section:
    "State agency" means all officers, boards, commissions, and agencies created by the Constitution in the executive branch; all officers, departments, boards, commissions, agencies, institutions, authorities, universities, bodies politic and corporate of the State; and administrative units or corporate outgrowths of the State government which are created by or pursuant to statute, other than units of local government and their officers, school districts, and boards of election commissioners; all administrative units and corporate outgrowths of the above and as may be created by executive order of the Governor.
    "State employee" means an employee of a State agency.
    (B) The Interagency Committee on Employees with Disabilities, created under repealed Section 19a of the Personnel Code, is continued as set forth in this Section. The Committee is composed of 18 members as follows: the Chairperson of the Civil Service Commission or his or her designee, the Director of Veterans' Affairs or his or her designee, the Director of Central Management Services or his or her designee, the Secretary of Human Services or his or her designee, the Director of Human Rights or his or her designee, the Director of the Illinois Council on Developmental Disabilities or his or her designee, the Lieutenant Governor or his or her designee, the Attorney General or his or her designee, the Secretary of State or his or her designee, the State Comptroller or his or her designee, the State Treasurer or his or her designee, and 7 State employees with disabilities appointed by and serving at the pleasure of the Governor.
    (C) The Director of Human Rights and the Secretary of Human Services shall serve as co-chairpersons of the Committee. The Committee shall meet as often as it deems necessary, but in no case less than 6 times annually at the call of the co-chairpersons. Notice shall be given to the members in writing in advance of a scheduled meeting.
    (D) The Department of Human Rights shall provide administrative support to the Committee.
    (E) The purposes and functions of the Committee are: (1) to provide a forum where problems of general concern to State employees with disabilities can be raised and methods of their resolution can be suggested to the appropriate State agencies; (2) to provide a clearinghouse of information for State employees with disabilities by working with those agencies to develop and retain such information; (3) to promote affirmative action efforts pertaining to the employment of persons with disabilities by State agencies; and (4) to recommend, where appropriate, means of strengthening the affirmative action programs for employees with disabilities in State agencies.
    (F) The Committee shall annually make a complete report to the General Assembly on the Committee's achievements and accomplishments. Such report may also include an evaluation by the Committee of the effectiveness of the hiring and advancement practices in State government.
    (G) This amendatory Act of the 99th General Assembly is not intended to disqualify any current member of the Committee from continued membership on the Committee in accordance with the terms of this Section or the member's appointment.
(Source: P.A. 99-314, eff. 8-7-15.)

    (775 ILCS 5/2-107)
    Sec. 2-107. Helpline to report sexual harassment and discrimination.
    (a) The Department shall, no later than 3 months after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 100th General Assembly, establish and maintain a sexual harassment and discrimination helpline. The Department shall help persons who contact the Department through the helpline find necessary resources, including counseling services, and assist in the filing of sexual harassment and discrimination complaints with the Department or other applicable agencies. The Department may recommend individual seek private counsel, but shall not make recommendations for legal representation. The helpline shall provide the means through which persons may anonymously report sexual harassment and discrimination in both private and public places of employment. In the case of a report of sexual harassment and discrimination by a person subject to Article 20 or 25 of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act, the Department shall, with the permission of the reporting individual, report the allegations to the Executive Inspector General or Legislative Inspector General for further investigation.
    (b) The Department shall advertise the helpline on its website and in materials related to sexual harassment and discrimination, including posters made available to the public, and encourage reporting by both those who are subject to sexual harassment and discrimination and those who have witnessed it.
    (c) All communications received by the Department via the helpline or Internet communication shall remain confidential and shall be exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act.
    (d) As used in this Section, "helpline" means a toll-free telephone with voicemail capabilities and an Internet website through which persons may report instances of sexual harassment and discrimination.
    (e) The Department shall annually evaluate the helpline and report to the Clerk of the House of Representatives and the Secretary of the Senate in electronic form only, in the manner that the Clerk and the Secretary shall direct, the following information: (i) the total number of calls received, including messages left during non-business hours; (ii) the number of calls reporting sexual discrimination claims; (iii) the number of calls reporting harassment claims; (iv) the number of calls reporting sexual harassment claims; (v) the number of calls that were referred to each Executive Inspector General; and (vi) the number of calls that were referred to the Legislative Inspector General.
(Source: P.A. 100-554, eff. 11-16-17; 100-588, eff. 6-8-18.)

    (775 ILCS 5/2-108)
    (Section scheduled to be repealed on January 1, 2030)
    Sec. 2-108. Employer disclosure requirements.
    (A) Definitions. The following definitions are applicable strictly to this Section:
        (1) "Employer" means:
            (a) any person employing one or more employees
        	
within this State;
            (b) a labor organization; or
            (c) the State and any political subdivision,
        	
municipal corporation, or other governmental unit or agency, without regard to the number of employees.
        (2) "Settlement" means any written commitment or
    	
written agreement, including any agreed judgment, stipulation, decree, agreement to settle, assurance of discontinuance, or otherwise between an employee, as defined by subsection (A) of Section 2-101, or a nonemployee to whom an employer owes a duty under this Act pursuant to (A-10) or (D-5) of Section 2-102, and an employer under which the employer directly or indirectly provides to an individual compensation or other consideration due to an allegation that the individual has been a victim of sexual harassment or unlawful discrimination under this Act.
        (3) "Adverse judgment or administrative ruling" means
    	
any final and non-appealable adverse judgment or final and non-appealable administrative ruling entered in favor of an employee as defined by subsection (A) of Section 2-101 or a nonemployee to whom an employer owes a duty under this Act pursuant to (A-10) or (D-5) of Section 2-102, and against the employer during the preceding year in which there was a finding of sexual harassment or unlawful discrimination brought under this Act, Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, or any other federal, State, or local law prohibiting sexual harassment or unlawful discrimination.
    (B) Required disclosures. Beginning July 1, 2020, and by each July 1 thereafter, each employer that had an adverse judgment or administrative ruling against it in the preceding calendar year, as provided in this Section, shall disclose annually to the Department of Human Rights the following information:
        (1) the total number of adverse judgments or
    	
administrative rulings during the preceding year;
        (2) whether any equitable relief was ordered against
    	
the employer in any adverse judgment or administrative ruling described in paragraph (1);
        (3) how many adverse judgments or administrative
    	
rulings described in paragraph (1) are in each of the following categories:
            (a) sexual harassment;
            (b) discrimination or harassment on the basis of
        	
sex;
            (c) discrimination or harassment on the basis of
        	
race, color, or national origin;
            (d) discrimination or harassment on the basis of
        	
religion;
            (e) discrimination or harassment on the basis of
        	
age;
            (f) discrimination or harassment on the basis of
        	
disability;
            (g) discrimination or harassment on the basis of
        	
military status or unfavorable discharge from military status;
            (h) discrimination or harassment on the basis of
        	
sexual orientation or gender identity; and
            (i) discrimination or harassment on the basis of
        	
any other characteristic protected under this Act;
    (C) Settlements. If the Department is investigating a charge filed pursuant to this Act, the Department may request the employer responding to the charge to submit the total number of settlements entered into during the preceding 5 years, or less at the direction of the Department, that relate to any alleged act of sexual harassment or unlawful discrimination that:
        (1) occurred in the workplace of the employer; or
        (2) involved the behavior of an employee of the
    	
employer or a corporate executive of the employer, without regard to whether that behavior occurred in the workplace of the employer.
    The total number of settlements entered into during the requested period shall be reported along with how many settlements are in each of the following categories, when requested by the Department pursuant to this subsection:
        (a) sexual harassment;
        (b) discrimination or harassment on the basis of sex;
        (c) discrimination or harassment on the basis of
    	
race, color, or national origin;
        (d) discrimination or harassment on the basis of
    	
religion;
        (e) discrimination or harassment on the basis of age;
        (f) discrimination or harassment on the basis of
    	
disability;
        (g) discrimination or harassment on the basis of
    	
military status or unfavorable discharge from military status;
        (h) discrimination or harassment on the basis of
    	
sexual orientation or gender identity; and
        (i) discrimination or harassment on the basis of any
    	
other characteristic protected under this Act;
    The Department shall not rely on the existence of any settlement agreement to support a finding of substantial evidence under this Act.
    (D) Prohibited disclosures. An employer may not disclose the name of a victim of an act of alleged sexual harassment or unlawful discrimination in any disclosures required under this Section.
    (E) Annual report. The Department shall publish an annual report aggregating the information reported by employers under subsection (B) of this Section such that no individual employer data is available to the public. The report shall include the number of adverse judgments or administrative rulings filed during the preceding calendar year based on each of the protected classes identified by this Act.
    The report shall be filed with the General Assembly and made available to the public by December 31 of each reporting year. Data submitted by an employer to comply with this Section is confidential and exempt from the Freedom of Information Act.
    (F) Failure to report and penalties. If an employer fails to make any disclosures required under this Section, the Department shall issue a notice to show cause giving the employer 30 days to disclose the required information. If the employer does not make the required disclosures within 30 days, the Department shall petition the Illinois Human Rights Commission for entry of an order imposing a civil penalty against the employer pursuant to Section 8-109.1. The civil penalty shall be paid into the Department of Human Rights' Training and Development Fund.
    (G) Rules. The Department shall adopt any rules it deems necessary for implementation of this Section.
    (H) This Section is repealed on January 1, 2030.
(Source: P.A. 101-221, eff. 1-1-20.)

    (775 ILCS 5/2-109)
    Sec. 2-109. Sexual harassment prevention training.
    (A) The General Assembly finds that the organizational tolerance of sexual harassment has a detrimental influence in workplaces by creating a hostile environment for employees, reducing productivity, and increasing legal liability. It is the General Assembly's intent to encourage employers to adopt and actively implement policies to ensure their workplaces are safe for employees to report concerns about sexual harassment without fear of retaliation, loss of status, or loss of promotional opportunities.
    (B) The Department shall produce a model sexual harassment prevention training program aimed at the prevention of sexual harassment in the workplace. The model program shall be made available to employers and to the public online at no cost. This model program shall include, at a minimum, the following:
        (1) an explanation of sexual harassment consistent
    	
with this Act;
        (2) examples of conduct that constitutes unlawful
    	
sexual harassment;
        (3) a summary of relevant federal and State statutory
    	
provisions concerning sexual harassment, including remedies available to victims of sexual harassment; and
        (4) a summary of responsibilities of employers in the
    	
prevention, investigation, and corrective measures of sexual harassment.
    (C) Except for those employers subject to the requirements of Section 5-10.5 of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act, every employer with employees working in this State shall use the model sexual harassment prevention training program created by the Department or establish its own sexual harassment prevention training program that equals or exceeds the minimum standards in subsection (B). The sexual harassment prevention training shall be provided at least once a year to all employees. For the purposes of satisfying the requirements under this Section, the Department's model sexual harassment prevention training program may be used to supplement any existing program an employer is utilizing or develops.
    (D) If an employer violates this Section, the Department shall issue a notice to show cause giving the employer 30 days to comply. If the employer does not comply within 30 days, the Department shall petition the Human Rights Commission for entry of an order imposing a civil penalty against the employer pursuant to Section 8-109.1. The civil penalty shall be paid into the Department of Human Rights Training and Development Fund.
(Source: P.A. 101-221, eff. 1-1-20.)

    (775 ILCS 5/2-110)
    Sec. 2-110. Restaurants and bars; sexual harassment prevention.
    (A) As used in this Section:
    "Bar" means an establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and that derives no more than 10% of its gross revenue from the sale of food consumed on the premises, including, but not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, adult entertainment facilities, and cabarets.
    "Manager" means a person responsible for the hiring and firing of employees, including, but not limited to, a general manager, owner, head chef, or other non-tipped employee with duties managing the operation, inventory, safety, and personnel of a restaurant or bar.
    "Restaurant" means any business that is primarily engaged in the sale of ready-to-eat food for immediate consumption, including, but not limited to, restaurants, coffee shops, cafeterias, and sandwich stands that give or offer for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, and kitchen or catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere.
    (B) Every restaurant and bar operating in this State must have a sexual harassment policy provided to all employees, in writing, within the first calendar week of the employee's employment. The policy shall include:
        (1) a prohibition on sexual harassment;
        (2) the definition of sexual harassment under the
    	
Illinois Human Rights Act and Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964;
        (3) details on how an individual can report an
    	
allegation of sexual harassment internally, including options for making a confidential report to a manager, owner, corporate headquarters, human resources department, or other internal reporting mechanism that may be available;
        (4) an explanation of the internal complaint process
    	
available to employees;
        (5) how to contact and file a charge with the
    	
Illinois Department of Human Rights and United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission;
        (6) a prohibition on retaliation for reporting sexual
    	
harassment allegations; and
        (7) a requirement that all employees participate in
    	
sexual harassment prevention training.
    The policy shall be made available in English and Spanish.
    (C) In addition to the model sexual harassment prevention training program produced by the Department in Section 2-109, the Department shall develop a supplemental model training program in consultation with industry professionals specifically aimed at the prevention of sexual harassment in the restaurant and bar industry. The supplemental model program shall be made available to all restaurants and bars and the public online at no cost. The training shall include:
        (1) specific conduct, activities, or videos related
    	
to the restaurant or bar industry;
        (2) an explanation of manager liability and
    	
responsibility under the law; and
        (3) English and Spanish language options.
    (D) Every restaurant and bar that is an employer under this Act shall use the supplemental model training program or establish its own supplemental model training program that equals or exceeds the requirements of subsection (C). The supplemental training program shall be provided at least once a year to all employees, regardless of employment classification. For the purposes of satisfying the requirements under this Section, this supplemental training may be done in conjunction or at the same time as any training that complies with Section 2-109.
    (E) If a restaurant or bar that is an employer under this Act violates this Section 2-110, the Department shall issue a notice to show cause giving the employer 30 days to comply. If the employer does not comply within 30 days, the Department shall petition the Human Rights Commission for entry of an order imposing a civil penalty against the employer pursuant to Section 8-109.1. The civil penalty shall be paid into the Department of Human Rights Training and Development Fund.
(Source: P.A. 101-221, eff. 1-1-20.)


 
    (775 ILCS 5/Art. 3 heading)
ARTICLE 3. REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS

    (775 ILCS 5/3-101) (from Ch. 68, par. 3-101)
    Sec. 3-101. Definitions. The following definitions are applicable strictly in the context of this Article:
    (A) Real Property. "Real property" includes buildings, structures, real estate, lands, tenements, leaseholds, interests in real estate cooperatives, condominiums, and hereditaments, corporeal and incorporeal, or any interest therein.
    (B) Real Estate Transaction. "Real estate transaction" includes the sale, exchange, rental or lease of real property. "Real estate transaction" also includes the brokering or appraising of residential real property and the making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance:
    (1) for purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling; or
    (2) secured by residential real estate.
    (C) Housing Accommodations. "Housing accommodation" includes any improved or unimproved real property, or part thereof, which is used or occupied, or is intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied, as the home or residence of one or more individuals.
    (D) Real Estate Broker or Salesman. "Real estate broker or salesman" means a person, whether licensed or not, who, for or with the expectation of receiving a consideration, lists, sells, purchases, exchanges, rents, or leases real property, or who negotiates or attempts to negotiate any of these activities, or who holds himself or herself out as engaged in these.
    (E) Familial Status. "Familial status" means one or more individuals (who have not attained the age of 18 years) being domiciled with:
    (1) a parent or person having legal custody of such individual or individuals; or
    (2) the designee of such parent or other person having such custody, with the written permission of such parent or other person.
    The protections afforded by this Article against discrimination on the basis of familial status apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18 years.
    (F) Conciliation. "Conciliation" means the attempted resolution of issues raised by a charge, or by the investigation of such charge, through informal negotiations involving the aggrieved party, the respondent and the Department.
    (G) Conciliation Agreement. "Conciliation agreement" means a written agreement setting forth the resolution of the issues in conciliation.
    (H) Covered Multifamily Dwellings. As used in Section 3-102.1, "covered multifamily dwellings" means:
    (1) buildings consisting of 4 or more units if such buildings have one or more elevators; and
    (2) ground floor units in other buildings consisting of 4 or more units.
(Source: P.A. 86-820; 86-910; 86-1028.)

    (775 ILCS 5/3-102) (from Ch. 68, par. 3-102)
    Sec. 3-102. Civil rights violations; real estate transactions. It is a civil rights violation for an owner or any other person engaging in a real estate transaction, or for a real estate broker or salesman, because of unlawful discrimination, familial status, or an arrest record, as defined under subsection (B-5) of Section 1-103, to:
        (A) Transaction. Refuse to engage in a real estate
    	
transaction with a person or to discriminate in making available such a transaction;
        (B) Terms. Alter the terms, conditions or privileges
    	
of a real estate transaction or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith;
        (C) Offer. Refuse to receive or to fail to transmit a
    	
bona fide offer to engage in a real estate transaction from a person;
        (D) Negotiation. Refuse to negotiate for a real
    	
estate transaction with a person;
        (E) Representations. Represent to a person that real
    	
property is not available for inspection, sale, rental, or lease when in fact it is so available, or to fail to bring a property listing to his or her attention, or to refuse to permit him or her to inspect real property;
        (F) Publication of Intent. Make, print, circulate,
    	
post, mail, publish or cause to be made, printed, circulated, posted, mailed, or published any notice, statement, advertisement or sign, or use a form of application for a real estate transaction, or make a record or inquiry in connection with a prospective real estate transaction, that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on unlawful discrimination or unlawful discrimination based on familial status or an arrest record, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation, or discrimination;
        (G) Listings. Offer, solicit, accept, use or retain
    	
a listing of real property with knowledge that unlawful discrimination or discrimination on the basis of familial status or an arrest record in a real estate transaction is intended.
(Source: P.A. 101-565, eff. 1-1-20.)

    (775 ILCS 5/3-102.1) (from Ch. 68, par. 3-102.1)
    Sec. 3-102.1. Disability.
    (A) It is a civil rights violation to refuse to sell or rent or to otherwise make unavailable or deny a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a disability of that buyer or renter, a disability of a person residing or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented or made available or a disability of any person associated with the buyer or renter.
    (B) It is a civil rights violation to alter the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or the provision of services or facilities in connection with such dwelling because of a disability of a person with a disability or a disability of any person residing or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented or made available, or a disability of any person associated with that person.
    (C) It is a civil rights violation:
        (1) to refuse to permit, at the expense of the
    	
person with a disability, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full enjoyment of the premises; except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before modifications, reasonable wear and tear excepted. The landlord may not increase for persons with a disability any customarily required security deposit. However, where it is necessary in order to ensure with reasonable certainty that funds will be available to pay for the restorations at the end of the tenancy, the landlord may negotiate as part of such a restoration agreement a provision requiring that the tenant pay into an interest bearing escrow account, over a reasonable period, a reasonable amount of money not to exceed the cost of the restorations. The interest in any such account shall accrue to the benefit of the tenant. A landlord may condition permission for a modification on the renter providing a reasonable description of the proposed modifications as well as reasonable assurances that the work will be done in a workmanlike manner and that any required building permits will be obtained;
        (2) to refuse to make reasonable accommodations in
    	
rules, policies, practices, or services, when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or
        (3) in connection with the design and construction of
    	
covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after March 13, 1991, to fail to design and construct those dwellings in such a manner that:
            (a) the public use and common use portions of
        	
such dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by persons with a disability;
            (b) all the doors designed to allow passage into
        	
and within all premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by persons with a disability in wheelchairs; and
            (c) all premises within such dwellings contain
        	
the following features of adaptive design:
                (i) an accessible route into and through the
            	
dwelling;
                (ii) light switches, electrical outlets,
            	
thermostats, and other environmental controls in accessible locations;
                (iii) reinforcements in bathroom walls to
            	
allow later installation of grab bars; and
                (iv) usable kitchens and bathrooms such that
            	
an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
    (D) Compliance with the appropriate standards of the Illinois Accessibility Code for adaptable dwelling units (71 Illinois Administrative Code Section 400.350 (e) 1-6) suffices to satisfy the requirements of subsection (C)(3)(c).
    (E) If a unit of local government has incorporated into its law the requirements set forth in subsection (C)(3), compliance with its law shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements of that subsection.
    (F) A unit of local government may review and approve newly constructed covered multifamily dwellings for the purpose of making determinations as to whether the design and construction requirements of subsection (C)(3) are met.
    (G) The Department shall encourage, but may not require, units of local government to include in their existing procedures for the review and approval of newly constructed covered multifamily dwellings, determinations as to whether the design and construction of such dwellings are consistent with subsection (C)(3), and shall provide technical assistance to units of local government and other persons to implement the requirements of subsection (C)(3).
    (H) Nothing in this Act shall be construed to require the Department to review or approve the plans, designs or construction of all covered multifamily dwellings to determine whether the design and construction of such dwellings are consistent with the requirements of subsection (C)(3).
    (I) Nothing in subsections (E), (F), (G) or (H) shall be construed to affect the authority and responsibility of the Department to receive and process complaints or otherwise engage in enforcement activities under State and local law.
    (J) Determinations by a unit of local government under subsections (E) and (F) shall not be conclusive in enforcement proceedings under this Act if those determinations are not in accord with the terms of this Act.
    (K) Nothing in this Section requires that a dwelling be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of others or would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others.
(Source: P.A. 95-668, eff. 10-10-07.)

    (775 ILCS 5/3-102.5)
    Sec. 3-102.5. Unlawful activity. The prohibition against the use of an arrest record under Section 3-102 shall not preclude an owner or any other person engaging in a real estate transaction, or a real estate broker or salesman, from prohibiting the tenant, a member of the tenant's household, or a guest of the tenant from engaging in unlawful activity on the premises.
(Source: P.A. 101-565, eff. 1-1-20.)

    (775 ILCS 5/3-103) (from Ch. 68, par. 3-103)
    Sec. 3-103. Blockbusting. It is a civil rights violation for any person to:
    (A) Solicitation. Solicit for sale, lease, listing or purchase any residential real estate within this State, on the grounds of loss of value due to the present or prospective entry into the vicinity of the property involved of any person or persons of any particular race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, age, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, familial status or disability.
    (B) Statements. Distribute or cause to be distributed, written material or statements designed to induce any owner of residential real estate in this State to sell or lease his or her property because of any present or prospective changes in the race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, age, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, familial status or disability of residents in the vicinity of the property involved.
    (C) Creating Alarm. Intentionally create alarm, among residents of any community, by transmitting communications in any manner, including a telephone call whether or not conversation thereby ensues, with a design to induce any owner of residential real estate in this state to sell or lease his or her property because of any present or prospective entry into the vicinity of the property involved of any person or persons of any particular race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, age, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, familial status or disability.
(Source: P.A. 97-877, eff. 8-2-12.)

    (775 ILCS 5/3-104.1) (from Ch. 68, par. 3-104.1)
    Sec. 3-104.1. Refusal to sell or rent because a person has a guide, hearing or support dog. It is a civil rights violation for the owner or agent of any housing accommodation to:
        (A) refuse to sell or rent after the making of a
    	
bonafide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny property to any blind or hearing impaired person or person with a physical disability because he has a guide, hearing or support dog; or
        (B) discriminate against any blind or hearing
    	
impaired person or person with a physical disability in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental property, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because he has a guide, hearing or support dog; or
        (C) require, because a blind or hearing impaired
    	
person or person with a physical disability has a guide, hearing or support dog, an extra charge in a lease, rental agreement, or contract of purchase or sale, other than for actual damage done to the premises by the dog.
(Source: P.A. 99-143, eff. 7-27-15.)

    (775 ILCS 5/3-105) (from Ch. 68, par. 3-105)
    Sec. 3-105. Restrictive covenants.
    (A) Agreements. Every provision in an oral agreement or a written instrument relating to real property which purports to forbid or restrict the conveyance, encumbrance, occupancy, or lease thereof on the basis of race, color, religion, or national origin is void.
    (B) Limitations.
    (1) Every condition, restriction or prohibition, including a right of entry or possibility of reverter, which directly or indirectly limits the use or occupancy of real property on the basis of race, color, religion, or national origin is void.
    (2) This Section shall not apply to a limitation of use on the basis of religion of real property held by a religious institution or organization or by a religious or charitable organization operated, supervised, or controlled by a religious institution or organization, and used for religious or charitable purposes.
    (C) Civil Rights Violations. It is a civil rights violation to insert in a written instrument relating to real property a provision that is void under this Section or to honor or attempt to honor such a provision in the chain of title.
(Source: P.A. 99-642, eff. 7-28-16.)

    (775 ILCS 5/3-105.1)
    Sec. 3-105.1. Interference, coercion, or intimidation. It is a civil rights violation to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by this Article 3.
(Source: P.A. 94-78, eff. 1-1-06.)

    (775 ILCS 5/3-106) (from Ch. 68, par. 3-106)
    Sec. 3-106. Exemptions. Nothing contained in Section 3-102 shall prohibit:
    (A) Private Sales of Single Family Homes.
        (1) Any sale of a single family home by its owner so
    	
long as the following criteria are met:
            (a) The owner does not own or have a beneficial
        	
interest in more than three single family homes at the time of the sale;
            (b) The owner or a member of his or her family
        	
was the last current resident of the home;
            (c) The home is sold without the use in any
        	
manner of the sales or rental facilities or services of any real estate broker or salesman, or of any employee or agent of any real estate broker or salesman;
            (d) The home is sold without the publication,
        	
posting or mailing, after notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of paragraph (F) of Section 3-102.
        (2) This exemption does not apply to paragraph (F) of
    	
Section 3-102.
    (B) Apartments. Rental of a housing accommodation in a building which contains housing accommodations for not more than 4 families living independently of each other, if the owner resides in one of the housing accommodations. This exemption does not apply to paragraph (F) of Section 3-102.
    (C) Private Rooms. Rental of a room or rooms in a private home by an owner if he or she or a member of his or her family resides therein or, while absent for a period of not more than twelve months, if he or she or a member of his or her family intends to return to reside therein.
    (D) Reasonable local, State, or Federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling.
    (E) Religious Organizations. A religious organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of a dwelling which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, or national origin.
    (F) Sex. Restricting the rental of rooms in a housing accommodation to persons of one sex.
    (G) Persons Convicted of Drug-Related Offenses. Conduct against a person because such person has been convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance as defined in Section 102 of the federal Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802).
    (H) Persons engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property from taking into consideration factors other than those based on unlawful discrimination or familial status in furnishing appraisals.
    (H-1) The owner of an owner-occupied residential building with 4 or fewer units (including the unit in which the owner resides) from making decisions regarding whether to rent to a person based upon that person's sexual orientation.
    (I) Housing for Older Persons. No provision in this Article regarding familial status shall apply with respect to housing for older persons.
        (1) As used in this Section, "housing for older
    	
persons" means housing:
            (a) provided under any State or Federal program
        	
that the Department determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons (as defined in the State or Federal program); or
            (b) intended for, and solely occupied by, persons
        	
62 years of age or older; or
            (c) intended and operated for occupancy by
        	
persons 55 years of age or older and:
                (i) at least 80% of the occupied units are
            	
occupied by at least one person who is 55 years of age or older;
                (ii) the housing facility or community
            	
publishes and adheres to policies and procedures that demonstrate the intent required under this subdivision (c); and
                (iii) the housing facility or community
            	
complies with rules adopted by the Department for verification of occupancy, which shall:
                    (aa) provide for verification by reliable
                	
surveys and affidavits; and
                    (bb) include examples of the types of
                	
policies and procedures relevant to a determination of compliance with the requirement of clause (ii).
        These surveys and affidavits shall be admissible in
    	
administrative and judicial proceedings for the purposes of such verification.
        (2) Housing shall not fail to meet the requirements
    	
for housing for older persons by reason of:
            (a) persons residing in such housing as of the
        	
effective date of this amendatory Act of 1989 who do not meet the age requirements of subsections (1)(b) or (c); provided, that new occupants of such housing meet the age requirements of subsections (1)(b) or (c) of this subsection; or
            (b) unoccupied units; provided, that such units
        	
are reserved for occupancy by persons who meet the age requirements of subsections (1)(b) or (c) of this subsection.
        (3) (a) A person shall not be held personally liable
        	
for monetary damages for a violation of this Article if the person reasonably relied, in good faith, on the application of the exemption under this subsection (I) relating to housing for older persons.
            (b) For the purposes of this item (3), a person
        	
may show good faith reliance on the application of the exemption only by showing that:
                (i) the person has no actual knowledge that
            	
the facility or community is not, or will not be, eligible for the exemption; and
                (ii) the facility or community has stated
            	
formally, in writing, that the facility or community complies with the requirements for the exemption.
    (J) Child Sex Offender Refusal to Rent. Refusal of a child sex offender who owns and resides at residential real estate to rent any residential unit within the same building in which he or she resides to a person who is the parent or guardian of a child or children under 18 years of age.
    (K) Arrest Records. Inquiry into or the use of an arrest record if the inquiry or use is otherwise authorized by State or federal law.
(Source: P.A. 101-565, eff. 1-1-20.)


 
    (775 ILCS 5/Art. 4 heading)
ARTICLE 4. FINANCIAL CREDIT

    (775 ILCS 5/4-101) (from Ch. 68, par. 4-101)
    Sec. 4-101. Definitions. The following definitions are applicable strictly in the context of this Article:
    (A) Credit Card. "Credit card" has the meaning set forth in Section 17-0.5 of the Criminal Code of 2012.
    (B) Financial Institution. "Financial institution" means any bank, credit union, insurance company, mortgage banking company or savings and loan association which operates or has a place of business in this State.
    (C) Loan. "Loan" includes, but is not limited to, the providing of funds, for consideration, which are sought for: (1) the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a housing accommodation as that term is defined in paragraph (C) of Section 3-101; or (2) any commercial or industrial purposes.
    (D) Varying Terms. "Varying the terms of a loan" includes, but is not limited to, the following practices:
        (1) Requiring a greater down payment than is usual
    	
for the particular type of a loan involved.
        (2) Requiring a shorter period of amortization than
    	
is usual for the particular type of loan involved.
        (3) Charging a higher interest rate than is usual for
    	
the particular type of loan involved.
        (4) An under appraisal of real estate or other item
    	
of property offered as security.
(Source: P.A. 96-1551, eff. 7-1-11; 97-1150, eff. 1-25-13.)

    (775 ILCS 5/4-102) (from Ch. 68, par. 4-102)
    Sec. 4-102. Civil Rights Violations: Loans. It shall be a civil rights violation for any financial institution, on the grounds of unlawful discrimination, to:
    (A) Denial of Services. Deny any person any of the services normally offered by such an institution.
    (B) Modification of Services. Provide any person with any service which is different from, or provided in a different manner than, that which is provided to other persons similarly situated.
    (C) Loan Terms. Deny or vary the terms of a loan.
    (D) Property Location. Deny or vary the terms of a loan on the basis that a specific parcel of real estate offered as security is located in a specific geographical area.
    (E) Consideration of Income. Deny or vary the terms of a loan without having considered all of the regular and dependable income of each person who would be liable for repayment of the loan.
    (F) Lending Standards. Utilize lending standards that have no economic basis and which constitute unlawful discrimination.
(Source: P.A. 81-1216.)

    (775 ILCS 5/4-103) (from Ch. 68, par. 4-103)
    Sec. 4-103. Credit Cards. It is a civil rights violation for a person who offers credit cards to the public in this State:
        (A) Denial. To refuse to issue a credit card, upon
    	
proper application, on the basis of unlawful discrimination.
        (B) Reasons for Rejection. To fail to inform an
    	
applicant for a credit card, upon request, of the reason that his or her application for a credit card has been rejected.
(Source: P.A. 81-1216.)

    (775 ILCS 5/4-104) (from Ch. 68, par. 4-104)
    Sec. 4-104. Exemptions. Nothing contained in this Article shall prohibit:
        (A) Sound Underwriting Practices. A financial
    	
institution from considering sound underwriting practices in contemplation of any loan to any person. Such practices shall include:
            (1) The willingness and the financial ability of
        	
the borrower to repay the loan.
            (2) The market value of any real estate or other
        	
item of property proposed as security for any loan.
            (3) Diversification of the financial
        	
institution's investment portfolio.
        (B) Credit-worthiness Information; Credit Systems. A
    	
financial institution or a person who offers credit cards from:
            (1) making an inquiry of the applicant's age,
        	
permanent residence, immigration status, or any additional information if such inquiry is for the purpose of determining the amount and probable continuance of income levels, credit history, or other pertinent element of credit-worthiness as provided in regulations of the Department;
            (2) using any empirically derived credit system
        	
which considers age if such system is demonstrably and statistically sound in accordance with regulations of the Department, except that in the operation of such system the age of an applicant over the age of 62 years may not be assigned a negative factor or value.
        (C) Special Credit Programs. A financial institution
    	
from refusing to extend credit when required to by or pursuant to any:
            (1) credit assistance program expressly
        	
authorized by law for an economically disadvantaged class of persons;
            (2) credit assistance program administered by a
        	
nonprofit organization for its members of an economically disadvantaged class of persons;
            (3) special purpose credit program offered by a
        	
profit-making organization to meet special social needs which meets standards prescribed by the Department in its regulations.
(Source: P.A. 100-201, eff. 8-18-17.)


 
    (775 ILCS 5/Art. 5 heading)
ARTICLE 5. PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS

    (775 ILCS 5/5-101) (from Ch. 68, par. 5-101)
    Sec. 5-101. Definitions. The following definitions are applicable strictly in the context of this Article:
    (A) Place of Public Accommodation. "Place of public accommodation" includes, but is not limited to:
        (1) an inn, hotel, motel, or other place of lodging,
    	
except for an establishment located within a building that contains not more than 5 units for rent or hire and that is actually occupied by the proprietor of such establishment as the residence of such proprietor;
        (2) a restaurant, bar, or other establishment serving
    	
food or drink;
        (3) a motion picture house, theater, concert hall,
    	
stadium, or other place of exhibition or entertainment;
        (4) an auditorium, convention center, lecture hall,
    	
or other place of public gathering;
        (5) a bakery, grocery store, clothing store, hardware
    	
store, shopping center, or other sales or rental establishment;
        (6) a laundromat, dry-cleaner, bank, barber shop,
    	
beauty shop, travel service, shoe repair service, funeral parlor, gas station, office of an accountant or lawyer, pharmacy, insurance office, professional office of a health care provider, hospital, or other service establishment;
        (7) public conveyances on air, water, or land;
        (8) a terminal, depot, or other station used for
    	
specified public transportation;
        (9) a museum, library, gallery, or other place of
    	
public display or collection;
        (10) a park, zoo, amusement park, or other place of
    	
recreation;
        (11) a non-sectarian nursery, day care center,
    	
elementary, secondary, undergraduate, or postgraduate school, or other place of education;
        (12) a senior citizen center, homeless shelter, food
    	
bank, non-sectarian adoption agency, or other social service center establishment; and
        (13) a gymnasium, health spa, bowling alley, golf
    	
course, or other place of exercise or recreation.
    (B) Operator. "Operator" means any owner, lessee, proprietor, manager, superintendent, agent, or occupant of a place of public accommodation or an employee of any such person or persons.
    (C) Public Official. "Public official" means any officer or employee of the state or any agency thereof, including state political subdivisions, municipal corporations, park districts, forest preserve districts, educational institutions, and schools.
(Source: P.A. 100-863, eff. 8-14-18.)

    (775 ILCS 5/5-102) (from Ch. 68, par. 5-102)
    Sec. 5-102. Civil Rights Violations: Public Accommodations. It is a civil rights violation for any person on the basis of unlawful discrimination to:
    (A) Enjoyment of Facilities, Goods, and Services. Deny or refuse to another the full and equal enjoyment of the facilities, goods, and services of any public place of accommodation;
    (B) Written Communications. Directly or indirectly, as the operator of a place of public accommodation, publish, circulate, display or mail any written communication, except a private communication sent in response to a specific inquiry, which the operator knows is to the effect that any of the facilities of the place of public accommodation will be denied to any person or that any person is unwelcome, objectionable or unacceptable because of unlawful discrimination;
    (C) Public Officials. Deny or refuse to another, as a public official, the full and equal enjoyment of the accommodations, advantage, facilities or privileges of the official's office or services or of any property under the official's care because of unlawful discrimination.
(Source: P.A. 95-668, eff. 10-10-07.)

    (775 ILCS 5/5-102.1)
    Sec. 5-102.1. No Civil Rights Violation: Public Accommodations.
    (a) It is not a civil rights violation for a medical, dental, or other health care professional or a private professional service provider such as a lawyer, accountant, or insurance agent to refer or refuse to treat or provide services to an individual in a protected class for any non-discriminatory reason if, in the normal course of his or her operations or business, the professional would for the same reason refer or refuse to treat or provide services to an individual who is not in the protected class of the individual who seeks or requires the same or similar treatment or services.
    (b) With respect to a place of public accommodation defined in paragraph (11) of Section 5-101, the exercise of free speech, free expression, free exercise of religion or expression of religiously based views by any individual or group of individuals that is protected under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution or under Section 3 of Article I, or Section 4 of Article I, of the Illinois Constitution, shall not be a civil rights violation.
(Source: P.A. 95-668, eff. 10-10-07; 96-814, eff. 1-1-10.)

    (775 ILCS 5/5-102.2)
    Sec. 5-102.2. Jurisdiction limited. In regard to places of public accommodation defined in paragraph (11) of Section 5-101, the jurisdiction of the Department is limited to: (1) the failure to enroll an individual; (2) the denial of access to facilities, goods, or services; or (3) severe or pervasive harassment of an individual when the covered entity fails to take corrective action to stop the severe or pervasive harassment.
(Source: P.A. 96-814, eff. 1-1-10.)

    (775 ILCS 5/5-103) (from Ch. 68, par. 5-103)
    Sec. 5-103. Exemption. Nothing in this Article shall apply to:
    (A) Private Club. A private club, or other establishment not in fact open to the public, except to the extent that the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations of the establishment are made available to the customers or patrons of another establishment that is a place of public accommodation.
    (B) Facilities Distinctly Private. Any facility, as to discrimination based on sex, which is distinctly private in nature such as restrooms, shower rooms, bath houses, health clubs and other similar facilities for which the Department, in its rules and regulations, may grant exemptions based on bona fide considerations of public policy.
    (C) Inn, Hotel, Rooming House. Any facility, as to discrimination based on sex, which restricts the rental of rooms to individuals of one sex.
(Source: P.A. 85-567.)


 
    (775 ILCS 5/Art. 5A heading)
ARTICLE 5A. ELEMENTARY, SECONDARY, AND HIGHER EDUCATION
(Source: P.A. 96-1319, eff. 7-27-10.)

    (775 ILCS 5/5A-101) (from Ch. 68, par. 5A-101)
    Sec. 5A-101. Definitions. The following definitions are applicable strictly in the content of this Article, except that the term "sexual harassment in elementary, secondary, and higher education" as defined herein has the meaning herein ascribed to it whenever that term is used anywhere in this Act.
    (A) Institution of Elementary, Secondary, or Higher Education. "Institution of elementary, secondary, or higher education" means: (1) a publicly or privately operated university, college, community college, junior college, business or vocational school, or other educational institution offering degrees and instruction beyond the secondary school level; or (2) a publicly or privately operated elementary school or secondary school.
    (B) Degree. "Degree" means: (1) a designation, appellation, series of letters or words or other symbols which signifies or purports to signify that the recipient thereof has satisfactorily completed an organized academic, business or vocational program of study offered beyond the secondary school level; or (2) a designation signifying that the recipient has graduated from an elementary school or secondary school.
    (C) Student. "Student" means any individual admitted to or applying for admission to an institution of elementary, secondary, or higher education, or enrolled on a full or part time basis in a course or program of academic, business or vocational instruction offered by or through an institution of elementary, secondary, or higher education.
    (D) Elementary, Secondary, or Higher Education Representative. "Elementary, secondary, or higher education representative" means and includes the president, chancellor or other holder of any executive office on the administrative staff of an institution of higher education, an administrator of an elementary school or secondary school, a member of the faculty of an institution of higher education, including but not limited to a dean or associate or assistant dean, a professor or associate or assistant professor, and a full or part time instructor or visiting professor, including a graduate assistant or other student who is employed on a temporary basis of less than full time as a teacher or instructor of any course or program of academic, business or vocational instruction offered by or through an institution of higher education, and any teacher, instructor, or other employee of an elementary school or secondary school.
    (E) Sexual Harassment in Elementary, Secondary, and Higher Education. "Sexual harassment in elementary, secondary, and higher education" means any unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors made by an elementary, secondary, or higher education representative to a student, or any conduct of a sexual nature exhibited by an elementary, secondary, or higher education representative toward a student, when such conduct has the purpose of substantially interfering with the student's educational performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive educational environment; or when the elementary, secondary, or higher education representative either explicitly or implicitly makes the student's submission to such conduct a term or condition of, or uses the student's submission to or rejection of such conduct as a basis for determining:
        (1) Whether the student will be admitted to an
    	
institution of elementary, secondary, or higher education;
        (2) The educational performance required or expected
    	
of the student;
        (3) The attendance or assignment requirements
    	
applicable to the student;
        (4) To what courses, fields of study or programs,
    	
including honors and graduate programs, the student will be admitted;
        (5) What placement or course proficiency requirements
    	
are applicable to the student;
        (6) The quality of instruction the student will
    	
receive;
        (7) What tuition or fee requirements are applicable
    	
to the student;
        (8) What scholarship opportunities are available to
    	
the student;
        (9) What extracurricular teams the student will be a
    	
member of or in what extracurricular competitions the student will participate;
        (10) Any grade the student will receive in any
    	
examination or in any course or program of instruction in which the student is enrolled;
        (11) The progress of the student toward successful
    	
completion of or graduation from any course or program of instruction in which the student is enrolled; or
        (12) What degree, if any, the student will receive.
(Source: P.A. 96-1319, eff. 7-27-10.)

    (775 ILCS 5/5A-101.1)
    Sec. 5A-101.1. Notice.
    (A) Every institution of higher education covered by this Act shall post in a prominent and accessible location a poster stating sexual harassment laws and policies. The poster shall be (i) posted and kept posted at each campus in common area positions easily accessible to all students including, but not limited to residence halls, administration buildings, student unions, cafeterias, and libraries or (ii) posted annually at each campus in common area positions easily accessible to all students including, but not limited to, residence halls, administration buildings, student unions, cafeterias, and libraries, with an electronic copy of the sexual harassment laws and policies also sent to each student at the time that registration materials are emailed or (iii) on campuses that provide for online registration of student classes, such information pertaining to sexual harassment laws and policies may be incorporated into the registration process so that students must review the policies and laws and acknowledge such review, prior to being allowed to register. Documents to be posted shall be retrieved from the Illinois Department of Human Rights website to satisfy posting requirements. Posting of the posters shall be effectuated within 90 days of the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 96th General Assembly and shall occur annually thereafter.
    (B) The posted sexual harassment poster shall include, at a minimum, the following information: (i) the illegality of sexual harassment in higher education; (ii) the definition of sexual harassment under State law; (iii) a description of sexual harassment, utilizing examples; (iv) the institution's internal complaint process including penalties; (v) the legal recourse, investigative and complaint process available through the Department of Human Rights; (vi) directions on how to contact the Department; and (vii) protection against retaliation as provided by Section 6-101 of this Act.
    (C) Upon notification of a failure to post, the Department of Human Rights may launch a preliminary investigation. If the Department finds a failure to post, the Department may issue a notice to show cause giving the institution 30 days to correct the failure to post. If the failure to post is not corrected, the Department may initiate a charge of a civil rights violation.
(Source: P.A. 96-574, eff. 8-18-09.)

    (775 ILCS 5/5A-102) (from Ch. 68, par. 5A-102)
    Sec. 5A-102. Civil Rights Violations-Elementary, Secondary, and Higher Education. It is a civil rights violation:
    (A) Elementary, Secondary, or Higher Education Representative. For any elementary, secondary, or higher education representative to commit or engage in sexual harassment in elementary, secondary, or higher education.
    (B) Institution of Elementary, Secondary, or Higher Education. For any institution of elementary, secondary, or higher education to fail to take remedial action, or to fail to take appropriate disciplinary action against an elementary, secondary, or higher education representative employed by such institution, when such institution knows that such elementary, secondary, or higher education representative was committing or engaging in or committed or engaged in sexual harassment in elementary, secondary, or higher education.
(Source: P.A. 96-574, eff. 8-18-09; 96-1319, eff. 7-27-10.)


 
    (775 ILCS 5/Art. 6 heading)
ARTICLE 6. ADDITIONAL CIVIL RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

    (775 ILCS 5/6-101) (from Ch. 68, par. 6-101)
    Sec. 6-101. Additional Civil Rights Violations. It is a civil rights violation for a person, or for two or more persons to conspire, to:
        (A) Retaliation. Retaliate against a person because
    	
he or she has opposed that which he or she reasonably and in good faith believes to be unlawful discrimination, sexual harassment in employment or sexual harassment in elementary, secondary, and higher education, discrimination based on citizenship status in employment, because he or she has made a charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted, or participated in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this Act, or because he or she has requested, attempted to request, used, or attempted to use a reasonable accommodation as allowed by this Act;
        (B) Aiding and Abetting; Coercion. Aid, abet, compel
    	
or coerce a person to commit any violation of this Act;
        (C) Interference. Wilfully interfere with the
    	
performance of a duty or the exercise of a power by the Commission or one of its members or representatives or the Department or one of its officers or employees.
    Definitions. For the purposes of this Section, "sexual harassment" and "citizenship status" shall have the same meaning as defined in Section 2-101 of this Act.
(Source: P.A. 97-333, eff. 8-12-11; 98-1050, eff. 1-1-15.)

    (775 ILCS 5/6-102)
    Sec. 6-102. Violations of other Acts. A person who violates the Section 11-117-12.2 of the Illinois Municipal Code, Section 224.05 of the Illinois Insurance Code, Section 8-201.5 of the Public Utilities Act, Sections 2-1401.1, 9-107.10, 9-107.11, and 15-1501.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure, Section 4.05 of the Interest Act, the Military Personnel Cellular Phone Contract Termination Act, Section 405-272 of the Civil Administrative Code of Illinois, Section 10-63 of the Illinois Administrative Procedure Act, Sections 30.25 and 30.30 of the Military Code of Illinois, Section 16 of the Landlord and Tenant Act, Section 26.5 of the Retail Installment Sales Act, or Section 37 of the Motor Vehicle Leasing Act commits a civil rights violation within the meaning of this Act.
(Source: P.A. 100-1101, eff. 1-1-19.)


 
    (775 ILCS 5/Art. 7 heading)
ARTICLE 7. DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RIGHTS; DUTIES; PROCEDURES

    (775 ILCS 5/7-101) (from Ch. 68, par. 7-101)
    Sec. 7-101. Powers and Duties. In addition to other powers and duties prescribed in this Act, the Department shall have the following powers:
    (A) Rules and Regulations. To adopt, promulgate, amend, and rescind rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act pursuant to the Illinois Administrative Procedure Act.
    (B) Charges. To issue, receive, investigate, conciliate, settle, and dismiss charges filed in conformity with this Act.
    (C) Compulsory Process. To request subpoenas as it deems necessary for its investigations.
    (D) Complaints. To file complaints with the Commission in conformity with this Act.
    (E) Judicial Enforcement. To seek temporary relief and to enforce orders of the Commission in conformity with this Act.
    (F) Equal Employment Opportunities. To take such action as may be authorized to provide for equal employment opportunities and affirmative action.
    (G) Recruitment; Research; Public Communication; Advisory Councils. To engage in such recruitment, research and public communication and create such advisory councils as may be authorized to effectuate the purposes of this Act.
    (H) Coordination with other Agencies. To coordinate its activities with federal, state, and local agencies in conformity with this Act.
    (I) Public Grants; Private Gifts. To accept public grants and private gifts as may be authorized.
    (J) Education and Training. To implement a formal and unbiased program of education and training for all employees assigned to investigate and conciliate charges under Articles 7A and 7B. The training program shall include the following:
        (1) substantive and procedural aspects of the
    	
investigation and conciliation positions;
        (2) current issues in human rights law and practice;
        (3) lectures by specialists in substantive areas
    	
related to human rights matters;
        (4) orientation to each operational unit of the
    	
Department and Commission;
        (5) observation of experienced Department
    	
investigators and attorneys conducting conciliation conferences, combined with the opportunity to discuss evidence presented and rulings made;
        (6) the use of hypothetical cases requiring the
    	
Department investigator and conciliation conference attorney to issue judgments as a means to evaluating knowledge and writing ability;
        (7) writing skills;
        (8) computer skills, including but not limited to
    	
word processing and document management.
    A formal, unbiased and ongoing professional development program including, but not limited to, the above-noted areas shall be implemented to keep Department investigators and attorneys informed of recent developments and issues and to assist them in maintaining and enhancing their professional competence.
(Source: P.A. 99-74, eff. 7-20-15.)

    (775 ILCS 5/7-101.1)
    Sec. 7-101.1. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 89-520, eff. 7-18-96. Repealed by P.A. 95-243, eff. 1-1-08.)

    (775 ILCS 5/7-105) (from Ch. 68, par. 7-105)
    Sec. 7-105. Equal Employment Opportunities; Affirmative Action. In order to establish and effectuate the policies of equal employment opportunity and affirmative action, the Department shall, with respect to state executive departments, boards, commissions and instrumentalities and any party to a public contract:
    (A) Policies; Rules; Regulations. Establish equal employment opportunity and affirmative action policies, rules and regulations which specify plans, programs and reporting procedures. Such rules may provide for exemptions or modifications as may be necessary to assure the continuity of federal requirements in State agencies supported in whole or in part by federal funds.
    (B) Minimum Compliance Criteria. Establish minimum compliance criteria and procedures for evaluating equal employment opportunity and affirmative action programs and plans.
    (C) Technical Assistance. Provide technical assistance, training, and advice for the establishment and implementation of required programs.
    (D) Meetings. Hold meetings at least annually with the head of each State agency and when necessary with any party to a public contract to:
        (1) Review equal employment opportunity plans and
    	
progress, performance and problems in meeting equal opportunity goals.
        (2) Recommend appropriate changes to the plans and
    	
procedures and the methods employed to implement the plans.
    (E) Report. Include within its annual report, filed pursuant to Section 5-650 of the Departments of State Government Law (20 ILCS 5/5-650), the progress, performance, and problems of meeting equal opportunity goals, and the identity of any State agency which fails to comply with the requirements of this Act and the circumstances surrounding such violation.
    (F) Personnel Operations. Periodically review personnel operations of State agencies to assure their conformity with this Act and the agency's plan.
    (G) Equal Employment Opportunity Officers. Approve the appointment of equal employment opportunity officers hired pursuant to subparagraph (4) of paragraph (B) of Section 2-105.
    (H) Enforcement. Require State agencies which fail to meet their affirmative action and equal employment opportunity goals by equal employment opportunity category to establish necessary training programs for preparation and promotion of the category of individuals affected by the failure. An agency required to establish training programs under this subsection shall do so in cooperation with the Department of Central Management Services as provided in Section 405-125 of the Department of Central Management Services Law (20 ILCS 405/405-125).
    The Department by rule or regulation shall provide for the implementation of this subsection. Such rules or regulations shall prescribe but not be limited to the following:
        (1) the circumstances and conditions which constitute
    	
an agency's failure to meet its affirmative action and equal employment opportunity goals;
        (2) the time period for measuring success or failure
    	
in reaching affirmative action and equal employment opportunity goals; and
        (3) that training programs shall be limited to State
    	
employees.
    This subsection shall not be construed to conflict with any contract between the State and any party which is approved and ratified by or on September 11, 1990.
(Source: P.A. 91-239, eff. 1-1-00.)

    (775 ILCS 5/7-105a) (from Ch. 68, par. 7-105a)
    Sec. 7-105a. (a) In order to facilitate the implementation of the policies of equal employment opportunity and affirmative action, the State executive departments, boards, commissions and instrumentalities shall, on and after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1983, on all forms used to collect information from individuals for official purposes, when such forms request information concerning the race or ethnicity of an individual by providing spaces for the designation of that individual as "white" or "black", or the semantic equivalent thereof, provide an additional space for a designation as "Hispanic".
    (b) Whenever a State executive department, board, commission or instrumentality is required to supply information to the Department concerning the racial or ethnic composition of its employees, clients or other groups of individuals on or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1983, the agency supplying such information shall supply the information by categories of "white", "black", and "Hispanic", or the semantic equivalent thereof, unless otherwise required by the Department.
(Source: P.A. 83-648.)

    (775 ILCS 5/7-105b) (from Ch. 68, par. 7-105b)
    Sec. 7-105b. Compliance with State Employment Records Act. The Department, as required by and for the purposes of the State Employment Records Act, shall, on a fiscal year basis, report the total number of persons employed within the State work force that are under the monitoring jurisdiction of the Department and provide any other information necessary to facilitate an accurate compilation of the entire State work force as defined and required by that Act. The State Employment Records (SER) report shall be maintained and kept on file within the Department.
(Source: P.A. 87-1211.)

    (775 ILCS 5/7-106) (from Ch. 68, par. 7-106)
    Sec. 7-106. Recruitment; Research; Public Communication) For the purpose of promoting equal employment and housing opportunities and eliminating unlawful discrimination, sexual harassment in employment and sexual harassment in elementary, secondary, and higher education, the Department shall have authority to:
    (A) Recruitment. Cooperate with public and private organizations, as well as the Department of Central Management Services, in encouraging individuals in underrepresented classifications to seek employment in state government.
    (B) Publications; Research. Issue publications, conduct research, and make surveys as it deems necessary.
    (C) Public Hearings. Hold public hearings to obtain information from the general public on the effectiveness of the state's equal employment opportunity program and the protection against unlawful discrimination, sexual harassment in employment and sexual harassment in elementary, secondary, and higher education afforded by this Act and to accept public recommendations concerning changes in the program and the Act for inclusion in its annual report.
    (D) Promotion of Communication and Goodwill. Establish a program to cooperate with civic, religious and educational organizations in order to improve human communication and understanding, foster equal opportunities in employment and housing, and promote and encourage communication, goodwill and interfaith and interracial harmony.
(Source: P.A. 96-1319, eff. 7-27-10.)

    (775 ILCS 5/7-107) (from Ch. 68, par. 7-107)
    Sec. 7-107. Advisory Councils) The Department shall have authority, as the need requires, to create local or statewide advisory councils to aid in effectuating the purposes of this Act, to limit the duration of a council's existence, and to empower a council to:
    (A) Study. Study and report on problems of unlawful discrimination and equal employment opportunity.
    (B) Goodwill. Foster through community effort or otherwise goodwill among the groups and segments of the population of Illinois.
    (C) Recommendations. Make recommendations to the Department for the development of policies and practices that will aid in carrying out the purposes of this Act.
    (D) Support Services. Receive technical and clerical assistance and reimbursement of actual expenses from the Department.
(Source: P.A. 81-1216.)

    (775 ILCS 5/7-108) (from Ch. 68, par. 7-108)
    Sec. 7-108. Local Departments, Commissions.
    (A) Authority. A political subdivision, or two or more political subdivisions acting jointly, may create a local department or commission as it or they see fit to promote the purposes of this Act and to secure for all individuals within the jurisdiction of the political subdivision or subdivisions freedom from unlawful discrimination, sexual harassment in employment and sexual harassment in elementary, secondary, and higher education. The provisions of any ordinance enacted by any municipality or county which prohibits broader or different categories of discrimination than are prohibited by this Act are not invalidated or affected by this Act.
    (B) Concurrent Jurisdiction. When the Department and a local department or commission have concurrent jurisdiction over a complaint, either may transfer the complaint to the other under regulations established by the Department.
    (C) Exclusive Jurisdiction. When the Department or a local department or commission has jurisdiction over a complaint and the other does not, the Department or local department or commission without jurisdiction may transfer the complaint to the other under regulations established by the Department.
    (D) To secure and guarantee the rights established by Sections 17, 18 and 19 of Article I of the Illinois Constitution, any ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any county, municipality or other unit of local government or of any local department or commission which prohibits, restricts, narrows or limits the housing choice of any person is unenforceable and void. Nothing in this amendatory Act of 1981 prohibits a unit of local government from making special outreach efforts to inform members of minority groups of housing opportunities available in areas of majority white concentration and make similar efforts to inform the majority white population of available housing opportunities located in areas of minority concentration. This paragraph is applicable to home rule units as well as non-home rule units.
    Pursuant to Article VII, Section 6, paragraph (i) of the Illinois Constitution, this amendatory Act of 1981 is a limitation of the power of home rule units.
(Source: P.A. 96-1319, eff. 7-27-10.)

    (775 ILCS 5/7-109) (from Ch. 68, par. 7-109)
    Sec. 7-109. Federal Departments and Agencies) (A) Utilization of Department Facilities and Employees. The Department in its discretion and for the purpose of carrying out its functions, may permit the utilization of its facilities and employees by federal departments and agencies in the investigation of charges over which the Department has jurisdiction. The Department shall be authorized to be reimbursed by the federal government for the reasonable value of such services rendered.
    (B) Cooperative Undertakings. In order to effect cooperative undertakings in the reduction of unlawful discrimination, the Department has the power and authority for and on behalf of the state to make contractual agreements, within the scope and authority of this Act, with any agency of the federal government, and such agreements may include provisions under which the federal department or agency shall refrain from processing a charge in Illinois in any cases or class of cases specified in these agreements.
(Source: P.A. 81-1216.)

    (775 ILCS 5/7-109.1) (from Ch. 68, par. 7-109.1)
    Sec. 7-109.1. Federal or State court proceedings.
        (1) For charges filed under Article 7A of this Act,
    	
if the complainant has initiated litigation in a federal or State court for the purpose of seeking final relief on some or all of the issues that are the basis of the charge, either party may request that the Department administratively dismiss the Department's charge or portions of the charge. Within 10 business days of receipt of the federal or State court complaint, the Department shall issue a notice of administrative dismissal and provide the complainant notice of his or her right to commence a civil action in the appropriate circuit court or other appropriate court of competent jurisdiction. The Director shall also provide the charging party notice of his or her right to seek review of the notice of dismissal before the Commission. Any review by the Commission of the dismissal shall be filed within 30 days after receipt of the Director's notice and shall be limited to the question of whether the charge was properly dismissed under this Section.
        (2) For charges filed under Article 7B of this Act,
    	
if the complainant has initiated litigation in a federal or State court for the purpose of seeking final relief on some or all of the issues that are the basis of the charge, either party may request that the Department administratively dismiss the charge or portions of the charge pending in the federal or State court proceeding if a trial has commenced in the federal or State court proceeding. Within 10 business days of receipt of notice that the trial has begun, the Department shall issue a notice of administrative dismissal and provide the complainant notice of his or her right to commence a civil action in the appropriate circuit court or other appropriate court of competent jurisdiction. The Director shall also provide the charging party notice of his or her right to seek review of the notice of dismissal before the Commission. Any review by the Commission of the dismissal shall be filed within 30 days after receipt of the Director's notice and shall be limited to the question of whether the charge was properly dismissed under this Section.
        (3) Nothing in this Section shall preclude the
    	
Department from continuing to investigate an allegation in the charge that is not included in the federal or State court proceeding.
(Source: P.A. 100-1066, eff. 8-24-18; 101-221, eff. 1-1-20.)

    (775 ILCS 5/7-110) (from Ch. 68, par. 7-110)
    Sec. 7-110. Attorney General) When authorized by this Act to take part in a judicial proceeding in any court in this state, the Department shall proceed only through the Attorney General of Illinois or with the Attorney General's approval.
(Source: P.A. 81-1216.)

    (775 ILCS 5/7-111) (from Ch. 68, par. 7-111)
    Sec. 7-111. Public Grants; Private Gifts) The Department is authorized to accept public grants and private gifts and bequests so long as the conditions of the grant, gift or bequest are not inconsistent with the purposes of this Act.
(Source: P.A. 81-1216.)

    (775 ILCS 5/7-112)
    Sec. 7-112. Automated Processing of Charges and Complaints. On or before December 31, 1996, the Department and the Commission shall jointly prepare an electronic data processing and telecommunications plan for the purpose of automating the processing of charges and complaints.
(Source: P.A. 89-370, eff. 8-18-95.)

    (775 ILCS 5/7-112.5)
    Sec. 7-112.5. Training tuition. The Department is authorized to charge tuition to non-governmental entities, other than not for profit groups or organizations in Illinois that have no more than 50 employees, for training offered by the Department's Institute for Training and Development. The tuition shall be paid into the Department of Human Rights Training and Development Fund, a special fund that is created in the State treasury. Moneys in the Fund shall be used to: (i) enhance the quality of the Department's training services; (ii) make training available at no cost to not for profit groups or organizations in Illinois that have no more than 50 employees, Department employees, other State agencies and instrumentalities of the State, and community organizations; and (iii) make training available to any other non-governmental entities on a tuition basis.
(Source: P.A. 96-548, eff. 1-1-10.)

    (775 ILCS 5/7-113)
    Sec. 7-113. Employer report form; registration fee. When a person files an "Employer Report Form" (PC-1) with the Department as specified in subsection (J) of Section 2-101 to establish eligibility to be awarded a contract by a State agency, the person must pay a $75 registration fee. A person must also pay a $75 registration fee when the person files for renewal of eligibility. These fees shall be paid into the Department of Human Rights Special Fund, a special fund that is created in the State treasury. Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, the Fund is not subject to administrative charges or charge-backs. Moneys in the Fund shall be used solely to fund the Department's public contract compliance monitoring program and other Department programs and activities.
(Source: P.A. 96-786, eff. 1-1-10.)


 
    (775 ILCS 5/Art. 7A heading)
ARTICLE 7A. DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RIGHTS;
PROCEDURES UNDER ARTICLES 2, 4, 5, 5A and 6

    (775 ILCS 5/7A-101) (from Ch. 68, par. 7A-101)
    Sec. 7A-101. The procedures specified in this Article shall apply solely to Articles 2, 4, 5, 5A and 6.
(Source: P.A. 86-910.)

    (775 ILCS 5/7A-102) (from Ch. 68, par. 7A-102)
    Sec. 7A-102. Procedures.
    (A) Charge.
        (1) Within 300 calendar days after the date that a
    	
civil rights violation allegedly has been committed, a charge in writing under oath or affirmation may be filed with the Department by an aggrieved party or issued by the Department itself under the signature of the Director.
        (2) The charge shall be in such detail as to
    	
substantially apprise any party properly concerned as to the time, place, and facts surrounding the alleged civil rights violation.
        (3) Charges deemed filed with the Department pursuant
    	
to subsection (A-1) of this Section shall be deemed to be in compliance with this subsection.
    (A-1) Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Charges.
        (1) If a charge is filed with the Equal Employment
    	
Opportunity Commission (EEOC) within 300 calendar days after the date of the alleged civil rights violation, the charge shall be deemed filed with the Department on the date filed with the EEOC. If the EEOC is the governmental agency designated to investigate the charge first, the Department shall take no action until the EEOC makes a determination on the charge and after the complainant notifies the Department of the EEOC's determination. In such cases, after receiving notice from the EEOC that a charge was filed, the Department shall notify the parties that (i) a charge has been received by the EEOC and has been sent to the Department for dual filing purposes; (ii) the EEOC is the governmental agency responsible for investigating the charge and that the investigation shall be conducted pursuant to the rules and procedures adopted by the EEOC; (iii) it will take no action on the charge until the EEOC issues its determination; (iv) the complainant must submit a copy of the EEOC's determination within 30 days after service of the determination by the EEOC on complainant; and (v) that the time period to investigate the charge contained in subsection (G) of this Section is tolled from the date on which the charge is filed with the EEOC until the EEOC issues its determination.
        (2) If the EEOC finds reasonable cause to believe
    	
that there has been a violation of federal law and if the Department is timely notified of the EEOC's findings by complainant, the Department shall notify complainant that the Department has adopted the EEOC's determination of reasonable cause and that complainant has the right, within 90 days after receipt of the Department's notice, to either file his or her own complaint with the Illinois Human Rights Commission or commence a civil action in the appropriate circuit court or other appropriate court of competent jurisdiction. This notice shall be provided to the complainant within 10 business days after the Department's receipt of the EEOC's determination. The Department's notice to complainant that the Department has adopted the EEOC's determination of reasonable cause shall constitute the Department's Report for purposes of subparagraph (D) of this Section.
        (3) For those charges alleging violations within the
    	
jurisdiction of both the EEOC and the Department and for which the EEOC either (i) does not issue a determination, but does issue the complainant a notice of a right to sue, including when the right to sue is issued at the request of the complainant, or (ii) determines that it is unable to establish that illegal discrimination has occurred and issues the complainant a right to sue notice, and if the Department is timely notified of the EEOC's determination by complainant, the Department shall notify the parties, within 10 business days after receipt of the EEOC's determination, that the Department will adopt the EEOC's determination as a dismissal for lack of substantial evidence unless the complainant requests in writing within 35 days after receipt of the Department's notice that the Department review the EEOC's determination.
            (a) If the complainant does not file a written
        	
request with the Department to review the EEOC's determination within 35 days after receipt of the Department's notice, the Department shall notify complainant, within 10 business days after the expiration of the 35-day period, that the decision of the EEOC has been adopted by the Department as a dismissal for lack of substantial evidence and that the complainant has the right, within 90 days after receipt of the Department's notice, to commence a civil action in the appropriate circuit court or other appropriate court of competent jurisdiction. The Department's notice to complainant that the Department has adopted the EEOC's determination shall constitute the Department's report for purposes of subparagraph (D) of this Section.
            (b) If the complainant does file a written
        	
request with the Department to review the EEOC's determination, the Department shall review the EEOC's determination and any evidence obtained by the EEOC during its investigation. If, after reviewing the EEOC's determination and any evidence obtained by the EEOC, the Department determines there is no need for further investigation of the charge, the Department shall issue a report and the Director shall determine whether there is substantial evidence that the alleged civil rights violation has been committed pursuant to subsection (D) of Section 7A-102. If, after reviewing the EEOC's determination and any evidence obtained by the EEOC, the Department determines there is a need for further investigation of the charge, the Department may conduct any further investigation it deems necessary. After reviewing the EEOC's determination, the evidence obtained by the EEOC, and any additional investigation conducted by the Department, the Department shall issue a report and the Director shall determine whether there is substantial evidence that the alleged civil rights violation has been committed pursuant to subsection (D) of Section 7A-102 of this Act.
        (4) Pursuant to this Section, if the EEOC dismisses
    	
the charge or a portion of the charge of discrimination because, under federal law, the EEOC lacks jurisdiction over the charge, and if, under this Act, the Department has jurisdiction over the charge of discrimination, the Department shall investigate the charge or portion of the charge dismissed by the EEOC for lack of jurisdiction pursuant to subsections (A), (A-1), (B), (B-1), (C), (D), (E), (F), (G), (H), (I), (J), and (K) of Section 7A-102 of this Act.
        (5) The time limit set out in subsection (G) of this
    	
Section is tolled from the date on which the charge is filed with the EEOC to the date on which the EEOC issues its determination.
        (6) The failure of the Department to meet the
    	
10-business-day notification deadlines set out in paragraph (2) of this subsection shall not impair the rights of any party.
    (B) Notice and Response to Charge. The Department shall, within 10 days of the date on which the charge was filed, serve a copy of the charge on the respondent and provide all parties with a notice of the complainant's right to opt out of the investigation within 60 days as set forth in subsection (C-1). This period shall not be construed to be jurisdictional. The charging party and the respondent may each file a position statement and other materials with the Department regarding the charge of alleged discrimination within 60 days of receipt of the notice of the charge. The position statements and other materials filed shall remain confidential unless otherwise agreed to by the party providing the information and shall not be served on or made available to the other party during pendency of a charge with the Department. The Department may require the respondent to file a response to the allegations contained in the charge. Upon the Department's request, the respondent shall file a response to the charge within 60 days and shall serve a copy of its response on the complainant or his or her representative. Notwithstanding any request from the Department, the respondent may elect to file a response to the charge within 60 days of receipt of notice of the charge, provided the respondent serves a copy of its response on the complainant or his or her representative. All allegations contained in the charge not denied by the respondent within 60 days of the Department's request for a response may be deemed admitted, unless the respondent states that it is without sufficient information to form a belief with respect to such allegation. The Department may issue a notice of default directed to any respondent who fails to file a response to a charge within 60 days of receipt of the Department's request, unless the respondent can demonstrate good cause as to why such notice should not issue. The term "good cause" shall be defined by rule promulgated by the Department. Within 30 days of receipt of the respondent's response, the complainant may file a reply to said response and shall serve a copy of said reply on the respondent or his or her representative. A party shall have the right to supplement his or her response or reply at any time that the investigation of the charge is pending. The Department shall, within 10 days of the date on which the charge was filed, and again no later than 335 days thereafter, send by certified or registered mail, or electronic mail if elected by the party, written notice to the complainant and to the respondent informing the complainant of the complainant's rights to either file a complaint with the Human Rights Commission or commence a civil action in the appropriate circuit court under subparagraph (2) of paragraph (G), including in such notice the dates within which the complainant may exercise these rights. In the notice the Department shall notify the complainant that the charge of civil rights violation will be dismissed with prejudice and with no right to further proceed if a written complaint is not timely filed with the Commission or with the appropriate circuit court by the complainant pursuant to subparagraph (2) of paragraph (G) or by the Department pursuant to subparagraph (1) of paragraph (G).
    (B-1) Mediation. The complainant and respondent may agree to voluntarily submit the charge to mediation without waiving any rights that are otherwise available to either party pursuant to this Act and without incurring any obligation to accept the result of the mediation process. Nothing occurring in mediation shall be disclosed by the Department or admissible in evidence in any subsequent proceeding unless the complainant and the respondent agree in writing that such disclosure be made.
    (C) Investigation.
        (1) The Department shall conduct an investigation
    	
sufficient to determine whether the allegations set forth in the charge are supported by substantial evidence unless the complainant elects to opt out of an investigation pursuant to subsection (C-1).
        (2) The Director or his or her designated
    	
representatives shall have authority to request any member of the Commission to issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of a witness or the production for examination of any books, records or documents whatsoever.
        (3) If any witness whose testimony is required for
    	
any investigation resides outside the State, or through illness or any other good cause as determined by the Director is unable to be interviewed by the investigator or appear at a fact finding conference, his or her testimony or deposition may be taken, within or without the State, in the same manner as is provided for in the taking of depositions in civil cases in circuit courts.
        (4) Upon reasonable notice to the complainant and the
    	
respondent, the Department shall conduct a fact finding conference, unless prior to 365 days after the date on which the charge was filed the Director has determined whether there is substantial evidence that the alleged civil rights violation has been committed, the charge has been dismissed for lack of jurisdiction, or the parties voluntarily and in writing agree to waive the fact finding conference. Any party's failure to attend the conference without good cause shall result in dismissal or default. The term "good cause" shall be defined by rule promulgated by the Department. A notice of dismissal or default shall be issued by the Director. The notice of default issued by the Director shall notify the respondent that a request for review may be filed in writing with the Commission within 30 days of receipt of notice of default. The notice of dismissal issued by the Director shall give the complainant notice of his or her right to seek review of the dismissal before the Human Rights Commission or commence a civil action in the appropriate circuit court. If the complainant chooses to have the Human Rights Commission review the dismissal order, he or she shall file a request for review with the Commission within 90 days after receipt of the Director's notice. If the complainant chooses to file a request for review with the Commission, he or she may not later commence a civil action in a circuit court. If the complainant chooses to commence a civil action in a circuit court, he or she must do so within 90 days after receipt of the Director's notice.
    (C-1) Opt out of Department's investigation. At any time within 60 days after receipt of notice of the right to opt out, a complainant may submit a written request seeking notice from the Director indicating that the complainant has opted out of the investigation and may commence a civil action in the appropriate circuit court or other appropriate court of competent jurisdiction. Within 10 business days of receipt of the complainant's request to opt out of the investigation, the Director shall issue a notice to the parties stating that: (i) the complainant has exercised the right to opt out of the investigation; (ii) the complainant has 90 days after receipt of the Director's notice to commence an action in the appropriate circuit court or other appropriate court of competent jurisdiction; and (iii) the Department has ceased its investigation and is administratively closing the charge. The complainant shall notify the Department and the respondent that a complaint has been filed with the appropriate circuit court or other appropriate court of competent jurisdiction and shall mail a copy of the complaint to the Department and the respondent on the same date that the complaint is filed with the appropriate court. Once a complainant has opted out of the investigation under this subsection, he or she may not file or refile a substantially similar charge with the Department arising from the same incident of unlawful discrimination or harassment.
    (D) Report.
        (1) Each charge investigated under subsection (C)
    	
shall be the subject of a report to the Director. The report shall be a confidential document subject to review by the Director, authorized Department employees, the parties, and, where indicated by this Act, members of the Commission or their designated hearing officers.
        (2) Upon review of the report, the Director shall
    	
determine whether there is substantial evidence that the alleged civil rights violation has been committed. The determination of substantial evidence is limited to determining the need for further consideration of the charge pursuant to this Act and includes, but is not limited to, findings of fact and conclusions, as well as the reasons for the determinations on all material issues. Substantial evidence is evidence which a reasonable mind accepts as sufficient to support a particular conclusion and which consists of more than a mere scintilla but may be somewhat less than a preponderance.
        (3) If the Director determines that there is no
    	
substantial evidence, the charge shall be dismissed by order of the Director and the Director shall give the complainant notice of his or her right to seek review of the dismissal order before the Commission or commence a civil action in the appropriate circuit court. If the complainant chooses to have the Human Rights Commission review the dismissal order, he or she shall file a request for review with the Commission within 90 days after receipt of the Director's notice. If the complainant chooses to file a request for review with the Commission, he or she may not later commence a civil action in a circuit court. If the complainant chooses to commence a civil action in a circuit court, he or she must do so within 90 days after receipt of the Director's notice.
        (4) If the Director determines that there is
    	
substantial evidence, he or she shall notify the complainant and respondent of that determination. The Director shall also notify the parties that the complainant has the right to either commence a civil action in the appropriate circuit court or request that the Department of Human Rights file a complaint with the Human Rights Commission on his or her behalf. Any such complaint shall be filed within 90 days after receipt of the Director's notice. If the complainant chooses to have the Department file a complaint with the Human Rights Commission on his or her behalf, the complainant must, within 30 days after receipt of the Director's notice, request in writing that the Department file the complaint. If the complainant timely requests that the Department file the complaint, the Department shall file the complaint on his or her behalf. If the complainant fails to timely request that the Department file the complaint, the complainant may file his or her complaint with the Commission or commence a civil action in the appropriate circuit court. If the complainant files a complaint with the Human Rights Commission, the complainant shall give notice to the Department of the filing of the complaint with the Human Rights Commission.
    (E) Conciliation.
         (1) When there is a finding of substantial evidence,
    	
the Department may designate a Department employee who is an attorney licensed to practice in Illinois to endeavor to eliminate the effect of the alleged civil rights violation and to prevent its repetition by means of conference and conciliation.
        (2) When the Department determines that a formal
    	
conciliation conference is necessary, the complainant and respondent shall be notified of the time and place of the conference by registered or certified mail at least 10 days prior thereto and either or both parties shall appear at the conference in person or by attorney.
        (3) The place fixed for the conference shall be
    	
within 35 miles of the place where the civil rights violation is alleged to have been committed.
        (4) Nothing occurring at the conference shall be
    	
disclosed by the Department unless the complainant and respondent agree in writing that such disclosure be made.
        (5) The Department's efforts to conciliate the matter
    	
shall not stay or extend the time for filing the complaint with the Commission or the circuit court.
    (F) Complaint.
        (1) When the complainant requests that the Department
    	
file a complaint with the Commission on his or her behalf, the Department shall prepare a written complaint, under oath or affirmation, stating the nature of the civil rights violation substantially as alleged in the charge previously filed and the relief sought on behalf of the aggrieved party. The Department shall file the complaint with the Commission.
        (2) If the complainant chooses to commence a civil
    	
action in a circuit court, he or she must do so in the circuit court in the county wherein the civil rights violation was allegedly committed. The form of the complaint in any such civil action shall be in accordance with the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure.
    (G) Time Limit.
        (1) When a charge of a civil rights violation has
    	
been properly filed, the Department, within 365 days thereof or within any extension of that period agreed to in writing by all parties, shall issue its report as required by subparagraph (D). Any such report shall be duly served upon both the complainant and the respondent.
        (2) If the Department has not issued its report
    	
within 365 days after the charge is filed, or any such longer period agreed to in writing by all the parties, the complainant shall have 90 days to either file his or her own complaint with the Human Rights Commission or commence a civil action in the appropriate circuit court. If the complainant files a complaint with the Commission, the form of the complaint shall be in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (F)(1). If the complainant commences a civil action in a circuit court, the form of the complaint shall be in accordance with the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure. The aggrieved party shall notify the Department that a complaint has been filed and shall serve a copy of the complaint on the Department on the same date that the complaint is filed with the Commission or in circuit court. If the complainant files a complaint with the Commission, he or she may not later commence a civil action in circuit court.
        (3) If an aggrieved party files a complaint with the
    	
Human Rights Commission or commences a civil action in circuit court pursuant to paragraph (2) of this subsection, or if the time period for filing a complaint has expired, the Department shall immediately cease its investigation and dismiss the charge of civil rights violation. Any final order entered by the Commission under this Section is appealable in accordance with paragraph (B)(1) of Section 8-111. Failure to immediately cease an investigation and dismiss the charge of civil rights violation as provided in this paragraph (3) constitutes grounds for entry of an order by the circuit court permanently enjoining the investigation. The Department may also be liable for any costs and other damages incurred by the respondent as a result of the action of the Department.
        (4) (Blank).
    (H) This amendatory Act of 1995 applies to causes of action filed on or after January 1, 1996.
    (I) This amendatory Act of 1996 applies to causes of action filed on or after January 1, 1996.
    (J) The changes made to this Section by Public Act 95-243 apply to charges filed on or after the effective date of those changes.
    (K) The changes made to this Section by this amendatory Act of the 96th General Assembly apply to charges filed on or after the effective date of those changes.
    (L) The changes made to this Section by this amendatory Act of the 100th General Assembly apply to charges filed on or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 100th General Assembly.
(Source: P.A. 100-492, eff. 9-8-17; 100-588, eff. 6-8-18; 100-1066, eff. 8-24-18; 101-221, eff. 1-1-20.)

    (775 ILCS 5/7A-103) (from Ch. 68, par. 7A-103)
    Sec. 7A-103. Settlement.
    (A) Circumstances. A settlement of any charge prior to the filing of a complaint may be effectuated at any time upon agreement of the parties and the approval of the Department. A settlement of any charge after the filing of a complaint shall be effectuated as specified in Section 8-105(A)(2) of this Act.
    (B) Form. Settlements of charges prior to the filing of complaints shall be reduced to writing by the Department, signed by the parties, and submitted by the Department to the Commission for approval. Settlements of charges after the filing of complaints shall be effectuated as specified in Section 8-105(A)(2) of this Act.
    (C) Violation.
        (1) When either party alleges that a settlement order
    	
has been violated, the Department shall conduct an investigation into the matter.
        (2) Upon finding substantial evidence to demonstrate
    	
that a settlement has been violated, the Department shall file notice of a settlement order violation with the Commission and serve all parties.
    (D) Dismissal For Refusal To Accept Settlement Offer. The Department shall dismiss a charge if it is satisfied that:
        (1) the respondent has eliminated the effects of the
    	
civil rights violation charged and taken steps to prevent its repetition; or
        (2) the respondent offers and the complainant
    	
declines to accept terms of settlement which the Department finds are sufficient to eliminate the effects of the civil rights violation charged and prevent its repetition.
     When the Department dismisses a charge under this Section it shall notify the complainant that he or she may seek review of the dismissal order before the Commission. The complainant shall have 30 days from receipt of notice to file a request for review by the Commission.
     In determining whether the respondent has eliminated the effects of the civil rights violation charged, or has offered terms of settlement sufficient to eliminate same, the Department shall consider the extent to which the respondent has either fully provided, or reasonably offered by way of terms of settlement, as the case may be, the relevant relief available to the complainant under Section 8-108 of this Act.
    (E) This amendatory Act of 1995 applies to causes of action filed on or after January 1, 1996.
    (F) The changes made to this Section by this amendatory Act of the 95th General Assembly apply to charges filed on or after the effective date of those changes.
(Source: P.A. 95-243, eff. 1-1-08.)

    (775 ILCS 5/7A-104) (from Ch. 68, par. 7A-104)
    Sec. 7A-104. Judicial Proceedings.
    (A) Temporary Relief.
        (1) At any time after a charge is filed, the
    	
Department or complainant may petition the appropriate court for temporary relief, pending final determination of the proceedings under this Act, including an order or judgment restraining the respondent from doing or causing any act which would render ineffectual an order which the Commission may enter with respect to the complainant. Whether it is brought by the Department or by the complainant, the petition shall contain a certification by the Director that the particular matter presents exceptional circumstances in which irreparable injury will result from a civil rights violation in the absence of temporary relief.
        (2) The petition shall be filed in the circuit court
    	
for the county in which the respondent resides or transacts business or in which the alleged violation took place, and the proceedings shall be governed by Part I of Article XI of the "Code of Civil Procedure", as amended. Except as provided in subsection (A) (3), the court may grant temporary relief or a temporary restraining order as it deems just and proper.
        (3) When the petition is based upon a civil rights
    	
violation as defined in Article 3 of this Act, the relief or restraining order entered by the court shall not exceed 5 days unless:
            (a) A longer period is agreed to by the
        	
respondent; or
            (b) The court finds that there is substantial
        	
evidence to demonstrate that the respondent has engaged in unlawful discrimination.
    (B) Expedited Proceedings.
        (1) A complainant or the Department at the request of
    	
the complainant may at any time petition the circuit court for expedited proceedings. Except as to causes the circuit court considers to be of greater importance, consideration of petitions for expedited proceedings under this subsection shall take precedence on the docket over all other causes and be assigned for hearing at the earliest practicable date and expedited in every way.
        (2) Venue for a petition filed under this subsection
    	
shall lie in the county where the respondent resides or is found or where the alleged violation was committed.
        (3) Any petition filed by the complainant shall name
    	
the Department, Commission and the respondent. Any petition filed by the Department, upon request of the complainant, shall name the Commission and the respondent.
        (4) If the circuit court determines that the
    	
complainant is likely to die before the termination of the proceedings under this Act, it may order the proceedings expedited. When an order for expedited proceedings is issued, the processing of the complainant's charge by the Department and Commission shall take precedence over all matters except older matters of the same character. Where such order is issued, the Department, the Commission, any panel of the Commission, or any Commission hearing officer shall be authorized to shorten any time period, other than the filing period set by Section 7A-102(A)(1). If such an order is issued and the complainant is before the Department, the Department shall immediately appoint an investigator if an investigator has not been appointed and shall in 90 days either file a complaint or order that no complaint be issued. If the Department fails to make a determination within 90 days the complainant shall have 30 days to file his complaint with the Commission.
    (C) Enforcement of Commission Orders. When authorized by this Act, the Department, at the request of the Commission, may take whatever action may be authorized for the enforcement of Commission orders.
(Source: P.A. 101-661, eff. 4-2-21.)


 
    (775 ILCS 5/Art. 7B heading)
ARTICLE 7B. DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RIGHTS;
PROCEDURES UNDER ARTICLE 3

    (775 ILCS 5/7B-101) (from Ch. 68, par. 7B-101)
    Sec. 7B-101. The procedures specified in this Article shall apply solely to Article 3.
(Source: P.A. 86-910.)

    (775 ILCS 5/7B-102) (from Ch. 68, par. 7B-102)
    Sec. 7B-102. Procedures.
    (A) Charge.
        (1) Within one year after the date that a civil
    	
rights violation allegedly has been committed or terminated, a charge in writing under oath or affirmation may be filed with the Department by an aggrieved party or issued by the Department itself under the signature of the Director.
        (2) The charge shall be in such detail as to
    	
substantially apprise any party properly concerned as to the time, place, and facts surrounding the alleged civil rights violation.
    (B) Notice and Response to Charge.
        (1) The Department shall serve notice upon the
    	
aggrieved party acknowledging such charge and advising the aggrieved party of the time limits and choice of forums provided under this Act. The Department shall, within 10 days of the date on which the charge was filed or the identification of an additional respondent under paragraph (2) of this subsection, serve on the respondent a copy of the charge along with a notice identifying the alleged civil rights violation and advising the respondent of the procedural rights and obligations of respondents under this Act and may require the respondent to file a response to the allegations contained in the charge. Upon the Department's request, the respondent shall file a response to the charge within 30 days and shall serve a copy of its response on the complainant or his or her representative. Notwithstanding any request from the Department, the respondent may elect to file a response to the charge within 30 days of receipt of notice of the charge, provided the respondent serves a copy of its response on the complainant or his or her representative. All allegations contained in the charge not denied by the respondent within 30 days after the Department's request for a response may be deemed admitted, unless the respondent states that it is without sufficient information to form a belief with respect to such allegation. The Department may issue a notice of default directed to any respondent who fails to file a response to a charge within 30 days of the Department's request, unless the respondent can demonstrate good cause as to why such notice should not issue. The term "good cause" shall be defined by rule promulgated by the Department. Within 10 days of the date he or she receives the respondent's response, the complainant may file his or her reply to said response. If he or she chooses to file a reply, the complainant shall serve a copy of said reply on the respondent or his or her representative. A party may supplement his or her response or reply at any time that the investigation of the charge is pending.
        (2) A person who is not named as a respondent in a
    	
charge, but who is identified as a respondent in the course of investigation, may be joined as an additional or substitute respondent upon written notice, under subsection (B), to such person, from the Department. Such notice, in addition to meeting the requirements of subsections (A) and (B), shall explain the basis for the Department's belief that a person to whom the notice is addressed is properly joined as a respondent.
    (C) Investigation.
        (1) The Department shall conduct a full investigation
    	
of the allegations set forth in the charge and complete such investigation within 100 days after the filing of the charge, unless it is impracticable to do so. The Department's failure to complete the investigation within 100 days after the proper filing of the charge does not deprive the Department of jurisdiction over the charge.
        (2) If the Department is unable to complete the
    	
investigation within 100 days after the charge is filed, the Department shall notify the complainant and respondent in writing of the reasons for not doing so.
        (3) The Director or his or her designated
    	
representative shall have authority to request any member of the Commission to issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of a witness or the production for examination of any books, records or documents whatsoever.
        (4) If any witness whose testimony is required for
    	
any investigation resides outside the State, or through illness or any other good cause as determined by the Director is unable to be interviewed by the investigator or appear at a fact finding conference, his or her testimony or deposition may be taken, within or without the State, in the same manner as provided for in the taking of depositions in civil cases in circuit courts.
        (5) Upon reasonable notice to the complainant and the
    	
respondent, the Department may conduct a fact finding conference. When requested by the Department, a party's failure to attend the conference without good cause may result in dismissal or default. A notice of dismissal or default shall be issued by the Director and shall notify the relevant party that a request for review may be filed in writing with the Commission within 30 days of receipt of notice of dismissal or default.
    (D) Report.
        (1) Each charge investigated under subsection (C)
    	
shall be the subject of a report to the Director. The report shall be a confidential document subject to review by the Director, authorized Department employees, the parties, and, where indicated by this Act, members of the Commission or their designated hearing officers.
            The report shall contain:
            (a) the names and dates of contacts with
        	
witnesses;
            (b) a summary and the date of correspondence and
        	
other contacts with the aggrieved party and the respondent;
            (c) a summary description of other pertinent
        	
records;
            (d) a summary of witness statements; and
            (e) answers to questionnaires.
        A final report under this paragraph may be amended if
    	
additional evidence is later discovered.
        (2) Upon review of the report and within 100 days of
    	
the filing of the charge, unless it is impracticable to do so, the Director shall determine whether there is substantial evidence that the alleged civil rights violation has been committed or is about to be committed. If the Director is unable to make the determination within 100 days after the filing of the charge, the Director shall notify the complainant and respondent in writing of the reasons for not doing so. The Director's failure to make the determination within 100 days after the proper filing of the charge does not deprive the Department of jurisdiction over the charge.
            (a) If the Director determines that there is no
        	
substantial evidence, the charge shall be dismissed and the aggrieved party notified that he or she may seek review of the dismissal order before the Commission. The aggrieved party shall have 90 days from receipt of notice to file a request for review by the Commission. The Director shall make public disclosure of each such dismissal.
            (b) If the Director determines that there is
        	
substantial evidence, he or she shall immediately issue a complaint on behalf of the aggrieved party pursuant to subsection (F).
    (E) Conciliation.
        (1) During the period beginning with the filing of
    	
charge and ending with the filing of a complaint or a dismissal by the Department, the Department shall, to the extent feasible, engage in conciliation with respect to such charge.
        When the Department determines that a formal
    	
conciliation conference is feasible, the aggrieved party and respondent shall be notified of the time and place of the conference by registered or certified mail at least 7 days prior thereto and either or both parties shall appear at the conference in person or by attorney.
        (2) The place fixed for the conference shall be
    	
within 35 miles of the place where the civil rights violation is alleged to have been committed.
        (3) Nothing occurring at the conference shall be made
    	
public or used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding for the purpose of proving a violation under this Act unless the complainant and respondent agree in writing that such disclosure be made.
        (4) A conciliation agreement arising out of such
    	
conciliation shall be an agreement between the respondent and the complainant, and shall be subject to approval by the Department and Commission.
        (5) A conciliation agreement may provide for binding
    	
arbitration of the dispute arising from the charge. Any such arbitration that results from a conciliation agreement may award appropriate relief, including monetary relief.
        (6) Each conciliation agreement shall be made public
    	
unless the complainant and respondent otherwise agree and the Department determines that disclosure is not required to further the purpose of this Act.
    (F) Complaint.
        (1) When there is a failure to settle or adjust any
    	
charge through a conciliation conference and the charge is not dismissed, the Department shall prepare a written complaint, under oath or affirmation, stating the nature of the civil rights violation and the relief sought on behalf of the aggrieved party. Such complaint shall be based on the final investigation report and need not be limited to the facts or grounds alleged in the charge filed under subsection (A).
        (2) The complaint shall be filed with the Commission.
        (3) The Department may not issue a complaint under
    	
this Section regarding an alleged civil rights violation after the beginning of the trial of a civil action commenced by the aggrieved party under any State or federal law, seeking relief with respect to that alleged civil rights violation.
    (G) Time Limit.
        (1) When a charge of a civil rights violation has
    	
been properly filed, the Department, within 100 days thereof, unless it is impracticable to do so, shall either issue and file a complaint in the manner and form set forth in this Section or shall order that no complaint be issued. Any such order shall be duly served upon both the aggrieved party and the respondent. The Department's failure to either issue and file a complaint or order that no complaint be issued within 100 days after the proper filing of the charge does not deprive the Department of jurisdiction over the charge.
        (2) The Director shall make available to the
    	
aggrieved party and the respondent, at any time, upon request following completion of the Department's investigation, information derived from an investigation and any final investigative report relating to that investigation.
    (H) This amendatory Act of 1995 applies to causes of action filed on or after January 1, 1996.
    (I) The changes made to this Section by Public Act 95-243 apply to charges filed on or after the effective date of those changes.
    (J) The changes made to this Section by this amendatory Act of the 96th General Assembly apply to charges filed on or after the effective date of those changes.
(Source: P.A. 100-492, eff. 9-8-17; 100-1066, eff. 8-24-18; 101-530, eff. 1-1-20.)

    (775 ILCS 5/7B-103) (from Ch. 68, par. 7B-103)
    Sec. 7B-103. Settlement.
    (A) Circumstances. A settlement of any charge prior to the filing of a complaint may be effectuated at any time upon agreement of the parties and the approval of the Department. A settlement of any charge after the filing of complaint shall be effectuated as specified in Section 8-105(A)(2) of this Act.
    (B) Form. Settlements of charges prior to the filing of complaints shall be reduced to writing by the Department, signed by the parties, and submitted by the Department to the Commission for approval. Settlements of charges after the filing of complaints shall be effectuated as specified in Section 8-105(A)(2) of this Act.
    (C) Violation.
        (1) When either party alleges that a settlement order
    	
has been violated, the Department shall conduct an investigation into the matter.
        (2) Upon finding substantial evidence to demonstrate
    	
that a settlement has been violated, the Department shall refer the matter to the Attorney General for enforcement in the circuit court in which the respondent or complainant resides or transacts business or in which the alleged violation took place.
    (D) Dismissal For Refusal To Accept Settlement Offer. The Department may dismiss a charge if it is satisfied that:
        (1) the respondent has eliminated the effects of the
    	
civil rights violation charged and taken steps to prevent its repetition; or
        (2) the respondent offers and the aggrieved party
    	
declines to accept terms of settlement which the Department finds are sufficient to eliminate the effects of the civil rights violation charged and prevent its repetition.
        (3) When the Department dismisses a charge under this
    	
Section it shall notify the complainant that he or she may seek review of the dismissal order before the Commission. The aggrieved party shall have 30 days from receipt of notice to file a request for review by the Commission.
        (4) In determining whether the respondent has
    	
eliminated the effects of the civil rights violation charged, or has offered terms of settlement sufficient to eliminate same, the Department shall consider the extent to which the respondent has either fully provided, or reasonably offered by way of terms of settlement, as the case may be, the relevant relief available to the aggrieved party under Section 8B-104 of this Act with the exception of civil penalties.
    (E) This amendatory Act of 1995 applies to causes of action filed on or after January 1, 1996.
    (F) The changes made to this Section by this amendatory Act of the 95th General Assembly apply to charges filed on or after the effective date of those changes.
(Source: P.A. 95-243, eff. 1-1-08.)

    (775 ILCS 5/7B-104) (from Ch. 68, par. 7B-104)
    Sec. 7B-104. Judicial Proceedings. (A) Temporary Relief. (1) At any time after a charge is filed, the Department or aggrieved party may petition the appropriate court for temporary relief, pending final determination of the proceedings under this Act, including an order or judgment restraining the respondent from doing or causing any act which would render ineffectual an order which the Commission may enter with respect to the aggrieved party. Whether it is brought by the Department or by the aggrieved party, the petition shall contain a certification by the Director that the particular matter presents exceptional circumstances in which irreparable injury will result from a civil rights violation in the absence of temporary relief. The filing of a petition under this paragraph does not affect the initiation or continuation of administrative proceedings under Section 7A-102 and Section 8A-102 of this Act.
    (2) The petition shall be filed in the circuit court for the county in which the respondent resides or transacts business or in which the alleged violation took place, and the proceedings shall be governed by Part 1 of Article XI of the "Code of Civil Procedure", as amended. Except as provided in subsection (A) (3), the court may grant temporary relief or a temporary restraining order as it deems just and proper.
    (3) When the petition is based upon a civil rights violation as defined in Article 3 of this Act, the duration of the relief or restraining order entered by the court shall not exceed 5 days unless:
    (a) A longer period is agreed to by the respondent; or
    (b) The court finds that there is substantial evidence to demonstrate that the respondent has engaged in unlawful discrimination.
    (B) Enforcement of Commission Orders. When authorized by this Act, the Department, at the request of the Commission, may take whatever action may be authorized for the enforcement of Commission orders.
(Source: P.A. 86-910.)


 
    (775 ILCS 5/Art. 8 heading)
ARTICLE 8. ILLINOIS HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION

    (775 ILCS 5/8-101) (from Ch. 68, par. 8-101)
    Sec. 8-101. Illinois Human Rights Commission.
    (A) Creation; appointments. The Human Rights Commission is created to consist of 7 members appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate. No more than 4 members shall be of the same political party. The Governor shall designate one member as chairperson. All appointments shall be in writing and filed with the Secretary of State as a public record.
    (B) Terms. Of the members first appointed, 4 shall be appointed for a term to expire on the third Monday of January, 2021, and 3 (including the Chairperson) shall be appointed for a term to expire on the third Monday of January, 2023.
    Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, the term of office of each member of the Illinois Human Rights Commission is abolished on January 19, 2019. Incumbent members holding a position on the Commission that was created by Public Act 84-115 and whose terms, if not for this amendatory Act of the 100th General Assembly, would have expired January 18, 2021 shall continue to exercise all of the powers and be subject to all of the duties of members of the Commission until June 30, 2019 or until their respective successors are appointed and qualified, whichever is earlier.
    Thereafter, each member shall serve for a term of 4 years and until his or her successor is appointed and qualified; except that any member chosen to fill a vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be appointed only for the unexpired term of the member whom he or she shall succeed and until his or her successor is appointed and qualified.
    (C) Vacancies.
        (1) In the case of vacancies on the Commission
    	
during a recess of the Senate, the Governor shall make a temporary appointment until the next meeting of the Senate when he or she shall appoint a person to fill the vacancy. Any person so nominated and confirmed by the Senate shall hold office for the remainder of the term and until his or her successor is appointed and qualified.
        (2) If the Senate is not in session at the time this
    	
Act takes effect, the Governor shall make temporary appointments to the Commission as in the case of vacancies.
        (3) Vacancies in the Commission shall not impair the
    	
right of the remaining members to exercise all the powers of the Commission. Except when authorized by this Act to proceed through a 3 member panel, a majority of the members of the Commission then in office shall constitute a quorum.
    (D) Compensation. On and after January 19, 2019, the Chairperson of the Commission shall be compensated at the rate of $125,000 per year, or as set by the Compensation Review Board, whichever is greater, during his or her service as Chairperson, and each other member shall be compensated at the rate of $119,000 per year, or as set by the Compensation Review Board, whichever is greater. In addition, all members of the Commission shall be reimbursed for expenses actually and necessarily incurred by them in the performance of their duties.
    (E) Notwithstanding the general supervisory authority of the Chairperson, each commissioner, unless appointed to the special temporary panel created under subsection (H), has the authority to hire and supervise a staff attorney. The staff attorney shall report directly to the individual commissioner.
    (F) A formal training program for newly appointed commissioners shall be implemented. The training program shall include the following:
        (1) substantive and procedural aspects of the office
    	
of commissioner;
        (2) current issues in employment and housing
    	
discrimination and public accommodation law and practice;
        (3) orientation to each operational unit of the Human
    	
Rights Commission;
        (4) observation of experienced hearing officers and
    	
commissioners conducting hearings of cases, combined with the opportunity to discuss evidence presented and rulings made;
        (5) the use of hypothetical cases requiring the newly
    	
appointed commissioner to issue judgments as a means of evaluating knowledge and writing ability;
        (6) writing skills; and
        (7) professional and ethical standards.
    A formal and ongoing professional development program including, but not limited to, the above-noted areas shall be implemented to keep commissioners informed of recent developments and issues and to assist them in maintaining and enhancing their professional competence. Each commissioner shall complete 20 hours of training in the above-noted areas during every 2 years the commissioner remains in office.
    (G) Commissioners must meet one of the following qualifications:
        (1) licensed to practice law in the State of Illinois;
        (2) at least 3 years of experience as a hearing
    	
officer at the Human Rights Commission; or
        (3) at least 4 years of professional experience
    	
working for or dealing with individuals or corporations affected by this Act or similar laws in other jurisdictions, including, but not limited to, experience with a civil rights advocacy group, a fair housing group, a trade association, a union, a law firm, a legal aid organization, an employer's human resources department, an employment discrimination consulting firm, or a municipal human relations agency.
    The Governor's appointment message, filed with the Secretary of State and transmitted to the Senate, shall state specifically how the experience of a nominee for commissioner meets the requirement set forth in this subsection. The Chairperson must have public or private sector management and budget experience, as determined by the Governor.
    Each commissioner shall devote full time to his or her duties and any commissioner who is an attorney shall not engage in the practice of law, nor shall any commissioner hold any other office or position of profit under the United States or this State or any municipal corporation or political subdivision of this State, nor engage in any other business, employment, or vocation.
    (H) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, the Governor shall appoint, by and with the consent of the Senate, a special temporary panel of commissioners comprised of 3 members. The members shall hold office until the Commission, in consultation with the Governor, determines that the caseload of requests for review has been reduced sufficiently to allow cases to proceed in a timely manner, or for a term of 18 months from the date of appointment by the Governor, whichever is earlier. Each of the 3 members shall have only such rights and powers of a commissioner necessary to dispose of the cases assigned to the special panel. Each of the 3 members appointed to the special panel shall receive the same salary as other commissioners for the duration of the panel. The panel shall have the authority to hire and supervise a staff attorney who shall report to the panel of commissioners.
(Source: P.A. 100-1066, eff. 8-24-18; 101-530, eff. 1-1-20.)

    (775 ILCS 5/8-102) (from Ch. 68, par. 8-102)
    Sec. 8-102. Powers and duties. In addition to the other powers and duties prescribed in this Act, the Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
        (A) Meetings. To meet and function at any place
    	
within the State.
        (B) Offices. To establish and maintain offices in
    	
Springfield and Chicago.
        (C) Employees. To select and fix the compensation of
    	
such technical advisors and employees as it may deem necessary pursuant to the provisions of the Personnel Code.
        (D) Hearing Officers. To select and fix the
    	
compensation of hearing officers who shall be attorneys duly licensed to practice law in this State and full-time employees of the Commission.
        A formal and unbiased training program for hearing
    	
officers shall be implemented. The training program shall include the following:
            (1) substantive and procedural aspects of the
        	
hearing officer position;
            (2) current issues in human rights law and
        	
practice;
            (3) lectures by specialists in substantive areas
        	
related to human rights matters;
            (4) orientation to each operational unit of the
        	
Department and Commission;
            (5) observation of experienced hearing officers
        	
conducting hearings of cases, combined with the opportunity to discuss evidence presented and rulings made;
            (6) the use of hypothetical cases requiring the
        	
hearing officer to issue judgments as a means to evaluating knowledge and writing ability;
            (7) writing skills;
            (8) computer skills, including, but not limited
        	
to, word processing and document management.
        A formal, unbiased and ongoing professional
    	
development program including, but not limited to, the above-noted areas shall be implemented to keep hearing officers informed of recent developments and issues and to assist them in maintaining and enhancing their professional competence.
        (E) Rules and Regulations. To adopt, promulgate,
    	
amend, and rescind rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act pursuant to the Illinois Administrative Procedure Act.
        (F) Compulsory Process. To issue and authorize
    	
requests for enforcement of subpoenas and other compulsory process established by this Act.
        (G) Decisions. Through a panel of 3 members
    	
designated by the Chairperson on a random basis, to hear and decide by majority vote complaints filed in conformity with this Act and to approve proposed settlements. Decisions by commissioners must be based strictly on neutral interpretations of the law and the facts.
        (H) Rehearings. To order, by a vote of 3 members,
    	
rehearing of its decisions by the entire Commission in conformity with this Act.
        (I) Judicial Enforcement. To authorize requests for
    	
judicial enforcement of its orders in conformity with this Act.
        (J) Opinions. To publish each decision within 180
    	
days of the decision to assure a consistent source of precedent. Published decisions shall be subject to the Personal Information Protection Act.
        (K) Public Grants; Private Gifts. To accept public
    	
grants and private gifts as may be authorized.
        (L) Interpreters. To appoint at the expense of the
    	
Commission a qualified sign language interpreter whenever a hearing impaired person is a party or witness at a public hearing.
        (M) Automated Processing Plan. To prepare an
    	
electronic data processing and telecommunications plan jointly with the Department in accordance with Section 7-112.
    The provisions of Public Act 89-370 amending subsection (G) of this Section apply to causes of action filed on or after January 1, 1996.
(Source: P.A. 100-1066, eff. 8-24-18; 101-81, eff. 7-12-19.)

    (775 ILCS 5/8-103) (from Ch. 68, par. 8-103)
    Sec. 8-103. Request for review.
    (A) Jurisdiction. The Commission, through a panel of three members, shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine requests for review of (1) decisions of the Department to dismiss a charge; and (2) notices of default issued by the Department.
    In each instance, the Department shall be the respondent. The respondent on the charge, in the case of dismissal, or the complainant, in the case of default, may file a response to the request for review.
    (B) Review. When a request for review is properly filed, the Commission may consider the Department's report, any argument and supplemental evidence timely submitted, and the results of any additional investigation conducted by the Department in response to the request. In its discretion, the Commission may designate a hearing officer to conduct a hearing into the factual basis of the matter at issue. Within 120 days after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 100th General Assembly, the Commission shall adopt rules of minimum standards for the contents of responses to requests for review, including, but not limited to, proposed statements of uncontested facts and proposed statements of the legal issues.
    (C) Default Order. When a respondent fails to file a timely request for review of a notice of default, or the default is sustained on review, the Commission shall enter a default order and notify the parties that the complainant has the right to either commence a civil action in the appropriate circuit court to determine the complainant's damages or request that the Commission set a hearing on damages before one of its hearing officers. The complainant shall have 90 days after receipt of the Commission's default order to either commence a civil action in the appropriate circuit court or request that the Commission set a hearing on damages.
    (D) Time Period Toll. Proceedings on requests for review shall toll the time limitation established in paragraph (G) of Section 7A-102 from the date on which the Department's notice of dismissal or default is issued to the date on which the Commission's order is entered.
    (E) The changes made to this Section by Public Act 95-243 apply to charges or complaints filed with the Department or Commission on or after the effective date of those changes.
    (F) The changes made to this Section by this amendatory Act of the 96th General Assembly apply to charges or complaints filed with the Department or Commission on or after the effective date of those changes.
    (G) The changes made to this Section by this amendatory Act of the 100th General Assembly apply to charges filed or pending with the Department or Commission on or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 100th General Assembly.
(Source: P.A. 100-1066, eff. 8-24-18.)

    (775 ILCS 5/8-104) (from Ch. 68, par. 8-104)
    Sec. 8-104. Compulsory Process.
    (A) Subpoenas. Any member of the Commission may issue a subpoena:
        (1) At the request of the Department to facilitate
    	
its investigation; or
        (2) At the request of a party to a proceeding which
    	
is the subject of a complaint pending before the Commission.
    (B) Form. The subpoena shall be on a form prescribed by the Commission in its rules and regulations, and a copy of the subpoena shall be served upon all parties of record by the party requesting the subpoena.
    (C) Content. A subpoena may be issued when necessary to compel the attendance of a witness or to require the production for examination of any relevant books, records or documents whatsoever.
    (D) Contests.
        (1) On motion of the person to whom the subpoena is
    	
directed or a party, and for good cause shown the Commission or the hearing officer presiding in the case may quash or modify any subpoena;
        (2) In the case of a subpoena duces tecum issued and
    	
served at the request of the Department, the Commission or the hearing officer presiding in the case shall upon request order the Department to pay the reasonable expense of producing or providing any item specified in the subpoena.
    (E) Enforcement.
        (1) When anyone fails or refuses to obey a subpoena,
    	
the Commission, through a panel of 3 members, shall authorize Commission staff to prepare and file a petition for enforcement in the circuit court of the county in which the person to whom the subpoena was directed resides or has his or her principal place of business.
        (2) Not less than five days before the petition is
    	
filed in the appropriate court, it shall be served on the person along with a notice of the time and place the petition is to be presented.
        (3) Following a hearing on the petition, the circuit
    	
courts shall have jurisdiction to enforce subpoenas issued pursuant to this Section.
    (F) Witnesses.
        (1) If any witness whose testimony is required for
    	
hearing resides outside the state, or through illness or any other good cause as determined by the hearing officer is unable to testify at the hearing, his or her testimony or deposition may be taken, within or without the State, in the same manner as is provided for in the taking of depositions in civil cases in circuit courts.
        (2) Witnesses subject to subpoena shall be paid the
    	
same fees and mileage as are paid witnesses in the circuit courts of this state, and witnesses whose depositions are taken or the person taking them shall be entitled to the same fees as are paid for like services in the circuit courts of this State.
    (G) Service of Process.
        (1) Except as otherwise provided in this Act,
    	
complaints, orders and other process and proper papers shall be served in accordance with such rules and regulations as the Commission may from time to time prescribe. The verified return of the individual making service in accordance with this Section and setting forth the manner of such service shall constitute proof of service.
        (2) For the purposes of this Act, any documents
    	
served upon any officer of a labor organization shall be sufficient to acquire jurisdiction against such labor organization, or labor union, or voluntary unincorporated union association, and all of its officers, members and representatives.
(Source: P.A. 89-370, eff. 8-18-95.)

    (775 ILCS 5/8-105) (from Ch. 68, par. 8-105)
    Sec. 8-105. Settlement.
    (A) Approval.
        (1) When a proposed settlement is submitted by the
    	
Department, the Commission, through a panel of 3 members, shall determine whether to approve its terms and conditions.
        (2) A settlement of any complaint and its underlying
    	
charge or charges may be effectuated at any time upon agreement of the parties, with or without the Commission's approval, and shall act as a full and final resolution of the matter. If the parties desire that the Commission retain jurisdiction over the matter for purposes of enforcing the terms of the settlement, the terms shall be reduced to writing, signed by the parties, and submitted to the Commission for approval. The Commission, through a panel of 3 members, shall determine whether to approve the settlement.
        (3) Approval of the settlement shall be accomplished
    	
by an order, served on the parties and the Department, in accord with the written terms of the settlement.
    (B) Violation. When the Department files notice of a settlement order violation, the Commission, through a panel of three members, may either order the Department to seek enforcement of the settlement order pursuant to paragraph (C) of Section 8-111 or remand for any type of hearing as it may deem necessary pursuant to paragraph (D) of Section 8A-103.
    (C) Dismissal for Refusal to Accept Settlement Offer. The Commission shall dismiss a complaint and the underlying charge or charges of the complaint if the Commission is satisfied that:
        1. the respondent has eliminated the effects of the
    	
civil rights violation charged and taken steps to prevent repetition of the violation; or
        2. the respondent offers and the complainant declines
    	
to accept the terms of settlement that the Commission determines are sufficient to eliminate the effect of the civil rights violation charged and to prevent repetition of the violation.
    In determining whether the respondent has eliminated the effects of the civil rights violation charged, or has offered terms of settlement sufficient to eliminate same, the Commission shall consider the extent to which the respondent has either fully provided, or reasonably offered by way of terms of settlement, as the case may be, the relevant relief available to the complainant under Section 8A-104 of this Act.
    At any time after the service of a complaint pursuant to Section 8A-102 of this Act, and prior to service of a decision prepared pursuant to Section 8A-102(I), a respondent may move for a recommended order dismissing a complaint and the underlying charge or charges for complainant's refusal to accept terms of settlement that are sufficient to eliminate the effects of the civil rights violation charged in the complaint and to eliminate repetition of the violation. Respondent's motion and complainant's reply, if any, shall comply with the requirements for summary decision set forth in Section 8-106.1 of this Act.
    (D) This amendatory Act of 1996 applies to causes of action filed on or after January 1, 1996.
(Source: P.A. 101-661, eff. 4-2-21.)

    (775 ILCS 5/8-106)
    Sec. 8-106. (Renumbered).
(Source: Renumbered by P.A. 86-910, eff. 9-11-89.)

    (775 ILCS 5/8-106.1) (from Ch. 68, par. 8-106.1)
    Sec. 8-106.1. Summary Decision.
    (1) At any time after the service of a complaint and prior to service of a decision pursuant to Section 8A-102(I) or 8B-102(J), complainant or respondent may move with or without supporting affidavits for a summary order in the moving party's favor as to all or any part of the relief sought. A hearing officer may not preclude the filing of said motion except within the 60-day period prior to hearing on the merits of the complaint.
    (2) Procedure. The non-moving party may file counteraffidavits prior to the time of the ruling on the motion. The hearing officer shall decide the motion without delay and shall grant it if the pleadings and affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a recommended order as a matter of law. The term "without delay" shall be defined by rule promulgated by the Commission. An interim summary recommended order, interlocutory in character, may be rendered on the issue of liability alone although there is a genuine issue as to the relief to be awarded.
    (3) Affidavits or Motions Made in Bad Faith. If it appears to the satisfaction of the hearing officer at any time that any affidavit or motion presented pursuant to this Section is presented in bad faith or solely for the purpose of delay, the hearing officer may recommend that the party employing the use of affidavits for dilatory purposes shall pay to the other party the amount of reasonable expenses incurred as a result of the filing of the affidavit or motion, including reasonable attorney's fees.
(Source: P.A. 101-661, eff. 4-2-21.)

    (775 ILCS 5/8-107)
    Sec. 8-107. (Renumbered).
(Source: Renumbered by P.A. 86-910, eff. 9-11-89.)

    (775 ILCS 5/8-108)
    Sec. 8-108. (Renumbered).
(Source: Renumbered by P.A. 86-910, eff. 9-11-89.)

    (775 ILCS 5/8-109) (from Ch. 68, par. 8-109)
    Sec. 8-109. Specific penalties; public contracts; licensees; public officials. In addition to the penalties and forms of relief set forth in Section 8A-104, a hearing officer may recommend and the Commission or any three member panel thereof may:
        (A) Public Contracts. In the case of a respondent
    	
who commits a civil rights violation while holding a public contract, where the practice was authorized, requested, commanded, performed, or knowingly permitted by the board of directors of the respondent or by an officer or executive agent acting within the scope of his employment, order: (1) termination of the contract; (2) debarment of the respondent from participating in public contracts for a period not to exceed three years; (3) imposition of a penalty to be paid to the State Treasurer not to exceed any profit acquired as a direct result of a civil rights violation; or (4) any combination of these penalties.
        (B) Licensees. In the case of a respondent,
    	
operating by virtue of a license issued by the State, a political subdivision, or any agency thereof, who commits a civil rights violation, recommend to the appropriate licensing authority that the respondent's license be suspended or revoked.
        (C) Public Officials. In the case of a respondent
    	
who is a public official who violates paragraph (C) of Section 5-102, recommend to the department or agency in which the official is employed that such disciplinary or discharge proceedings as the Commission deems appropriate be employed.
(Source: P.A. 101-221, eff. 1-1-20.)

    (775 ILCS 5/8-109.1)
    Sec. 8-109.1. Civil penalties; failure to report; failure to train.
    (A) A hearing officer may recommend the Commission or any 3-member panel thereof may:
        (1) Failure to report. In the case of an employer
    	
who fails to make any disclosures required under Section 2-108 within 30 days of the Department's notice to show cause, or as otherwise extended by the Department, order that a civil penalty be imposed pursuant to subsection (B).
        (2) Failure to train. In the case of an employer
    	
who fails to comply with the sexual harassment prevention training requirements under Section 2-109 or 2-110 within 30 days of the Department's notice to show cause, or as otherwise extended by the Department, order that a civil penalty be imposed pursuant to subsection (B).
    (B) An employer who violates Section 2-108, 2-109, or 2-110 is subject to a civil penalty as follows:
        (1) For an employer with fewer than 4 employees: a
    	
penalty not to exceed $500 for a first offense; a penalty not to exceed $1,000 for a second offense; a penalty not to exceed $3,000 for a third or subsequent offense.
        (2) For an employer with 4 or more employees: a
    	
penalty not to exceed $1,000 for a first offense; a penalty not to exceed $3,000 for a second offense; a penalty not to exceed $5,000 for a third or subsequent offense.
    (C) The appropriateness of the penalty to the size of the employer charged, the good faith efforts made by the employer to comply, and the gravity of the violation shall be considered in determining the amount of the civil penalty.
(Source: P.A. 101-221, eff. 1-1-20.)

    (775 ILCS 5/8-110) (from Ch. 68, par. 8-110)
    Sec. 8-110. Publication of opinions. Decisions of the Commission or panels thereof, whether on requests for review or complaints, shall be made available on the Commission's website and to online legal research companies within 14 calendar days after publication by the Commission as required by subsection (J) of Section 8-102. Published decisions shall be subject to the Personal Information Protection Act.
(Source: P.A. 100-1066, eff. 8-24-18.)

    (775 ILCS 5/8-111) (from Ch. 68, par. 8-111)
    Sec. 8-111. Court Proceedings.
    (A) Civil Actions Commenced in Circuit Court.
        (1) Venue. Civil actions commenced in a circuit
    	
court pursuant to Section 7A-102 shall be commenced in the circuit court in the county in which the civil rights violation was allegedly committed.
        (2) If a civil action is commenced in a circuit
    	
court, the form of the complaint shall be in accordance with the Code of Civil Procedure.
        (3) If a civil action is commenced in a circuit court
    	
under Section 7A-102, the plaintiff or defendant may demand trial by jury.
        (4) Remedies. Upon the finding of a civil rights
    	
violation, the circuit court or jury may award any of the remedies set forth in Section 8A-104.
    (B) Judicial Review.
        (1) Any complainant or respondent may apply for and
    	
obtain judicial review of a final order of the Commission entered under this Act by filing a petition for review in the Appellate Court within 35 days from the date that a copy of the decision sought to be reviewed was served upon the party affected by the decision. If a 3-member panel or the full Commission finds that an interlocutory order involves a question of law as to which there is substantial ground for difference of opinion and that an immediate appeal from the order may materially advance the ultimate termination of the litigation, any party may petition the Appellate Court for permission to appeal the order. The procedure for obtaining the required Commission findings and the permission of the Appellate Court shall be governed by Supreme Court Rule 308, except the references to the "trial court" shall be understood as referring to the Commission.
        (2) In any proceeding brought for judicial review,
    	
the Commission's findings of fact shall be sustained unless the court determines that such findings are contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence.
        (3) Venue. Proceedings for judicial review shall be
    	
commenced in the appellate court for the district wherein the civil rights violation which is the subject of the Commission's order was allegedly committed.
    (C) Judicial Enforcement.
        (1) When the Commission, at the instance of the
    	
Department or an aggrieved party, concludes that any person has violated a valid order of the Commission issued pursuant to this Act, and the violation and its effects are not promptly corrected, the Commission, through a panel of 3 members, shall order the Department to commence an action in the name of the People of the State of Illinois by complaint, alleging the violation, attaching a copy of the order of the Commission and praying for the issuance of an order directing such person, his or her or its officers, agents, servants, successors and assigns to comply with the order of the Commission.
        (2) An aggrieved party may file a complaint for
    	
enforcement of a valid order of the Commission directly in Circuit Court.
        (3) Upon the commencement of an action filed under
    	
paragraphs (1) or (2) of this subsection, the court shall have jurisdiction over the proceedings and power to grant or refuse, in whole or in part, the relief sought or impose such other remedy as the court may deem proper.
        (4) The court may stay an order of the Commission in
    	
accordance with the applicable Supreme Court rules, pending disposition of the proceedings.
        (5) The court may punish for any violation of its
    	
order as in the case of civil contempt.
        (6) Venue. Proceedings for judicial enforcement of a
    	
Commission order shall be commenced in the circuit court in the county wherein the civil rights violation which is the subject of the Commission's order was committed.
    (D) Limitation. Except as otherwise provided by law, no court of this state shall have jurisdiction over the subject of an alleged civil rights violation other than as set forth in this Act.
    (E) This amendatory Act of 1996 applies to causes of action filed on or after January 1, 1996.
    (F) The changes made to this Section by this amendatory Act of the 95th General Assembly apply to charges or complaints filed with the Department or the Commission on or after the effective date of those changes.
(Source: P.A. 101-661, eff. 4-2-21.)

    (775 ILCS 5/8-112) (from Ch. 68, par. 8-112)
    Sec. 8-112. Public Grants; Private Gifts) The commission is authorized to accept public grants and private gifts and bequests so long as the conditions of the grant, gift, or bequest are not inconsistent with the purposes of this Act.
(Source: P.A. 81-1216.)

    (775 ILCS 5/8-113) (from Ch. 68, par. 8-113)
    Sec. 8-113. Immigration. The Human Rights Commission and the Department of Human Rights are authorized to receive and collect information concerning employment discrimination in relation to persons affected by the federal Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986, and the Human Rights Commission and the Department of Human Rights are authorized to cooperate with the United States General Accounting Office in providing such information as may be necessary or appropriate for the preparation of the report of the Comptroller General of the United States on discrimination and the implementation of employer sanctions pursuant to that Act. The Human Rights Commission and Department of Human Rights shall coordinate their activities under this Section, and report to the Governor or his designee.
(Source: P.A. 85-139.)


 
    (775 ILCS 5/Art. 8A heading)
ARTICLE 8A. ILLINOIS HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION;
PROCEDURES UNDER ARTICLES 2, 4, 5, 5A and 6

    (775 ILCS 5/8A-101) (from Ch. 68, par. 8A-101)
    Sec. 8A-101. This Article shall apply solely to Articles 2, 4, 5, 5A and 6.
(Source: P.A. 86-910.)

    (775 ILCS 5/8A-102) (from Ch. 68, par. 8A-102)
    Sec. 8A-102. Hearing on Complaint.
    (A) Services. Within five days after a complaint is filed by the Department, or the aggrieved party, as the case may be, the Commission shall cause it to be served on the respondent together with a notice of hearing before a hearing officer of the Commission at a place therein fixed.
    (B) Time and Location of Hearing. An initial hearing date shall be scheduled for not less than thirty nor more than ninety days after service of the complaint at a place that is within one hundred miles of the place at which the civil rights violation is alleged to have occurred. The hearing officer may, for good cause shown, extend the date of the hearing.
    (C) Amendment.
        (1) A complaint may be amended under oath by leave of
    	
the presiding hearing officer, for good cause shown, upon timely written motion and reasonable notice to all interested parties at any time prior to the issuance of a recommended order pursuant to Section 8A-102(I) or 8B-102(J). The amended complaint shall be served upon all parties of record and the Department of Human Rights by the complainant, or by the Department if it prepared and filed the amended complaint, within 7 days of the date of the order permitting its filing or such additional time as the hearing officer may order. Amendments to the complaint may encompass any unlawful discrimination which is like or reasonably related to the charge and growing out of the allegations in such charge, including, but not limited to, allegations of retaliation.
        (2) A motion that the complaint be amended to conform
    	
to the evidence, made prior to the close of the public hearing, may be addressed orally on the record to the hearing officer, and shall be granted for good and sufficient cause.
    (D) Answer.
        (1) The respondent shall file an answer under oath or
    	
affirmation to the original or amended complaint within 30 days of the date of service thereof, but the hearing officer may, for good cause shown, grant further time for the filing of an answer.
        (2) When the respondent files a motion to dismiss the
    	
complaint within 30 days and the motion is denied by the hearing officer, the time for filing the answer shall be within 15 days of the date of denial of the motion.
        (3) Any allegation in the complaint which is not
    	
denied or admitted in the answer is deemed admitted unless the respondent states in the answer that he is without sufficient knowledge or information to form a belief with respect to such allegation.
        (4) The failure to file an answer is deemed to
    	
constitute an admission of the allegations contained in the complaint.
        (5) The respondent has the right to amend his answer,
    	
upon leave of the hearing officer, for good cause shown.
    (E) Proceedings In Forma Pauperis.
        (1) If the hearing officer is satisfied that the
    	
complainant or respondent is a poor person, and unable to prosecute or defend the complaint and pay the costs and expenses thereof, the hearing officer may permit the party to commence and prosecute or defend the action as a poor person. Such party shall have all the necessary subpoenas, appearances, and proceedings without prepayment of witness fees or charges. Witnesses shall attend as in other cases under this Act and the same remedies shall be available for failure or refusal to obey the subpoena as are provided for in Section 8-104 of this Act.
        (2) A person desiring to proceed without payment of
    	
fees or charges shall file with the hearing officer an affidavit stating that he is a poor person and unable to pay costs, and that the action is meritorious.
    (F) Discovery. The procedure for obtaining discovery of information from parties and witnesses shall be specified by the Commission in rules. If no rule has been promulgated by the Commission on a particular type of discovery, the Code of Civil Procedure may be considered persuasive authority. The types of discovery shall be the same as in civil cases in the circuit courts of this State, provided, however, that a party may take discovery depositions only upon leave of the hearing officer and for good cause shown.
    (G) Hearing.
        (1) Both the complainant and the respondent may
    	
appear at the hearing and examine and cross-examine witnesses.
        (2) The testimony taken at the hearing shall be under
    	
oath or affirmation and a transcript shall be made and filed in the office of the Commission.
        (3) The testimony taken at the hearing is subject to
    	
the same rules of evidence that apply in courts of this State in civil cases.
    (H) Compelling Appearance of Parties at Hearing. The appearance at the hearing of a party or a person who at the time of the hearing is an officer, director, or employee of a party may be required by serving the party with a notice designating the person who is required to appear. The notice also may require the production at the hearing of documents or tangible things. If the party or person is a nonresident of the county, the hearing officer may order any terms and conditions in connection with his appearance at the hearing that are just, including payment of his reasonable expenses. Upon a failure to comply with the notice, the hearing officer may enter any order that is just.
    (I) Decision.
        (1) When all the testimony has been taken, the
    	
hearing officer shall determine whether the respondent has engaged in or is engaging in the civil rights violation with respect to the person aggrieved as charged in the complaint. A determination sustaining a complaint shall be based upon a preponderance of the evidence.
        (2) The hearing officer shall make findings of fact
    	
in writing and, if the finding is against the respondent, shall issue and cause to be served on the parties and the Department a recommended order for appropriate relief as provided by this Act.
        (3) If, upon all the evidence, the hearing officer
    	
finds that a respondent has not engaged in the discriminatory practice charged in the complaint or that a preponderance of the evidence does not sustain the complaint, he shall state his findings of fact and shall issue and cause to be served on the parties and the Department a recommended order dismissing the complaint.
        (4) The findings and recommended order of the hearing
    	
officer shall be filed with the Commission. The findings and recommended order may be authored by a hearing officer other than the hearing officer who presides at the public hearing if:
            (a) the hearing officer who presides at the
        	
public hearing is unable to author the findings and recommended order by reason of death, disability, or separation from employment; and
            (b) all parties to a complaint file a joint
        	
motion agreeing to have the findings and recommended order written by a hearing officer who did not preside at the public hearing.
        (5) A recommended order dismissing a complaint may
    	
include an award of reasonable attorneys fees in favor of the respondent against the complainant or the complainant's attorney, or both, if the hearing officer concludes that the complaint was frivolous, unreasonable or groundless or that the complainant continued to litigate after it became clearly so.
        (6) The hearing officer may issue a recommended order
    	
of dismissal with prejudice or a recommended order of default as a sanction for the failure of a party to prosecute his or her case, file a required pleading, appear at a hearing, or otherwise comply with this Act, the rules of the Commission, or a previous order of the hearing officer.
(Source: P.A. 92-472, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (775 ILCS 5/8A-102.5)
    Sec. 8A-102.5. Alternative hearing procedure.
    (A) All parties shall be given the right to proceed under this Section.
    (B) If all parties to a complaint stipulate to proceedings under this Section, the complaint shall be resolved in the following manner:
        (1) The parties shall select a hearing officer by
    	
mutual agreement from a pool of hearing officers determined by the Commission.
        (2) The parties shall have a limited right to
    	
discovery. The methods of discovery available to the parties shall be specified in rules promulgated by the Commission.
        (3) If a dispositive motion is made with respect to a
    	
case, the hearing officer mutually agreed upon shall have the authority to issue a final order disposing of the complaint based upon the motion.
        (4) If the case proceeds to public hearing, the
    	
hearing officer mutually agreed upon shall have the authority to issue a final order disposing of the complaint based upon the pleadings and the evidence presented. The final order shall be in sufficient detail to apprise the parties as to the basis for the decisions, but need not contain detailed findings of fact and conclusions of law.
    (C) There is no right of appeal of orders issued under this Section. By stipulating to resolution of the complaint under this Section, the parties waive all right of appeal except for orders procured by fraud or duress.
    (D) Final orders issued under this Section are enforceable in the same manner as orders issued by the Commission.
(Source: P.A. 89-370, eff. 8-18-95.)

    (775 ILCS 5/8A-103) (from Ch. 68, par. 8A-103)
    Sec. 8A-103. Review by Commission.
    (A) Exceptions. Within 30 days of the receipt of service of the hearing officer's recommended order, a party may file with the Commission any written exceptions to any part of the order. Exceptions shall be supported by argument and served on all parties at the time they are filed. If no exceptions are filed, the recommended order shall become the order of the Commission without further review. The Commission shall issue a notice that no exceptions have been filed no later than 30 days after the exceptions were due.
    (B) Response. Within 21 days of the receipt of service of exceptions, a party may file with the Commission any response to the exceptions. Responses shall be supported by argument and served on all parties at the time they are filed.
    (C) Oral Argument. A party may request oral argument at the time of filing exceptions or a response to exceptions. When any party requests oral argument in this manner, the Commission may schedule oral argument to be heard by a panel of 3 Commission members. If the panel grants oral argument, it shall notify all parties of the time and place of argument. Any party so notified may present oral argument.
    (D) Remand.
        (1) The Commission, on its own motion or at the
    	
written request of any party made at the time of filing exceptions or responses, may remand a case to a hearing officer for purposes of a rehearing to reconsider evidence or hear additional evidence in the matter. The Commission shall issue and serve on all parties a written order remanding the cause and specifying the additional evidence.
        (2) The hearing officer presiding at a rehearing
    	
shall set a hearing date, in accordance with subsection (B) of Section 8A-102, upon due notice to all parties.
        (3) After conclusion of the rehearing, the hearing
    	
officer shall file written findings and recommendations with the Commission and serve copies at the same time on all parties in the same manner as provided in subsection (I) of Section 8A-102. The findings and recommendations shall be subject to review by the Commission as provided in this Section.
    (E) Review.
        (1) Following the filing of the findings and
    	
recommended order of the hearing officer and any written exceptions and responses, and any other proceedings provided for in this Section, the Commission, through a panel of 3 members, shall decide whether to accept the case for review. If the panel declines to review the recommended order, it shall become the order of the Commission. The Commission shall issue a notice within 30 days after a Commission panel votes to decline review. If the panel accepts the case, it shall review the record and may adopt, modify, or reverse in whole or in part the findings and recommendations of the hearing officer.
        (2) When reviewing a recommended order, the
    	
Commission shall adopt the hearing officer's findings of fact if they are not contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence.
        (3) If the Commission accepts a case for review, it
    	
shall file its written order and decision in its office and serve copies on all parties together with a notification of the date when it was filed. If the Commission declines to review a recommended order or if no exceptions have been filed, it shall issue a short statement notifying the parties that the recommended order has become the order of the Commission. The statement shall be served on the parties by first class mail.
        (4) A recommended order authored by a non-presiding
    	
hearing officer under subparagraph 8A-102(I)(4) of this Act shall be reviewed in the same manner as a recommended order authored by a presiding hearing officer.
    (F) Rehearing.
        (1) Within 30 days after service of the Commission's
    	
order or statement declining review, a party may file an application for rehearing before the full Commission. The application shall be served on all other parties. The Commission shall have discretion to order a response to the application. The filing of an application for rehearing is optional. The failure to file an application for rehearing shall not be considered a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. This amendatory Act of 1991 applies to pending proceedings as well as those filed on or after its effective date.
        (2) Applications for rehearing shall be viewed with
    	
disfavor and may be granted, by vote of 3 Commission members, only upon a clear demonstration that a matter raises legal issues of significant impact or that Commission decisions are in conflict.
        (3) When an application for rehearing is granted, the
    	
original order shall be nullified and oral argument before the full Commission shall be scheduled. The Commission may request the parties to file any additional written arguments it deems necessary.
    (G) Modification of Order.
        (1) At any time before a final order of the court in
    	
a proceeding for judicial review under this Act, the Commission or the 3-member panel that decided the matter, upon reasonable notice, may modify or set aside in whole or in part any finding or order made by it in accordance with this Section.
        (2) Any modification shall be accomplished by the
    	
filing and service of a supplemental order and decision by the Commission in the same manner as provided in this Section.
    (H) Extensions of time. All motions for extensions of time with respect to matters being considered by the Commission shall be decided by the full Commission or a 3-member panel. If a motion for extension of time cannot be ruled upon before the filing deadline sought to be extended, the Chairperson of the Commission shall be authorized to extend the filing deadline to the date of the next Commission meeting at which the motion can be considered.
(Source: P.A. 100-1066, eff. 8-24-18; 100-1154, eff. 12-19-18.)

    (775 ILCS 5/8A-104) (from Ch. 68, par. 8A-104)
    Sec. 8A-104. Relief; Penalties. Upon finding a civil rights violation, a hearing officer may recommend and the Commission or any three-member panel thereof may provide for any relief or penalty identified in this Section, separately or in combination, by entering an order directing the respondent to:
    (A) Cease and Desist Order. Cease and desist from any violation of this Act.
    (B) Actual Damages. Pay actual damages, as reasonably determined by the Commission, for injury or loss suffered by the complainant.
    (C) Hiring; Reinstatement; Promotion; Backpay; Fringe Benefits. Hire, reinstate or upgrade the complainant with or without back pay or provide such fringe benefits as the complainant may have been denied.
    (D) Restoration of Membership; Admission To Programs. Admit or restore the complainant to labor organization membership, to a guidance program, apprenticeship training program, on the job training program, or other occupational training or retraining program.
    (E) Public Accommodations. Admit the complainant to a public accommodation.
    (F) Services. Extend to the complainant the full and equal enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations of the respondent.
    (G) Attorneys Fees; Costs. Pay to the complainant all or a portion of the costs of maintaining the action, including reasonable attorney fees and expert witness fees incurred in maintaining this action before the Department, the Commission and in any judicial review and judicial enforcement proceedings. Provided, however, that no award of attorney fees or costs shall be made pursuant to this amendatory Act of 1987 with respect to any charge for which the complaint before the Commission was filed prior to December 1, 1987. With respect to all charges for which complaints were filed with the Commission prior to December 1, 1987, attorney fees and costs shall be awarded pursuant to the terms of this subsection as it existed prior to revision by this amendatory Act of 1987.
    (H) Compliance Report. Report as to the manner of compliance.
    (I) Posting of Notices. Post notices in a conspicuous place which the Commission may publish or cause to be published setting forth requirements for compliance with this Act or other relevant information which the Commission determines necessary to explain this Act.
    (J) Make Complainant Whole. Take such action as may be necessary to make the individual complainant whole, including, but not limited to, awards of interest on the complainant's actual damages and backpay from the date of the civil rights violation. Provided, however, that no award of prejudgment interest shall be made pursuant to this amendatory Act of 1987 with respect to any charge in which the complaint before the Commission was filed prior to December 1, 1987. With respect to all charges for which complaints were filed with the Commission prior to December 1, 1987, make whole relief shall be awarded pursuant to this subsection as it existed prior to revision by this amendatory Act of 1987.
    There shall be no distinction made under this Section between complaints filed by the Department and those filed by the aggrieved party.
(Source: P.A. 86-910.)


 
    (775 ILCS 5/Art. 8B heading)
ARTICLE 8B. PROCEDURES AND RELIEF IN ARTICLE 3
CASES BEFORE THE HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION

    (775 ILCS 5/8B-101) (from Ch. 68, par. 8B-101)
    Sec. 8B-101. Applicability. The procedures and relief specified in this Article shall apply solely to complaints filed with the Human Rights Commission under Article 3.
(Source: P.A. 86-910.)

    (775 ILCS 5/8B-102) (from Ch. 68, par. 8B-102)
    Sec. 8B-102. Hearing on complaint.
    (A) Election of Judicial Determination. When a complaint is filed under Section 7B-102(F) a complainant, a respondent, or an aggrieved party on whose behalf the complaint was filed, may elect to have the claims asserted in that complaint decided in a civil action in a circuit court of Illinois, in which case the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure shall apply. The election must be made not later than 20 days after the receipt by the electing person of service of the complaint by the Commission. The person making such election shall file it with the Commission and shall give notice of doing so to the Department and to all other complainants and respondents to whom the charge relates. If an election is made, the Commission shall act no further on the complaint and shall administratively close the file on the complaint. If an election is not made, the Commission shall continue proceedings on the complaint in accordance with this Act and the hearing shall be before a hearing officer.
    (B) Services. Within 5 days after a complaint is filed by the Department, the Commission shall cause it to be served on the respondent and complainant together with a notice of hearing before a hearing officer of the Commission at a place therein fixed and with information as to how to make an election under subsection (A) and the effect of such an election.
    (C) Time and Location of Hearing. An initial hearing date shall be scheduled for not less than 30 nor more than 90 days after service of the complaint at a place that is within 100 miles of the place at which the civil rights violation is alleged to have occurred. The hearing officer may, for good cause shown, extend the date of the hearing.
    (D) Amendment.
        (1) A complaint may be amended under oath by leave of
    	
the presiding hearing officer, for good cause shown, upon timely written motion and reasonable notice to all interested parties at any time prior to the issuance of a recommended order pursuant to Section 8A-102(I) or 8B-102(J). The amended complaint shall be served upon all parties of record by the Department within 7 days of the date of the order permitting its filing or such additional time as the hearing officer may order. Amendments to the complaint may encompass any unlawful discrimination which is like or reasonably related to the charge and growing out of the allegations in such charge, including, but not limited to, allegations of retaliation.
        (2) A motion that the complaint be amended to conform
    	
to the evidence, made prior to the close of the public hearing, may be addressed orally on the record to the hearing officer, and shall be granted for good and sufficient cause.
    (E) Answer.
        (1) The respondent shall file an answer under oath or
    	
affirmation to the original or amended complaint within 30 days of the date of service thereof, but the hearing officer may, for good cause shown, grant further time for the filing of an answer.
        (2) When the respondent files a motion to dismiss the
    	
complaint within 30 days and the motion is denied by the hearing officer, the time for filing the answer shall be within 15 days of the date of denial of the motion.
        (3) Any allegation in the complaint which is not
    	
denied or admitted in the answer is deemed admitted unless the respondent states in the answer that he is without sufficient knowledge or information to form a belief with respect to such allegation.
        (4) The failure to file an answer is deemed to
    	
constitute an admission of the allegations contained in the complaint.
        (5) The respondent has the right to amend his answer,
    	
upon leave of the hearing officer, for good cause shown.
    (F) Proceedings In Forma Pauperis.
        (1) If the hearing officer is satisfied that the
    	
complainant or respondent is a poor person, and unable to prosecute or defend the complaint and pay the costs and expenses thereof, the hearing officer may permit the party to commence and prosecute or defend the action as a poor person. Such party shall have all the necessary subpoenas, appearances, and proceedings without prepayment of witness fees or charges. Witnesses shall attend as in other cases under this Act and the same remedies shall be available for failure or refusal to obey the subpoena as are provided for in Section 8-104 of this Act.
        (2) A person desiring to proceed without payment of
    	
fees or charges shall file with the hearing officer an affidavit stating that he is a poor person and unable to pay costs, and that the action is meritorious.
    (G) Discovery. The procedures for obtaining discovery of information from parties and witnesses shall be specified by the Commission in rules. If no rule has been promulgated by the Commission on a particular type of discovery, the Code of Civil Procedure may be considered persuasive authority. The types of discovery shall be the same as in civil cases in the circuit courts of this State, provided, however, that a party may take discovery depositions only upon leave of the hearing officer and for good cause shown.
    (H) Hearing.
        (1) The Department and the respondent shall be
    	
parties in hearings under this Article. The Department shall seek appropriate relief for the complainant and vindication of the public interest. Any complainant may intervene as a party. All parties have the right to examine and cross examine witnesses.
        (2) The testimony taken at the hearing shall be under
    	
oath or affirmation and a transcript shall be made and filed in the office of the Commission.
        (3) The testimony taken at the hearing is subject to
    	
the same rules of evidence that apply in courts of this State in civil cases.
    (I) Compelling Appearance of Parties at Hearing. The appearance at the hearing of a party or a person who at the time of the hearing is an officer, director, or employee of a party may be required by serving the party with a notice designating the person who is required to appear. The notice also may require the production at the hearing of documents or tangible things. If the party or person is a nonresident of the county, the hearing officer may order any terms and conditions in connection with his appearance at the hearing that are just, including payment of his reasonable expenses. Upon a failure to comply with the notice, the hearing officer may enter any order that is just.
    (J) Decision.
        (1) When all the testimony has been taken, the
    	
hearing officer shall determine whether the respondent has engaged in or is engaging in the civil rights violation with respect to the aggrieved party as charged in the complaint. A determination sustaining a complaint shall be based upon a preponderance of the evidence.
        (2) The hearing officer shall make findings of fact
    	
in writing and, if the finding is against the respondent, shall issue and cause to be served on the parties and the Department a recommended order for appropriate relief as provided by this Act.
        (3) If, upon all the evidence, the hearing officer
    	
finds that a respondent has not engaged in the civil rights violation charged in the complaint or that a preponderance of the evidence does not sustain the complaint, he shall state his findings of fact and shall issue and cause to be served on the parties and the Department a recommended order dismissing the complaint.
        (4) The findings and recommended order of the hearing
    	
officer shall be filed with the Commission. The findings and recommended order may be authored by a hearing officer other than the hearing officer who presides at the public hearing if:
            (a) the hearing officer who presides at the
        	
public hearing is unable to author the findings and recommended order by reason of death, disability, or separation from employment; and
            (b) all parties to a complaint file a joint
        	
motion agreeing to have the findings and recommended order written by a hearing officer who did not preside at the public hearing.
        (5) The hearing officer may issue a recommended order
    	
of dismissal with prejudice or a recommended order of default as a sanction for the failure of a party to prosecute his or her case, file a required pleading, appear at a hearing, or otherwise comply with this Act, the rules of the Commission, or a previous order of the hearing officer.
    (K) Effect of Trial of Civil Action on Administrative Proceedings. A hearing officer shall not proceed with any administrative proceedings under this Section after the filing of a civil action by or on behalf of the aggrieved party under federal or State law seeking relief with respect to the alleged civil rights violation.
(Source: P.A. 92-472, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (775 ILCS 5/8B-103) (from Ch. 68, par. 8B-103)
    Sec. 8B-103. Review by Commission.
    (A) Exceptions. Within 30 days of the receipt of service of the hearing officer's recommended order, a party may file with the Commission any written exceptions to any part of the order. Exceptions shall be supported by argument and served on all parties at the time they are filed. If no exceptions are filed, the recommended order shall become the order of the Commission without further review. The Commission shall issue a notice that no exceptions have been filed no later than 30 days after the exceptions were due.
    (B) Response. Within 21 days of the receipt of service of exceptions, a party may file with the Commission any response to the exceptions. Responses shall be supported by argument and served on all parties at the time they are filed.
    (C) Oral Argument. A party may request oral argument at the time of filing exceptions or a response to exceptions. When any party requests oral argument in this manner, the Commission may schedule oral argument to be heard by a panel of 3 Commission members. If the panel grants oral argument, it shall notify all parties of the time and place of argument. Any party so notified may present oral argument.
    (D) Remand.
        (1) The Commission, on its own motion or at the
    	
written request of any party made at the time of filing exceptions or responses, may remand a case to a hearing officer for purposes of a rehearing to reconsider evidence or hear additional evidence in the matter. The Commission shall issue and serve on all parties a written order remanding the cause and specifying the additional evidence.
        (2) The hearing officer presiding at a rehearing
    	
shall set a hearing date, in accordance with Section 8B-102(C), upon due notice to all parties.
        (3) After conclusion of the rehearing, the hearing
    	
officer shall file written findings and recommendations with the Commission and serve copies at the same time on all parties in the same manner as provided in Section 8B-102(J). The findings and recommendations shall be subject to review by the Commission as provided in this Section.
    (E) Review.
        (1) Following the filing of the findings and
    	
recommended order of the hearing officer and any written exceptions and responses, and any other proceedings provided for in this Section, the Commission, through a panel of 3 members, may review the record and may adopt, modify, or reverse in whole or in part the findings and recommendations of the hearing officer.
        (2) When reviewing a recommended order, the
    	
Commission shall adopt the hearing officer's findings of fact if they are not contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence.
        (3) If the Commission accepts a case for review, it
    	
shall file its written order and decision in its office and serve copies on all parties together with a notification of the date when it was filed. If the Commission declines to review a recommended order or if no exceptions have been filed, it shall issue a short statement notifying the parties that the recommended order has become the order of the Commission. The statement shall be served on the parties by first class mail.
        (3.1) A recommended order authored by a non-presiding
    	
hearing officer under subparagraph 8B-102(J)(4) shall be reviewed in the same manner as a recommended order authored by a presiding hearing officer.
        (4) The Commission shall issue a final decision
    	
within one year of the date a charge is filed with the Department unless it is impracticable to do so. If the Commission is unable to issue a final decision within one year of the date the charge is filed with the Department, it shall notify all parties in writing of the reasons for not doing so.
    (F) Rehearing.
        (1) Within 30 days after service of the Commission's
    	
order or statement declining review, a party may file an application for rehearing before the full Commission. The application shall be served on all other parties. The Commission shall have discretion to order a response to the application. The filing of an application for rehearing is optional. The failure to file an application for rehearing shall not be considered a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. This amendatory Act of 1991 applies to pending proceedings as well as those filed on or after its effective date.
        (2) Applications for rehearing shall be viewed with
    	
disfavor, and may be granted, by vote of 3 Commission members, only upon a clear demonstration that a matter raises legal issues of significant impact or that Commission decisions are in conflict.
        (3) When an application for rehearing is granted, the
    	
original order shall be nullified and oral argument before the full Commission shall be scheduled. The Commission may request the parties to file any additional written arguments it deems necessary.
    (G) Modification of Order.
        (1) At any time before a final order of the court in
    	
a proceeding for judicial review under this Act, the Commission or the 3-member panel that decided the matter, upon reasonable notice, may modify or set aside in whole or in part any finding or order made by it in accordance with this Section.
        (2) Any modification shall be accomplished by the
    	
filing and service of a supplemental order and decision by the Commission in the same manner as provided in this Section.
    (H) Extensions of time. All motions for extensions of time with respect to matters being considered by the Commission shall be decided by the full Commission or a 3-member panel. If a motion for extension of time cannot be ruled upon before the filing deadline sought to be extended, the Chairperson of the Commission shall be authorized to extend the filing deadline to the date of the next Commission meeting at which the motion can be considered.
(Source: P.A. 100-1066, eff. 8-24-18; 100-1154, eff. 12-19-18.)

    (775 ILCS 5/8B-104) (from Ch. 68, par. 8B-104)
    Sec. 8B-104. Relief; penalties. Upon finding a civil rights violation, a hearing officer may recommend and the Commission or any three-member panel thereof may provide for any relief or penalty identified in this Section, separately or in combination, by entering an order directing the respondent to:
        (A) Cease and Desist Order. Cease and desist from
    	
any violation of this Act.
        (B) Actual Damages. Pay actual damages, as
    	
reasonably determined by the Commission, for injury or loss suffered by the complainant.
        (C) Civil Penalty. Pay a civil penalty to vindicate
    	
the public interest:
            (i) in an amount not exceeding $16,000 if the
        	
respondent has not been adjudged to have committed any prior civil rights violation under Article 3;
            (ii) in an amount not exceeding $42,500 if the
        	
respondent has been adjudged to have committed one other civil rights violation under Article 3 during the 5-year period ending on the date of the filing of this charge; and
            (iii) in an amount not exceeding $70,000 if the
        	
respondent has been adjudged to have committed 2 or more civil rights violations under Article 3 during the 7-year period ending on the date of the filing of this charge; except that if the acts constituting the civil rights violation that is the object of the charge are committed by the same natural person who has been previously adjudged to have committed acts constituting a civil rights violation under Article 3, then the civil penalties set forth in subparagraphs (ii) and (iii) may be imposed without regard to the period of time within which any subsequent civil rights violation under Article 3 occurred.
        (D) Attorney Fees; Costs. Pay to the complainant all
    	
or a portion of the costs of maintaining the action, including reasonable attorneys fees and expert witness fees incurred in maintaining this action before the Department, the Commission and in any judicial review and judicial enforcement proceedings.
        (E) Compliance Report. Report as to the manner of
    	
compliance.
        (F) Posting of Notices. Post notices in a
    	
conspicuous place which the Commission may publish or cause to be published setting forth requirements for compliance with this Act or other relevant information which the Commission determines necessary to explain this Act.
        (G) Make Complainant Whole. Take such action as may
    	
be necessary to make the individual complainant whole, including, but not limited to, awards of interest on the complainant's actual damages from the date of the civil rights violation.
(Source: P.A. 99-548, eff. 1-1-17.)


 
    (775 ILCS 5/Art. 9 heading)
ARTICLE 9. SAVINGS PROVISIONS

    (775 ILCS 5/9-101) (from Ch. 68, par. 9-101)
    Sec. 9-101. Transfer; savings.
    (A) Personnel.
        (1) All personnel previously assigned to the Fair
    	
Employment Practices Commission, Department of Equal Employment Opportunity, and Human Relations Commission shall be transferred, in accordance with this Act to the Department or Commission.
        (2) The rights of employees, the state, and its
    	
executive agencies under the Personnel Code, any collective bargaining agreement, or any pension, retirement or annuity plan shall not be affected by this Act.
    (B) Documents; Property. All books, records, papers, documents, and property in the possession of the Fair Employment Practices Commission, Department of Equal Employment Opportunity, and Human Relations Commission shall be transferred, in accordance with this Act to the Department or Commission.
    (C) Service of Documents; Response to Subpoenas. Any report, notice, paper, document or response to a subpoena which previously had to be made, given, furnished or served to or upon the Fair Employment Practices Commission, Department of Equal Employment Opportunity and Human Relations Commission shall be made, given, furnished or served, in accordance with this Act to the Department.
    (D) Rules and Regulations. No rule or regulation promulgated by the Fair Employment Practices Commission, Department of Equal Employment Opportunity, or Human Relations Commission, including those now in effect and those filed pursuant to the Illinois Administrative Procedure Act, shall be abrogated by this Act. In accordance with this Act they shall be deemed rules and regulations of the Department or the Commission.
    (E) Completed Acts. This Act shall not affect any act completed, ratified or confirmed or any action taken in a judicial proceeding by or any right accrued or established under the authority of the Fair Employment Practices Commission, Department of Equal Employment Opportunity, Human Relations Commission. Such actions shall be continued, in accordance with this Act, by the Department or Commission.
    (F) Appropriations. Appropriations made to or for the use of the Fair Employment Practices Commission, Department of Equal Employment Opportunity, and Human Relations Commission shall be transferred, in accordance with Section 9b of the State Finance Act, to the Department or Commission.
(Source: P.A. 91-357, eff. 7-29-99.)

    (775 ILCS 5/9-102) (from Ch. 68, par. 9-102)
    Sec. 9-102. Pending matters.
    (A) Charges; Complaints; Causes of Action. This Act shall not affect or abate any cause of action, charge, complaint or other matter pending before or accrued under the jurisdiction of the Fair Employment Practices Commission or the Department of Equal Employment Opportunity. Each charge, complaint, or matter shall be assumed by the Department or Commission, as provided in this Act, at the same stage, or a parallel stage, of proceeding to which it had progressed prior to the effective date of this Act.
    (B) Special Cases. The Human Rights Act shall not in any way affect or abate any right, claim or cause of action under the "Equal Opportunities for the Handicapped Act", approved August 23, 1971, as amended, which accrued or arose prior to July 1, 1980.
(Source: P.A. 99-642, eff. 7-28-16.)


 
    (775 ILCS 5/Art. 10 heading)
ARTICLE 10. CIRCUIT COURT ACTIONS

    (775 ILCS 5/10-101) (from Ch. 68, par. 10-101)
    Sec. 10-101. Applicability. With the exception of Section 10-104, this Article shall apply solely to civil actions arising under Article 3 of this Act.
(Source: P.A. 93-1017, eff. 8-24-04.)

    (775 ILCS 5/10-102) (from Ch. 68, par. 10-102)
    Sec. 10-102. Court Actions.
    (A) Circuit Court Actions.
        (1) An aggrieved party may commence a civil action in
    	
an appropriate Circuit Court not later than 2 years after the occurrence or the termination of an alleged civil rights violation or the breach of a conciliation or settlement agreement entered into under this Act, whichever occurs last, to obtain appropriate relief with respect to the alleged civil rights violation or breach. Venue for such civil action shall be determined under Section 8-111(A)(1).
        (2) The computation of such 2-year period shall not
    	
include any time during which an administrative proceeding under this Act was pending with respect to a complaint or charge under this Act based upon the alleged civil rights violation. This paragraph does not apply to actions arising from a breach of a conciliation or settlement agreement.
        (3) An aggrieved party may commence a civil action
    	
under this subsection whether or not a charge has been filed under Section 7B-102 and without regard to the status of any such charge, however, if the Department or local agency has obtained a conciliation or settlement agreement with the consent of an aggrieved party, no action may be filed under this subsection by such aggrieved party with respect to the alleged civil rights violation practice which forms the basis for such complaint except for the purpose of enforcing the terms of such conciliation or settlement agreement.
        (4) An aggrieved party shall not commence a civil
    	
action under this subsection with respect to an alleged civil rights violation which forms the basis of a complaint issued by the Department if a hearing officer has commenced a hearing on the record under Article 3 of this Act with respect to such complaint.
    (B) Appointment of Attorney by Court. Upon application by a person alleging a civil rights violation or a person against whom the civil rights violation is alleged, if in the opinion of the court such person is financially unable to bear the costs of such action, the court may:
        (1) appoint an attorney for such person, any attorney
    	
so appointed may petition for an award of attorneys fees pursuant to subsection (C)(2) of this Section; or
        (2) authorize the commencement or continuation of a
    	
civil action under subsection (A) without the payment of fees, costs, or security.
    (C) Relief which may be granted.
        (1) In a civil action under subsection (A) if the
    	
court finds that a civil rights violation has occurred or is about to occur, the court may award to the plaintiff actual and punitive damages, and may grant as relief, as the court deems appropriate, any permanent or preliminary injunction, temporary restraining order, or other order, including an order enjoining the defendant from engaging in such civil rights violation or ordering such affirmative action as may be appropriate.
        (2) In a civil action under subsection (A), the
    	
court, in its discretion, may allow the prevailing party, other than the State of Illinois, reasonable attorneys fees and costs. The State of Illinois shall be liable for such fees and costs to the same extent as a private person.
    (D) Intervention By The Department. The Attorney General of Illinois may intervene on behalf of the Department if the Department certifies that the case is of general public importance. Upon such intervention the court may award such relief as is authorized to be granted to a plaintiff in a civil action under Section 10-102(C).
(Source: P.A. 101-661, eff. 4-2-21.)

    (775 ILCS 5/10-103) (from Ch. 68, par. 10-103)
    Sec. 10-103. Circuit court actions pursuant to election.
    (A) If an election is made under Section 8B-102, the Department shall authorize and not later than 30 days after the entry of the administrative closure order by the Commission the Attorney General shall commence and maintain a civil action on behalf of the aggrieved party in a circuit court of Illinois seeking relief under this Section. Venue for such civil action shall be determined under Section 8-111(A)(1).
    (B) Any aggrieved party with respect to the issues to be determined in a civil action under this Section may intervene as of right in that civil action.
    (C) In a civil action under this Section, if the court finds that a civil rights violation has occurred or is about to occur the court may grant as relief any relief which a court could grant with respect to such civil rights violation in a civil action under Section 10-102. Any relief so granted that would accrue to an aggrieved party in a civil action commenced by that aggrieved party under Section 10-102 shall also accrue to that aggrieved party in a civil action under this Section. If monetary relief is sought for the benefit of an aggrieved party who does not intervene in the civil action, the court shall not award such relief if that aggrieved party has not complied with discovery orders entered by the court.
(Source: P.A. 101-530, eff. 1-1-20; 101-661, eff. 4-2-21.)

    (775 ILCS 5/10-104)
    Sec. 10-104. Circuit Court Actions by the Illinois Attorney General.
    (A) Standing, venue, limitations on actions, preliminary investigations, notice, and Assurance of Voluntary Compliance.
        (1) Whenever the Illinois Attorney General has
    	
reasonable cause to believe that any person or group of persons is engaged in a pattern and practice of discrimination prohibited by this Act, the Illinois Attorney General may commence a civil action in the name of the People of the State, as parens patriae on behalf of persons within the State to enforce the provisions of this Act in any appropriate circuit court. Venue for this civil action shall be determined under paragraph (1) of subsection (A) of Section 8-111. Such actions shall be commenced no later than 2 years after the occurrence or the termination of an alleged civil rights violation or the breach of a conciliation agreement or Assurance of Voluntary Compliance entered into under this Act, whichever occurs last, to obtain relief with respect to the alleged civil rights violation or breach.
        (2) Prior to initiating a civil action, the Attorney
    	
General shall conduct a preliminary investigation to determine whether there is reasonable cause to believe that any person or group of persons is engaged in a pattern and practice of discrimination declared unlawful by this Act and whether the dispute can be resolved without litigation. In conducting this investigation, the Attorney General may:
            (a) require the individual or entity to file a
        	
statement or report in writing under oath or otherwise, as to all information the Attorney General may consider necessary;
            (b) examine under oath any person alleged to have
        	
participated in or with knowledge of the alleged pattern and practice violation; or
            (c) issue subpoenas or conduct hearings in aid of
        	
any investigation.
        (3) Service by the Attorney General of any notice
    	
requiring a person to file a statement or report, or of a subpoena upon any person, shall be made:
            (a) personally by delivery of a duly executed
        	
copy thereof to the person to be served or, if a person is not a natural person, in the manner provided in the Code of Civil Procedure when a complaint is filed; or
            (b) by mailing by certified mail a duly executed
        	
copy thereof to the person to be served at his or her last known abode or principal place of business within this State.
        (4) In lieu of a civil action, the individual or
    	
entity alleged to have engaged in a pattern or practice of discrimination deemed violative of this Act may enter into an Assurance of Voluntary Compliance with respect to the alleged pattern or practice violation.
        (5) The Illinois Attorney General may commence a
    	
civil action under this subsection (A) whether or not a charge has been filed under Sections 7A-102 or 7B-102 and without regard to the status of any charge, however, if the Department or local agency has obtained a conciliation or settlement agreement or if the parties have entered into an Assurance of Voluntary Compliance no action may be filed under this subsection (A) with respect to the alleged civil rights violation practice that forms the basis for the complaint except for the purpose of enforcing the terms of the conciliation or settlement agreement or the terms of the Assurance of Voluntary Compliance.
        (6) Subpoenas.
            (a) Petition for enforcement. Whenever any person
        	
fails to comply with any subpoena issued under paragraph (2) of this subsection (A), or whenever satisfactory copying or reproduction of any material requested in an investigation cannot be done and the person refuses to surrender the material, the Attorney General may file in any appropriate circuit court, and serve upon the person, a petition for a court order for the enforcement of the subpoena or other request. Venue for this enforcement action shall be determined under paragraph (E)(1) of Section 8-104.
            (b) Petition to modify or set aside a subpoena.
                (i) Any person who has received a subpoena
            	
issued under paragraph (2) of this subsection (A) may file in the appropriate circuit court, and serve upon the Attorney General, a petition for a court order to modify or set aside the subpoena or other request. The petition must be filed either (I) within 20 days after the date of service of the subpoena or at any time before the return date specified in the subpoena, whichever date is earlier, or (II) within such longer period as may be prescribed in writing by the Attorney General.
                (ii) The petition shall specify each ground
            	
upon which the petitioner relies in seeking relief under subdivision (i) and may be based upon any failure of the subpoena to comply with the provisions of this Section or upon any constitutional or other legal right or privilege of the petitioner. During the pendency of the petition in the court, the court may stay, as it deems proper, the running of the time allowed for compliance with the subpoena or other request, in whole or in part, except that the petitioner shall comply with any portion of the subpoena or other request not sought to be modified or set aside.
            (c) Jurisdiction. Whenever any petition is filed
        	
in any circuit court under this paragraph (6), the court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine the matter so presented and to enter such orders as may be required to carry out the provisions of this Section. Any final order so entered shall be subject to appeal in the same manner as appeals of other final orders in civil matters. Any disobedience of any final order entered under this paragraph (6) by any court shall be punished as a contempt of the court.
    (B) Relief which may be granted.
        (1) In any civil action brought pursuant to
    	
subsection (A) of this Section, the Attorney General may obtain as a remedy, equitable relief (including any permanent or preliminary injunction, temporary restraining order, or other order, including an order enjoining the defendant from engaging in such civil rights violation or ordering any action as may be appropriate). In addition, the Attorney General may request and the Court may impose a civil penalty to vindicate the public interest:
            (a) for violations of Article 3 and Article 4 in
        	
an amount not exceeding $25,000 per violation, and in the case of violations of all other Articles in an amount not exceeding $10,000 if the defendant has not been adjudged to have committed any prior civil rights violations under the provision of the Act that is the basis of the complaint;
            (b) for violations of Article 3 and Article 4 in
        	
an amount not exceeding $50,000 per violation, and in the case of violations of all other Articles in an amount not exceeding $25,000 if the defendant has been adjudged to have committed one other civil rights violation under the provision of the Act within 5 years of the occurrence of the civil rights violation that is the basis of the complaint; and
            (c) for violations of Article 3 and Article 4 in
        	
an amount not exceeding $75,000 per violation, and in the case of violations of all other Articles in an amount not exceeding $50,000 if the defendant has been adjudged to have committed 2 or more civil rights violations under the provision of the Act within 5 years of the occurrence of the civil rights violation that is the basis of the complaint.
        (2) A civil penalty imposed under subdivision (B)(1)
    	
of this Section shall be deposited into the Attorney General Court Ordered and Voluntary Compliance Payment Projects Fund, which is a special fund in the State Treasury. Moneys in the Fund shall be used, subject to appropriation, for the performance of any function pertaining to the exercise of the duties of the Attorney General including but not limited to enforcement of any law of this State and conducting public education programs; however, any moneys in the Fund that are required by the court or by an agreement to be used for a particular purpose shall be used for that purpose.
        (3) Aggrieved parties seeking actual damages must
    	
follow the procedure set out in Sections 7A-102 or 7B-102 for filing a charge.
(Source: P.A. 101-661, eff. 4-2-21.)