LIQUOR
(235 ILCS 5/) Liquor Control Act of 1934.

 
    (235 ILCS 5/Art. I heading)
ARTICLE I. CONSTRUCTION

    (235 ILCS 5/1-1) (from Ch. 43, par. 93.9)
    Sec. 1-1. This Act may be cited as the Liquor Control Act of 1934.
(Source: P.A. 86-1475.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-2) (from Ch. 43, par. 94)
    Sec. 1-2. This Act shall be liberally construed, to the end that the health, safety, and welfare of the People of the State of Illinois shall be protected and temperance in the consumption of alcoholic liquors shall be fostered and promoted by sound and careful control and regulation of the manufacture, sale, and distribution of alcoholic liquors. The State Commission may not enforce any trade practice policy or other rule that was not adopted in accordance with the Illinois Administrative Procedure Act.
(Source: P.A. 99-46, eff. 7-15-15.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3) (from Ch. 43, par. 95)
    Sec. 1-3. Unless the context otherwise requires, words and phrases are used in this Act in the sense given them in the Sections following this Section and preceding Section 2-1.
(Source: P.A. 91-357, eff. 7-29-99.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.01) (from Ch. 43, par. 95.01)
    Sec. 1-3.01. "Alcohol" means the product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol. It does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.02) (from Ch. 43, par. 95.02)
    Sec. 1-3.02. "Spirits" means any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey, gin, or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors when rectified, blended or otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.03) (from Ch. 43, par. 95.03)
    Sec. 1-3.03. "Wine" means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural contents of fruits, or vegetables, containing sugar, including such beverages when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits, as above defined.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.04) (from Ch. 43, par. 95.04)
    Sec. 1-3.04. "Beer" means a beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or concoction of barley, or other grain, malt, and hops in water, and includes, among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.05) (from Ch. 43, par. 95.05)
    Sec. 1-3.05. "Alcoholic liquor" includes alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being. The provisions of this Act shall not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured alcohol produced in accordance with Acts of Congress and regulations promulgated thereunder, nor to any liquid or solid containing one-half of one per cent, or less, of alcohol by volume. No tax provided for in Article VIII of this Act shall apply to wine intended for use and used by any church or religious organization for sacramental purposes, provided that such wine shall be purchased from a licensed manufacturer or importing distributor under this Act.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.06) (from Ch. 43, par. 95.06)
    Sec. 1-3.06. "Original package" means any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead or other receptacle or container, whatsoever, used, corked or capped, sealed and labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to contain and to convey any alcoholic liquor.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.07) (from Ch. 43, par. 95.07)
    Sec. 1-3.07. "Distiller" means a person who distills, ferments, brews, makes, mixes, concocts, processes, blends, bottles or fills an original package with any alcoholic liquor.
    The above definition for a distiller includes a manufacturer of wine, but does not include a manufacturer of beer or bottler of wine.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.08) (from Ch. 43, par. 95.08)
    Sec. 1-3.08. "Manufacturer" means every brewer, fermenter, distiller, rectifier, wine maker, blender, processor, bottler or person who fills or refills an original package, whether for himself or for another, and others engaged in brewing, fermenting, distilling, rectifying or bottling alcoholic liquors as above defined.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.09) (from Ch. 43, par. 95.09)
    Sec. 1-3.09. "Brewer" means a person who is engaged in the manufacture of beer.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.10) (from Ch. 43, par. 95.10)
    Sec. 1-3.10. "Non-beverage user" means every manufacturer of any of the products set forth and described in subsection (a) of Section 8-1 of this Act, when the same contains alcoholic liquor, and all laboratories and hospitals and sanatoria using alcoholic liquor for non-beverage purposes.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.11) (from Ch. 43, par. 95.11)
    Sec. 1-3.11. "Wine-manufacturer" means a person who is engaged in the manufacture of wine.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.12) (from Ch. 43, par. 95.12)
    Sec. 1-3.12. "Wine-maker" means a person engaged in the making of less than 50,000 gallons of wine annually other than a person issued a Second Class wine-maker's license.
(Source: P.A. 92-378, eff. 8-16-01.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.13) (from Ch. 43, par. 95.13)
    Sec. 1-3.13. "Manufacture" means to distill, rectify, ferment, brew, make, mix, concoct, process, blend, bottle or fill an original package with an alcoholic liquor, whether for oneself or for another, and includes blending but does not include the mixing or other preparation of drinks for serving by those persons authorized and permitted in this Act to serve drinks for consumption on the premises where sold. All containers or packages of blended alcoholic liquors shall have affixed thereto a label setting forth and stating clearly the names of all ingredients which the blended alcoholic liquors offered for sale shall contain.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.14) (from Ch. 43, par. 95.14)
    Sec. 1-3.14. "Rectifier," means any person who rectifies, ferments, brews, makes, mixes, concocts, processes, blends, bottles or fills an original package with any alcoholic liquor, other than by original or continuous distillation.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.15) (from Ch. 43, par. 95.15)
    Sec. 1-3.15. "Distributor" means any person, other than a manufacturer or non-resident dealer licensed under this Act, who is engaged in this State in purchasing, storing, possessing or warehousing any alcoholic liquors for resale or reselling at wholesale, whether within or without this State.
(Source: P.A. 83-1254.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.16) (from Ch. 43, par. 95.16)
    Sec. 1-3.16. "Importing distributor" means any person other than a non-resident dealer licensed under this Act who imports into this State, from any point in the United States outside this State, whether for himself or for another, any alcoholic liquors for sale or resale, or for use in the manufacture, preparation or compounding of products other than alcoholic liquors, or who imports into this State, from any point in the United States outside this State, for consumption in any one calendar year, more than one gallon of such liquors.
(Source: P.A. 83-1254.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.17) (from Ch. 43, par. 95.17)
    Sec. 1-3.17. "Retailer" means a person who sells, or offers for sale, alcoholic liquor for use or consumption and not for resale in any form.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.17.1) (from Ch. 43, par. 95.17.1)
    Sec. 1-3.17.1. "Special event retailer" means an educational, fraternal, political, civic, religious, or non-profit organization which sells or offers for sale beer, spirits, or wine, or any combination thereof, only for consumption at the location and on the dates designated by a special event retail license.
(Source: P.A. 100-17, eff. 6-30-17.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.18) (from Ch. 43, par. 95.18)
    Sec. 1-3.18. "Sell at retail" and "sale at retail" refer to and mean sales for use or consumption and not for resale in any form.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.19) (from Ch. 43, par. 95.19)
    Sec. 1-3.19. "State Commission" means the Illinois Liquor Control Commission.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.20) (from Ch. 43, par. 95.20)
    Sec. 1-3.20. "Department" means the Department of Revenue.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.21) (from Ch. 43, par. 95.21)
    Sec. 1-3.21. "Sale" means any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner, or by any means whatsoever, including the transfer of alcoholic liquors by and through the transfer or negotiation of warehouse receipts or certificates, and includes and means all sales made by any person, whether principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee. The term "sale" includes any transfer of alcoholic liquor from a foreign importer's license to an importing distributor's license even if both licenses are held by the same person.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.22) (from Ch. 43, par. 95.22)
    Sec. 1-3.22. "To sell" includes to keep or expose for sale and to keep with intent to sell.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.23) (from Ch. 43, par. 95.23)
    Sec. 1-3.23. "Restaurant" means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.24) (from Ch. 43, par. 95.24)
    Sec. 1-3.24. "Club" means a corporation organized under the laws of this State, not for pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used and maintained by its members through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring or leasing a building or space in a building, of such extent and character as may be suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its members and their guests and provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and dining room space and equipment and maintaining a sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for its members and their guests; provided, that such club files with the local liquor control commissioner at the time of its application for a license under this Act two copies of a list of names and residences of its members, and similarly files within 10 days of the election of any additional member his or her name and address; and, provided further, that its affairs and management are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at their annual meeting and that no member or any officer, agent, or employee of the club is paid, or directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation any profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to the club or the members of the club or its guests introduced by members beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed and voted at any annual meeting by the members or by its board of directors or other governing body out of the general revenue of the club.
(Source: P.A. 84-551.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.25) (from Ch. 43, par. 95.25)
    Sec. 1-3.25. "Hotel" means every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which twenty-five (25) or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests and having one or more public dining rooms where meals are served to such guests, such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same building or buildings in connection therewith and such building or buildings, structure or structures being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity. All public dining rooms, banquet rooms, meeting rooms, room service areas, mini-bars, and other locations within or adjacent to a hotel in which alcoholic liquors are stored, offered for sale, or sold at retail shall be considered part of the hotel's licensed premises if those locations within or adjacent to the hotel are owned and managed by the hotel operator. As part of the hotel's licensed premises, each and all of those locations within or adjacent to the hotel shall be maintained and managed pursuant to a single retailer's license issued by the State Commission to the hotel operator, regardless of the number of local retailer licenses mandated by the local unit of government having jurisdiction over the hotel. Public dining rooms and other locations within or adjacent to a hotel that are owned or managed by a person other than the hotel operator and are licensed by the local unit of government having jurisdiction over the hotel to a person other than the hotel operator are not considered part of the hotel's licensed premises for purposes of this Act and, as such, must be maintained and operated under separate retailer's licenses.
(Source: P.A. 99-46, eff. 7-15-15.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.26) (from Ch. 43, par. 95.26)
    Sec. 1-3.26. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 82-783. Repealed by P.A. 89-250, eff. 1-1-96.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.27) (from Ch. 43, par. 95.27)
    Sec. 1-3.27. "Foreign importer" means anyone other than a non-resident dealer licensed under this Act who imports into this State, from any point outside the United States, any alcoholic liquors other than in bulk for sale to a licensed importing distributor.
(Source: P.A. 83-1254.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.28) (from Ch. 43, par. 95.28)
    Sec. 1-3.28. "Broker" means (i) a person who solicits orders for or offers to sell or supply alcoholic liquors to retailers for a fee or commission, for or on behalf of a person authorized to manufacture or sell at wholesale alcoholic liquors within or without the State or (ii) a person within this State, other than a retail licensee, who, for a fee or commission, promotes, solicits, or accepts orders for alcoholic liquor, for use or consumption and not for resale, to be shipped from this State and delivered to residents outside of this State by an express company, common carrier, or contract carrier. This Section does not apply to any person who promotes, solicits, or accepts orders for wine as specifically authorized in Section 6-29 of this Act.
(Source: P.A. 90-739, eff. 8-13-98.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.29) (from Ch. 43, par. 95.29)
    Sec. 1-3.29. "Non-resident dealer" means any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal business entity who or which exports into this State, from any point outside of this State, any alcoholic liquors for sale to Illinois licensed foreign importers or importing distributors. Such license shall be restricted to the actual manufacturer of such alcoholic liquors or the primary United States importer of such alcoholic liquors, if manufactured outside of the United States, or the duly registered agent of such manufacturer or importer. Registration of such agent with the State Commission, in such manner and form as it may prescribe, shall be a prerequisite to the issuance of such license to an agent.
    Any licensed Illinois manufacturer of Class 1, Class 2, or Class 3 may obtain a Non-Resident Dealer's License at no fee. A manufacturer whose production of alcoholic liquor is less than 500,000 gallons per year may obtain a Non-Resident Dealer's License for an annual fee of $75.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.30) (from Ch. 43, par. 95.30)
    Sec. 1-3.30. "Special event" means an event conducted by an educational, fraternal, political, civic, religious or non-profit organization.
(Source: P.A. 86-404.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.31) (from Ch. 43, par. 95.31)
    Sec. 1-3.31. "Limited wine manufacturer" means a wine manufacturer which uses only grapes, berries, other fruits, fruit products, honey and vegetables produced or grown in Illinois, except as follows: (i) during the first 36 months of operation after first being issued a license it may use as much as 100% imported products; (ii) during the following 24 months it may use as much as 80% imported products; and (iii) thereafter it may use as much as 60% imported products. The maximum allowances on use of imported products may be temporarily increased in any year in which there is a crop shortage or severe drought in such percentages as determined by the Director of the Department of Agriculture.
(Source: P.A. 86-858; 86-1028.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.32)
    Sec. 1-3.32. "Auction liquor license" means a person who obtains prior written approval from the State Commission to sell or offer for sale at auction, on a specified date, wine or spirits for private use or consumption, or for resale by an Illinois liquor licensee in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(Source: P.A. 88-91.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.33)
    Sec. 1-3.33. "Brew Pub" means a person who manufactures no more than 155,000 gallons of beer per year only at a designated licensed premises to make sales to importing distributors, distributors, and to non-licensees for use and consumption only, who stores beer at the designated premises, and who is allowed to sell at retail from the licensed premises, provided that a brew pub licensee shall not sell for off-premises consumption more than 155,000 gallons per year.
(Source: P.A. 99-448, eff. 8-24-15.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.34)
    Sec. 1-3.34. "Caterer retailer" means a person who serves alcoholic liquors for consumption, either on-site or off-site, whether the location is licensed or unlicensed, as an incidental part of food service. Prepared meals and alcoholic liquors are sold at a package price agreed upon under contract.
(Source: P.A. 88-91.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.35)
    Sec. 1-3.35. Special use permit license. "Special use permit license" means a license for use by a retailer to allow for the transfer of alcoholic beverages from an existing licensed retail premises to a designated site for a specific event.
(Source: P.A. 88-91; 89-250, eff. 1-1-96.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.36)
    Sec. 1-3.36. Private function. "Private function" means a prearranged private party, function, or event for a specific social or business occasion, either by invitation or reservation and not open to the general public, where the guests in attendance are served in a room or rooms designated and used exclusively for the private party, function, or event.
(Source: P.A. 89-250, eff. 1-1-96.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.37)
    Sec. 1-3.37. "Council" means the Grape and Wine Resources Council.
(Source: P.A. 90-77, eff. 7-8-97.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.38)
    Sec. 1-3.38. Class 1 brewer. "Class 1 brewer" means a person who is a holder of a brewer license or non-resident dealer license who manufactures up to 930,000 gallons of beer per year and who may make sales and deliveries to importing distributors and distributors and to retail licensees in accordance with the conditions set forth in paragraph (18) of subsection (a) of Section 3-12 of this Act.
(Source: P.A. 98-401, eff. 8-16-13; 99-448, eff. 8-24-15.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.39)
    Sec. 1-3.39. Homemade brewed beverage. "Homemade brewed beverage" means beer or any other beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or concoction of grains, sugars, or both in water and includes, but is not limited to, beer, mead, and cider made by a person 21 years of age or older, through his or her own efforts, fermented at his or her place of residence, fermented at another place of residence of a homemade brewed beverage brewer, or fermented at a premises of a commercial enterprise that is engaged primarily in selling supplies and equipment for use by home brewers and not for a commercial purpose but for consumption by that person or his or her family, neighbors, guests, and friends or for use at an exhibition, demonstration, judging, tasting, or sampling with sampling sizes as authorized by Section 6-31 of this Act or as part of a contest or competition authorized by Section 6-36 of this Act.
(Source: P.A. 98-55, eff. 7-5-13.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.40)
    Sec. 1-3.40. Manufacturer class license holder. "Manufacturer class license holder" means any holder of a Manufacturer's license as provided in Section 5-1 of this Act. The Manufacturer's licenses are: a Class 1. Distiller, a Class 2. Rectifier, a Class 3. Brewer, a Class 4. First Class Wine Manufacturer, a Class 5. Second Class Wine Manufacturer, a Class 6. First Class Winemaker, a Class 7. Second Class Winemaker, a Class 8. Limited Wine Manufacturer, a Class 9. Craft Distiller, a Class 10. Class 1 Craft Distiller, a Class 11. Class 2 Craft Distiller, a Class 12. Class 1 Brewer, and a Class 13. Class 2 Brewer, and any future Manufacturer's licenses established by law.
(Source: P.A. 101-482, eff. 8-23-19; 101-615, eff. 12-20-19.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.41)
    Sec. 1-3.41. Non-alcoholic merchandise. "Non-alcoholic merchandise" means any good or commodity that contains less than 0.5 percent alcohol by volume. For purposes of this Act, "non-alcoholic merchandise" does not include trade fixtures, equipment, or furnishings that are used or intended for the limited purpose of storing, servicing, displaying, advertising, furnishing, selling, or aiding in the sale of alcoholic liquors.
(Source: P.A. 99-282, eff. 8-5-15.)

    (235 ILCS 5/1-3.42)
    Sec. 1-3.42. Class 2 brewer. "Class 2 brewer" means a person who is a holder of a brewer license or non-resident dealer license who manufactures up to 3,720,000 gallons of beer per year for sale to a licensed importing distributor or distributor.
(Source: P.A. 99-448, eff. 8-24-15; 99-642, eff. 7-28-16.)


 
    (235 ILCS 5/Art. II heading)
ARTICLE II. SCOPE OF ACT

    (235 ILCS 5/2-1) (from Ch. 43, par. 96)
    Sec. 2-1. No person shall manufacture, bottle, blend, sell, barter, transport, transfer into this State from a point outside this State, deliver, furnish or possess any alcoholic liquor for beverage purposes, unless such person has been issued a license by the Commission or except as permitted by Section 6-29 of this Act or except as otherwise specifically provided in this Act; provided, however, nothing herein contained shall prevent the possession and transportation of alcoholic liquor by the possessor for the personal use of the possessor, his family and guests, nor prevent the making of wine, cider or other alcoholic liquor by a person from fruits, vegetables or grains, or the products thereof, by simple fermentation and without distillation, if it is made solely for the use of the maker, his family and his guests; and provided further that nothing herein contained shall prevent any duly licensed practicing physician or dentist from possessing or using alcoholic liquor in the strict practice of his profession, or any hospital or other institution caring for sick and diseased persons, from possessing and using alcoholic liquor for the treatment of bona fide patients of such hospital or other institution; and provided further that any drug store employing a licensed pharmacist may possess and use alcoholic liquors in the concoction of prescriptions of duly licensed physicians; and provided further, that the possession and dispensation of wine by an authorized representative of any church for the purpose of conducting any bona fide rite or religious ceremony conducted by such church shall not be prohibited by this Act.
(Source: P.A. 90-739, eff. 8-13-98.)


 
    (235 ILCS 5/Art. III heading)
ARTICLE III. STATE CONTROL COMMISSION

    (235 ILCS 5/3-1) (from Ch. 43, par. 97)
    Sec. 3-1. There is hereby created an Illinois Liquor Control Commission consisting of 7 members to be appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate, no more than 4 of whom shall be members of the same political party. The Executive Director of the Illinois Liquor Control Commission shall be appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate.
(Source: P.A. 100-1050, eff. 7-1-19.)

    (235 ILCS 5/3-2) (from Ch. 43, par. 98)
    Sec. 3-2. Immediately, or soon as may be after the effective date of this Act, the Governor shall appoint 3 members of the commission, one of whom shall be designated as "Chairman", one to hold office for a period of 2 years, one to hold office for a period of 4 years and one to hold office for a period of 6 years. Immediately, or as soon as may be after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1983, the Governor shall appoint 2 members to the commission to the offices created by this amendatory Act of 1983, one for an initial term expiring the third Monday in January of 1986 and one for an initial term expiring the third Monday in January of 1988. At the expiration of the term of any such commissioner the Governor shall reappoint said commissioner or appoint a successor of said commissioner for a period of 6 years. The Governor shall have power to fill vacancies in the office of any commissioner.
    Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, the term of office of each member of the commission is abolished on the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1985, but the incumbent members shall continue to exercise all of the powers and be subject to all of the duties of members of the commission until their respective successors are appointed and qualified. The Governor shall appoint 2 members of the commission whose terms of office shall expire on February 1, 1986, 2 members of the commission whose terms of office shall expire on February 1, 1988, and one member of the commission whose term shall expire on February 1, 1990. Their respective successors shall be appointed for terms of 6 years from the first day of February of the year of appointment. Each member shall serve until his successor is appointed and qualified.
    The initial term of both of the 2 additional members appointed pursuant to this amendatory Act of the 91st General Assembly shall expire on February 1, 2006. Their respective successors shall be appointed for terms of 6 years from the first day of February of the year of appointment. Each member shall serve until his or her successor is appointed and qualified.
    Notwithstanding any action taken to fill the office on an acting, temporary, or other basis, the office of Executive Director of the Commission shall be vacant on January 1, 2019. On and after January 1, 2019, the Governor shall appoint the Executive Director of the Commission for a 4-year term, with the advice and consent of the Senate.
(Source: P.A. 100-1050, eff. 7-1-19.)

    (235 ILCS 5/3-3) (from Ch. 43, par. 99)
    Sec. 3-3. A majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum to transact business, but no vacancy shall impair the right of the remaining commissioners to exercise all of the powers of the commission; and every act of a majority of the members of the commission shall be deemed to be the act of the commission. The commission shall have a secretary who shall keep a record of all proceedings, transactions, communications and official acts of the commission and who shall be custodian of all records and perform such other duties as the commission may prescribe.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/3-4) (from Ch. 43, par. 100)
    Sec. 3-4. Authority to conduct investigations. The State Commission shall obtain, pursuant to the provisions of the Personnel Code, such inspectors, clerks, and other employees as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act, or to perform the duties and exercise the powers conferred by law upon the State Commission. The inspectors obtained by the State Commission shall not be peace officers and shall not exercise any powers of a peace officer.
    The State Commission shall have the power to appoint investigators to conduct investigations, searches, seizures, arrests, and other duties required to enforce the provisions of this Act, on behalf of the State Commission, and to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the People of the State of Illinois. The Commission's investigators are peace officers and have all the powers possessed by police officers in cities and by sheriffs. State Commission investigators may exercise these powers throughout the State whenever enforcing the provisions of this Act, subject to the rules and orders of the State Commission. No State Commission investigator may have peace officer status or may exercise police powers unless: (1) he or she successfully completes the basic police training course mandated and approved by the Illinois Law Enforcement Training Standards Board; or (2) the Illinois Law Enforcement Training Standards Board waives the training requirement by reason of the investigator's prior law enforcement experience, training, or both.
    The Executive Director must authorize to each investigator of the State Commission and to any other employee of the Department exercising the powers of a peace officer a distinct badge that, on its face: (1) clearly states that the badge is authorized by the State Commission; and (2) contains a unique identifying number. No other badge shall be authorized by the State Commission. Nothing in this Section prohibits the Executive Director from issuing shields or other distinctive identification to employees performing security or regulatory duties who are not peace officers if the Executive Director determines that a shield or distinctive identification is needed by the employee to carry out his or her responsibilities.
(Source: P.A. 101-37, eff. 7-3-19.)

    (235 ILCS 5/3-5) (from Ch. 43, par. 101)
    Sec. 3-5. Each commissioner, the secretary, the Executive Director, and each person appointed by the commission shall, before entering upon the duties of his or her office, take and subscribe to the constitutional oath of office. The secretary, the Executive Director, and each inspector, clerk, and other employee shall devote his or her entire time to the duties of his or her office.
(Source: P.A. 100-1050, eff. 7-1-19.)

    (235 ILCS 5/3-6) (from Ch. 43, par. 102)
    Sec. 3-6. No person shall be appointed a commissioner, secretary, Executive Director, or inspector for the commission who is not a citizen of the United States. No commissioner, secretary, Executive Director, inspector, or other employee shall be appointed who has been convicted of any violation of any Federal or State law concerning the manufacture or sale of alcoholic liquor prior or subsequent to the passage of this Act or who has paid a fine or penalty in settlement of any prosecution against him or her for any violation of such laws or shall have forfeited his or her bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation, nor shall any person be appointed who has been convicted of a felony. No commissioner, Executive Director, inspector, or other employee, may, directly or indirectly, individually or as a member of a partnership, or as a shareholder of a corporation, have any interest whatsoever in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor, nor receive any compensation or profit therefrom, nor have any interest whatsoever in the purchases or sales made by the persons authorized by this Act, or to purchase or to sell alcoholic liquor. No provision of this section shall prevent any such commissioner, secretary, Executive Director, inspector, or other employee from purchasing and keeping in his or her possession for the use of himself or herself or members of his or her family or guests any alcoholic liquor which may be purchased or kept by any person by virtue of this Act.
(Source: P.A. 100-1050, eff. 7-1-19.)

    (235 ILCS 5/3-7) (from Ch. 43, par. 103)
    Sec. 3-7. No commissioner, secretary, Executive Director, or person appointed or employed by the commission, shall solicit or accept any gift, gratuity, emolument or employment from any person subject to the provisions of this Act, or from any officer, agent or employee thereof, nor solicit, request from or recommend, directly or indirectly, to any such person or to any officer, agent or employee thereof, the appointment of any person to any place or position, and every such person, and every officer, agent or employee thereof, is hereby forbidden to offer to any commissioner, secretary, Executive Director, or to any person appointed or employed by the commission, any gift, gratuity, emolument or employment. If any commissioner, secretary, Executive Director, or any person appointed or employed by the commission shall violate any of the provisions of this Section, he or she shall be removed from the office or employment held by him or her. Every person violating the provisions of this Section shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
(Source: P.A. 100-1050, eff. 7-1-19.)

    (235 ILCS 5/3-8) (from Ch. 43, par. 104)
    Sec. 3-8. Before entering upon the duties of his office, each commissioner shall give a bond, with surety to be approved by the Governor, in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000) for the faithful performance of his duties as such commissioner. Before entering upon the duties of his office the secretary shall give a bond, with surety to be approved by the Governor, in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000) for the faithful performance of his duties as secretary.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/3-9) (from Ch. 43, par. 105)
    Sec. 3-9. Compensation of commissioners, secretary, and employees. The chairman of the Commission shall receive an annual salary of $32,000 or such greater amount as may be set by the Compensation Review Board. The other commissioners shall receive an annual salary of $28,000 or such greater amount as may be set by the Compensation Review Board. The secretary of the Commission shall receive an annual salary as set by the Compensation Review Board. All clerks, inspectors, and employees of the Commission shall receive reasonable compensation in an amount fixed by the Commission, subject to the approval in writing of the Governor.
(Source: P.A. 91-798, eff. 7-9-00.)

    (235 ILCS 5/3-10) (from Ch. 43, par. 106)
    Sec. 3-10. The commissioners, the secretary, the Executive Director, and all clerks, inspectors, and other employees shall be reimbursed for all actual and necessary traveling and other expenses and disbursements incurred or made by them in the discharge of their official duties. The commission may also incur necessary expenses for office furniture and other incidental expenses.
(Source: P.A. 100-1050, eff. 7-1-19.)

    (235 ILCS 5/3-11) (from Ch. 43, par. 107)
    Sec. 3-11. Principal office; meetings; seal; proceedings. The principal office of the Commission shall be in Chicago, but the Commission may, with the approval of the Governor, establish and maintain branch offices at other places. The Commission shall hold regular meetings at least once a month at its office, and may hold such special meetings as it may deem necessary at any time and at any place within the State. The Commission may, for authentication of its records, process and proceedings, adopt, keep and use a common seal, of which seal judicial notice shall be taken in all of the courts of the State, and any process, notice or other paper which the Commission may be authorized by law to issue, shall be deemed sufficient if signed by the secretary of said Commission and authenticated by such seal; and all acts, orders, proceedings, rules, regulations, entries, minutes, and other records of said Commission, and all reports and documents filed with said Commission may be proved in any court of this State by copy thereof certified to by the secretary of said Commission with the seal of said Commission attached.
(Source: P.A. 89-250, eff. 1-1-96.)

    (235 ILCS 5/3-12)
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-37)
    Sec. 3-12. Powers and duties of State Commission.
    (a) The State Commission shall have the following powers, functions, and duties:
        (1) To receive applications and to issue licenses to
    	
manufacturers, foreign importers, importing distributors, distributors, non-resident dealers, on premise consumption retailers, off premise sale retailers, special event retailer licensees, special use permit licenses, auction liquor licenses, brew pubs, caterer retailers, non-beverage users, railroads, including owners and lessees of sleeping, dining and cafe cars, airplanes, boats, brokers, and wine maker's premises licensees in accordance with the provisions of this Act, and to suspend or revoke such licenses upon the State Commission's determination, upon notice after hearing, that a licensee has violated any provision of this Act or any rule or regulation issued pursuant thereto and in effect for 30 days prior to such violation. Except in the case of an action taken pursuant to a violation of Section 6-3, 6-5, or 6-9, any action by the State Commission to suspend or revoke a licensee's license may be limited to the license for the specific premises where the violation occurred. An action for a violation of this Act shall be commenced by the State Commission within 2 years after the date the State Commission becomes aware of the violation.
        In lieu of suspending or revoking a license, the
    	
commission may impose a fine, upon the State Commission's determination and notice after hearing, that a licensee has violated any provision of this Act or any rule or regulation issued pursuant thereto and in effect for 30 days prior to such violation.
        For the purpose of this paragraph (1), when
    	
determining multiple violations for the sale of alcohol to a person under the age of 21, a second or subsequent violation for the sale of alcohol to a person under the age of 21 shall only be considered if it was committed within 5 years after the date when a prior violation for the sale of alcohol to a person under the age of 21 was committed.
        The fine imposed under this paragraph may not exceed
    	
$500 for each violation. Each day that the activity, which gave rise to the original fine, continues is a separate violation. The maximum fine that may be levied against any licensee, for the period of the license, shall not exceed $20,000. The maximum penalty that may be imposed on a licensee for selling a bottle of alcoholic liquor with a foreign object in it or serving from a bottle of alcoholic liquor with a foreign object in it shall be the destruction of that bottle of alcoholic liquor for the first 10 bottles so sold or served from by the licensee. For the eleventh bottle of alcoholic liquor and for each third bottle thereafter sold or served from by the licensee with a foreign object in it, the maximum penalty that may be imposed on the licensee is the destruction of the bottle of alcoholic liquor and a fine of up to $50.
        Any notice issued by the State Commission to a
    	
licensee for a violation of this Act or any notice with respect to settlement or offer in compromise shall include the field report, photographs, and any other supporting documentation necessary to reasonably inform the licensee of the nature and extent of the violation or the conduct alleged to have occurred. The failure to include such required documentation shall result in the dismissal of the action.
        (2) To adopt such rules and regulations consistent
    	
with the provisions of this Act which shall be necessary to carry on its functions and duties to the end that the health, safety and welfare of the People of the State of Illinois shall be protected and temperance in the consumption of alcoholic liquors shall be fostered and promoted and to distribute copies of such rules and regulations to all licensees affected thereby.
        (3) To call upon other administrative departments of
    	
the State, county and municipal governments, county and city police departments and upon prosecuting officers for such information and assistance as it deems necessary in the performance of its duties.
        (4) To recommend to local commissioners rules and
    	
regulations, not inconsistent with the law, for the distribution and sale of alcoholic liquors throughout the State.
        (5) To inspect, or cause to be inspected, any
    	
premises in this State where alcoholic liquors are manufactured, distributed, warehoused, or sold. Nothing in this Act authorizes an agent of the State Commission to inspect private areas within the premises without reasonable suspicion or a warrant during an inspection. "Private areas" include, but are not limited to, safes, personal property, and closed desks.
        (5.1) Upon receipt of a complaint or upon having
    	
knowledge that any person is engaged in business as a manufacturer, importing distributor, distributor, or retailer without a license or valid license, to conduct an investigation. If, after conducting an investigation, the State Commission is satisfied that the alleged conduct occurred or is occurring, it may issue a cease and desist notice as provided in this Act, impose civil penalties as provided in this Act, notify the local liquor authority, or file a complaint with the State's Attorney's Office of the county where the incident occurred or the Attorney General.
        (5.2) Upon receipt of a complaint or upon having
    	
knowledge that any person is shipping alcoholic liquor into this State from a point outside of this State if the shipment is in violation of this Act, to conduct an investigation. If, after conducting an investigation, the State Commission is satisfied that the alleged conduct occurred or is occurring, it may issue a cease and desist notice as provided in this Act, impose civil penalties as provided in this Act, notify the foreign jurisdiction, or file a complaint with the State's Attorney's Office of the county where the incident occurred or the Attorney General.
        (5.3) To receive complaints from licensees, local
    	
officials, law enforcement agencies, organizations, and persons stating that any licensee has been or is violating any provision of this Act or the rules and regulations issued pursuant to this Act. Such complaints shall be in writing, signed and sworn to by the person making the complaint, and shall state with specificity the facts in relation to the alleged violation. If the State Commission has reasonable grounds to believe that the complaint substantially alleges a violation of this Act or rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this Act, it shall conduct an investigation. If, after conducting an investigation, the State Commission is satisfied that the alleged violation did occur, it shall proceed with disciplinary action against the licensee as provided in this Act.
        (5.4) To make arrests and issue notices of civil
    	
violations where necessary for the enforcement of this Act.
        (5.5) To investigate any and all unlicensed activity.
        (5.6) To impose civil penalties or fines to any
    	
person who, without holding a valid license, engages in conduct that requires a license pursuant to this Act, in an amount not to exceed $20,000 for each offense as determined by the State Commission. A civil penalty shall be assessed by the State Commission after a hearing is held in accordance with the provisions set forth in this Act regarding the provision of a hearing for the revocation or suspension of a license.
        (6) To hear and determine appeals from orders of a
    	
local commission in accordance with the provisions of this Act, as hereinafter set forth. Hearings under this subsection shall be held in Springfield or Chicago, at whichever location is the more convenient for the majority of persons who are parties to the hearing.
        (7) The State Commission shall establish uniform
    	
systems of accounts to be kept by all retail licensees having more than 4 employees, and for this purpose the State Commission may classify all retail licensees having more than 4 employees and establish a uniform system of accounts for each class and prescribe the manner in which such accounts shall be kept. The State Commission may also prescribe the forms of accounts to be kept by all retail licensees having more than 4 employees, including but not limited to accounts of earnings and expenses and any distribution, payment, or other distribution of earnings or assets, and any other forms, records and memoranda which in the judgment of the commission may be necessary or appropriate to carry out any of the provisions of this Act, including but not limited to such forms, records and memoranda as will readily and accurately disclose at all times the beneficial ownership of such retail licensed business. The accounts, forms, records and memoranda shall be available at all reasonable times for inspection by authorized representatives of the State Commission or by any local liquor control commissioner or his or her authorized representative. The commission, may, from time to time, alter, amend or repeal, in whole or in part, any uniform system of accounts, or the form and manner of keeping accounts.
        (8) In the conduct of any hearing authorized to be
    	
held by the State Commission, to appoint, at the commission's discretion, hearing officers to conduct hearings involving complex issues or issues that will require a protracted period of time to resolve, to examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any licensee, and to examine or cause to be examined the books and records of such licensee; to hear testimony and take proof material for its information in the discharge of its duties hereunder; to administer or cause to be administered oaths; for any such purpose to issue subpoena or subpoenas to require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, which shall be effective in any part of this State, and to adopt rules to implement its powers under this paragraph (8).
        Any circuit court may by order duly entered, require
    	
the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant books subpoenaed by the State Commission and the court may compel obedience to its order by proceedings for contempt.
        (9) To investigate the administration of laws in
    	
relation to alcoholic liquors in this and other states and any foreign countries, and to recommend from time to time to the Governor and through him or her to the legislature of this State, such amendments to this Act, if any, as it may think desirable and as will serve to further the general broad purposes contained in Section 1-2 hereof.
        (10) To adopt such rules and regulations consistent
    	
with the provisions of this Act which shall be necessary for the control, sale or disposition of alcoholic liquor damaged as a result of an accident, wreck, flood, fire or other similar occurrence.
        (11) To develop industry educational programs related
    	
to responsible serving and selling, particularly in the areas of overserving consumers and illegal underage purchasing and consumption of alcoholic beverages.
        (11.1) To license persons providing education and
    	
training to alcohol beverage sellers and servers for mandatory and non-mandatory training under the Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers Education and Training (BASSET) programs and to develop and administer a public awareness program in Illinois to reduce or eliminate the illegal purchase and consumption of alcoholic beverage products by persons under the age of 21. Application for a license shall be made on forms provided by the State Commission.
        (12) To develop and maintain a repository of license
    	
and regulatory information.
        (13) (Blank).
        (14) On or before April 30, 2008 and every 2 years
    	
thereafter, the State Commission shall present a written report to the Governor and the General Assembly that shall be based on a study of the impact of Public Act 95-634 on the business of soliciting, selling, and shipping wine from inside and outside of this State directly to residents of this State. As part of its report, the State Commission shall provide all of the following information:
            (A) The amount of State excise and sales tax
        	
revenues generated.
            (B) The amount of licensing fees received.
            (C) The number of cases of wine shipped from
        	
inside and outside of this State directly to residents of this State.
            (D) The number of alcohol compliance operations
        	
conducted.
            (E) The number of winery shipper's licenses
        	
issued.
            (F) The number of each of the following: reported
        	
violations; cease and desist notices issued by the Commission; notices of violations issued by the Commission and to the Department of Revenue; and notices and complaints of violations to law enforcement officials, including, without limitation, the Illinois Attorney General and the U.S. Department of Treasury's Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau.
        (15) As a means to reduce the underage consumption of
    	
alcoholic liquors, the State Commission shall conduct alcohol compliance operations to investigate whether businesses that are soliciting, selling, and shipping wine from inside or outside of this State directly to residents of this State are licensed by this State or are selling or attempting to sell wine to persons under 21 years of age in violation of this Act.
        (16) The State Commission shall, in addition to
    	
notifying any appropriate law enforcement agency, submit notices of complaints or violations of Sections 6-29 and 6-29.1 by persons who do not hold a winery shipper's license under this Act to the Illinois Attorney General and to the U.S. Department of Treasury's Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau.
        (17)(A) A person licensed to make wine under the laws
    	
of another state who has a winery shipper's license under this Act and annually produces less than 25,000 gallons of wine or a person who has a first-class or second-class wine manufacturer's license, a first-class or second-class wine-maker's license, or a limited wine manufacturer's license under this Act and annually produces less than 25,000 gallons of wine may make application to the Commission for a self-distribution exemption to allow the sale of not more than 5,000 gallons of the exemption holder's wine to retail licensees per year.
        (B) In the application, which shall be sworn under
    	
penalty of perjury, such person shall state (1) the date it was established; (2) its volume of production and sales for each year since its establishment; (3) its efforts to establish distributor relationships; (4) that a self-distribution exemption is necessary to facilitate the marketing of its wine; and (5) that it will comply with the liquor and revenue laws of the United States, this State, and any other state where it is licensed.
        (C) The State Commission shall approve the
    	
application for a self-distribution exemption if such person: (1) is in compliance with State revenue and liquor laws; (2) is not a member of any affiliated group that produces more than 25,000 gallons of wine per annum or produces any other alcoholic liquor; (3) will not annually produce for sale more than 25,000 gallons of wine; and (4) will not annually sell more than 5,000 gallons of its wine to retail licensees.
        (D) A self-distribution exemption holder shall
    	
annually certify to the State Commission its production of wine in the previous 12 months and its anticipated production and sales for the next 12 months. The State Commission may fine, suspend, or revoke a self-distribution exemption after a hearing if it finds that the exemption holder has made a material misrepresentation in its application, violated a revenue or liquor law of Illinois, exceeded production of 25,000 gallons of wine in any calendar year, or become part of an affiliated group producing more than 25,000 gallons of wine or any other alcoholic liquor.
        (E) Except in hearings for violations of this Act or
    	
Public Act 95-634 or a bona fide investigation by duly sworn law enforcement officials, the State Commission, or its agents, the State Commission shall maintain the production and sales information of a self-distribution exemption holder as confidential and shall not release such information to any person.
        (F) The State Commission shall issue regulations
    	
governing self-distribution exemptions consistent with this Section and this Act.
        (G) Nothing in this paragraph (17) shall prohibit a
    	
self-distribution exemption holder from entering into or simultaneously having a distribution agreement with a licensed Illinois distributor.
        (H) It is the intent of this paragraph (17) to
    	
promote and continue orderly markets. The General Assembly finds that in order to preserve Illinois' regulatory distribution system it is necessary to create an exception for smaller makers of wine as their wines are frequently adjusted in varietals, mixes, vintages, and taste to find and create market niches sometimes too small for distributor or importing distributor business strategies. Limited self-distribution rights will afford and allow smaller makers of wine access to the marketplace in order to develop a customer base without impairing the integrity of the 3-tier system.
        (18)(A) A class 1 brewer licensee, who must also be
    	
either a licensed brewer or licensed non-resident dealer and annually manufacture less than 930,000 gallons of beer, may make application to the State Commission for a self-distribution exemption to allow the sale of not more than 232,500 gallons of the exemption holder's beer per year to retail licensees and to brewers, class 1 brewers, and class 2 brewers that, pursuant to subsection (e) of Section 6-4 of this Act, sell beer, cider, or both beer and cider to non-licensees at their breweries.
        (B) In the application, which shall be sworn under
    	
penalty of perjury, the class 1 brewer licensee shall state (1) the date it was established; (2) its volume of beer manufactured and sold for each year since its establishment; (3) its efforts to establish distributor relationships; (4) that a self-distribution exemption is necessary to facilitate the marketing of its beer; and (5) that it will comply with the alcoholic beverage and revenue laws of the United States, this State, and any other state where it is licensed.
        (C) Any application submitted shall be posted on the
    	
State Commission's website at least 45 days prior to action by the State Commission. The State Commission shall approve the application for a self-distribution exemption if the class 1 brewer licensee: (1) is in compliance with the State, revenue, and alcoholic beverage laws; (2) is not a member of any affiliated group that manufactures more than 930,000 gallons of beer per annum or produces any other alcoholic beverages; (3) shall not annually manufacture for sale more than 930,000 gallons of beer; (4) shall not annually sell more than 232,500 gallons of its beer to retail licensees or to brewers, class 1 brewers, and class 2 brewers that, pursuant to subsection (e) of Section 6-4 of this Act, sell beer, cider, or both beer and cider to non-licensees at their breweries; and (5) has relinquished any brew pub license held by the licensee, including any ownership interest it held in the licensed brew pub.
        (D) A self-distribution exemption holder shall
    	
annually certify to the State Commission its manufacture of beer during the previous 12 months and its anticipated manufacture and sales of beer for the next 12 months. The State Commission may fine, suspend, or revoke a self-distribution exemption after a hearing if it finds that the exemption holder has made a material misrepresentation in its application, violated a revenue or alcoholic beverage law of Illinois, exceeded the manufacture of 930,000 gallons of beer in any calendar year or became part of an affiliated group manufacturing more than 930,000 gallons of beer or any other alcoholic beverage.
        (E) The State Commission shall issue rules and
    	
regulations governing self-distribution exemptions consistent with this Act.
        (F) Nothing in this paragraph (18) shall prohibit a
    	
self-distribution exemption holder from entering into or simultaneously having a distribution agreement with a licensed Illinois importing distributor or a distributor. If a self-distribution exemption holder enters into a distribution agreement and has assigned distribution rights to an importing distributor or distributor, then the self-distribution exemption holder's distribution rights in the assigned territories shall cease in a reasonable time not to exceed 60 days.
        (G) It is the intent of this paragraph (18) to
    	
promote and continue orderly markets. The General Assembly finds that in order to preserve Illinois' regulatory distribution system, it is necessary to create an exception for smaller manufacturers in order to afford and allow such smaller manufacturers of beer access to the marketplace in order to develop a customer base without impairing the integrity of the 3-tier system.
    (b) On or before April 30, 1999, the Commission shall present a written report to the Governor and the General Assembly that shall be based on a study of the impact of Public Act 90-739 on the business of soliciting, selling, and shipping alcoholic liquor from outside of this State directly to residents of this State.
    As part of its report, the Commission shall provide the following information:
        (i) the amount of State excise and sales tax revenues
    	
generated as a result of Public Act 90-739;
        (ii) the amount of licensing fees received as a
    	
result of Public Act 90-739;
        (iii) the number of reported violations, the number
    	
of cease and desist notices issued by the Commission, the number of notices of violations issued to the Department of Revenue, and the number of notices and complaints of violations to law enforcement officials.
(Source: P.A. 100-134, eff. 8-18-17; 100-201, eff. 8-18-17; 100-816, eff. 8-13-18; 100-1012, eff. 8-21-18; 100-1050, eff. 8-23-18; 101-37, eff. 7-3-19.)
 
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-81)
    Sec. 3-12. Powers and duties of State Commission.
    (a) The State Commission shall have the following powers, functions, and duties:
        (1) To receive applications and to issue licenses to
    	
manufacturers, foreign importers, importing distributors, distributors, non-resident dealers, on premise consumption retailers, off premise sale retailers, special event retailer licensees, special use permit licenses, auction liquor licenses, brew pubs, caterer retailers, non-beverage users, railroads, including owners and lessees of sleeping, dining and cafe cars, airplanes, boats, brokers, and wine maker's premises licensees in accordance with the provisions of this Act, and to suspend or revoke such licenses upon the State Commission's determination, upon notice after hearing, that a licensee has violated any provision of this Act or any rule or regulation issued pursuant thereto and in effect for 30 days prior to such violation. Except in the case of an action taken pursuant to a violation of Section 6-3, 6-5, or 6-9, any action by the State Commission to suspend or revoke a licensee's license may be limited to the license for the specific premises where the violation occurred. An action for a violation of this Act shall be commenced by the State Commission within 2 years after the date the State Commission becomes aware of the violation.
        In lieu of suspending or revoking a license, the
    	
commission may impose a fine, upon the State Commission's determination and notice after hearing, that a licensee has violated any provision of this Act or any rule or regulation issued pursuant thereto and in effect for 30 days prior to such violation.
        For the purpose of this paragraph (1), when
    	
determining multiple violations for the sale of alcohol to a person under the age of 21, a second or subsequent violation for the sale of alcohol to a person under the age of 21 shall only be considered if it was committed within 5 years after the date when a prior violation for the sale of alcohol to a person under the age of 21 was committed.
        The fine imposed under this paragraph may not exceed
    	
$500 for each violation. Each day that the activity, which gave rise to the original fine, continues is a separate violation. The maximum fine that may be levied against any licensee, for the period of the license, shall not exceed $20,000. The maximum penalty that may be imposed on a licensee for selling a bottle of alcoholic liquor with a foreign object in it or serving from a bottle of alcoholic liquor with a foreign object in it shall be the destruction of that bottle of alcoholic liquor for the first 10 bottles so sold or served from by the licensee. For the eleventh bottle of alcoholic liquor and for each third bottle thereafter sold or served from by the licensee with a foreign object in it, the maximum penalty that may be imposed on the licensee is the destruction of the bottle of alcoholic liquor and a fine of up to $50.
        Any notice issued by the State Commission to a
    	
licensee for a violation of this Act or any notice with respect to settlement or offer in compromise shall include the field report, photographs, and any other supporting documentation necessary to reasonably inform the licensee of the nature and extent of the violation or the conduct alleged to have occurred. The failure to include such required documentation shall result in the dismissal of the action.
        (2) To adopt such rules and regulations consistent
    	
with the provisions of this Act which shall be necessary to carry on its functions and duties to the end that the health, safety and welfare of the People of the State of Illinois shall be protected and temperance in the consumption of alcoholic liquors shall be fostered and promoted and to distribute copies of such rules and regulations to all licensees affected thereby.
        (3) To call upon other administrative departments of
    	
the State, county and municipal governments, county and city police departments and upon prosecuting officers for such information and assistance as it deems necessary in the performance of its duties.
        (4) To recommend to local commissioners rules and
    	
regulations, not inconsistent with the law, for the distribution and sale of alcoholic liquors throughout the State.
        (5) To inspect, or cause to be inspected, any
    	
premises in this State where alcoholic liquors are manufactured, distributed, warehoused, or sold. Nothing in this Act authorizes an agent of the Commission to inspect private areas within the premises without reasonable suspicion or a warrant during an inspection. "Private areas" include, but are not limited to, safes, personal property, and closed desks.
        (5.1) Upon receipt of a complaint or upon having
    	
knowledge that any person is engaged in business as a manufacturer, importing distributor, distributor, or retailer without a license or valid license, to notify the local liquor authority, file a complaint with the State's Attorney's Office of the county where the incident occurred, or initiate an investigation with the appropriate law enforcement officials.
        (5.2) To issue a cease and desist notice to persons
    	
shipping alcoholic liquor into this State from a point outside of this State if the shipment is in violation of this Act.
        (5.3) To receive complaints from licensees, local
    	
officials, law enforcement agencies, organizations, and persons stating that any licensee has been or is violating any provision of this Act or the rules and regulations issued pursuant to this Act. Such complaints shall be in writing, signed and sworn to by the person making the complaint, and shall state with specificity the facts in relation to the alleged violation. If the Commission has reasonable grounds to believe that the complaint substantially alleges a violation of this Act or rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this Act, it shall conduct an investigation. If, after conducting an investigation, the Commission is satisfied that the alleged violation did occur, it shall proceed with disciplinary action against the licensee as provided in this Act.
        (6) To hear and determine appeals from orders of a
    	
local commission in accordance with the provisions of this Act, as hereinafter set forth. Hearings under this subsection shall be held in Springfield or Chicago, at whichever location is the more convenient for the majority of persons who are parties to the hearing.
        (7) The commission shall establish uniform systems of
    	
accounts to be kept by all retail licensees having more than 4 employees, and for this purpose the commission may classify all retail licensees having more than 4 employees and establish a uniform system of accounts for each class and prescribe the manner in which such accounts shall be kept. The commission may also prescribe the forms of accounts to be kept by all retail licensees having more than 4 employees, including but not limited to accounts of earnings and expenses and any distribution, payment, or other distribution of earnings or assets, and any other forms, records and memoranda which in the judgment of the commission may be necessary or appropriate to carry out any of the provisions of this Act, including but not limited to such forms, records and memoranda as will readily and accurately disclose at all times the beneficial ownership of such retail licensed business. The accounts, forms, records and memoranda shall be available at all reasonable times for inspection by authorized representatives of the State Commission or by any local liquor control commissioner or his or her authorized representative. The commission, may, from time to time, alter, amend or repeal, in whole or in part, any uniform system of accounts, or the form and manner of keeping accounts.
        (8) In the conduct of any hearing authorized to be
    	
held by the commission, to appoint, at the commission's discretion, hearing officers to conduct hearings involving complex issues or issues that will require a protracted period of time to resolve, to examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any licensee, and to examine or cause to be examined the books and records of such licensee; to hear testimony and take proof material for its information in the discharge of its duties hereunder; to administer or cause to be administered oaths; for any such purpose to issue subpoena or subpoenas to require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, which shall be effective in any part of this State, and to adopt rules to implement its powers under this paragraph (8).
        Any circuit court may by order duly entered, require
    	
the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant books subpoenaed by the State Commission and the court may compel obedience to its order by proceedings for contempt.
        (9) To investigate the administration of laws in
    	
relation to alcoholic liquors in this and other states and any foreign countries, and to recommend from time to time to the Governor and through him or her to the legislature of this State, such amendments to this Act, if any, as it may think desirable and as will serve to further the general broad purposes contained in Section 1-2 hereof.
        (10) To adopt such rules and regulations consistent
    	
with the provisions of this Act which shall be necessary for the control, sale or disposition of alcoholic liquor damaged as a result of an accident, wreck, flood, fire or other similar occurrence.
        (11) To develop industry educational programs related
    	
to responsible serving and selling, particularly in the areas of overserving consumers and illegal underage purchasing and consumption of alcoholic beverages.
        (11.1) To license persons providing education and
    	
training to alcohol beverage sellers and servers for mandatory and non-mandatory training under the Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers Education and Training (BASSET) programs and to develop and administer a public awareness program in Illinois to reduce or eliminate the illegal purchase and consumption of alcoholic beverage products by persons under the age of 21. Application for a license shall be made on forms provided by the State Commission.
        (12) To develop and maintain a repository of license
    	
and regulatory information.
        (13) (Blank).
        (14) On or before April 30, 2008 and every 2 years
    	
thereafter, the Commission shall present a written report to the Governor and the General Assembly that shall be based on a study of the impact of Public Act 95-634 on the business of soliciting, selling, and shipping wine from inside and outside of this State directly to residents of this State. As part of its report, the Commission shall provide all of the following information:
            (A) The amount of State excise and sales tax
        	
revenues generated.
            (B) The amount of licensing fees received.
            (C) The number of cases of wine shipped from
        	
inside and outside of this State directly to residents of this State.
            (D) The number of alcohol compliance operations
        	
conducted.
            (E) The number of winery shipper's licenses
        	
issued.
            (F) The number of each of the following: reported
        	
violations; cease and desist notices issued by the Commission; notices of violations issued by the Commission and to the Department of Revenue; and notices and complaints of violations to law enforcement officials, including, without limitation, the Illinois Attorney General and the U.S. Department of Treasury's Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau.
        (15) As a means to reduce the underage consumption of
    	
alcoholic liquors, the Commission shall conduct alcohol compliance operations to investigate whether businesses that are soliciting, selling, and shipping wine from inside or outside of this State directly to residents of this State are licensed by this State or are selling or attempting to sell wine to persons under 21 years of age in violation of this Act.
        (16) The Commission shall, in addition to
    	
notifying any appropriate law enforcement agency, submit notices of complaints or violations of Sections 6-29 and 6-29.1 by persons who do not hold a winery shipper's license under this Act to the Illinois Attorney General and to the U.S. Department of Treasury's Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau.
        (17)(A) A person licensed to make wine under the laws
    	
of another state who has a winery shipper's license under this Act and annually produces less than 25,000 gallons of wine or a person who has a first-class or second-class wine manufacturer's license, a first-class or second-class wine-maker's license, or a limited wine manufacturer's license under this Act and annually produces less than 25,000 gallons of wine may make application to the Commission for a self-distribution exemption to allow the sale of not more than 5,000 gallons of the exemption holder's wine to retail licensees per year.
        (B) In the application, which shall be sworn under
    	
penalty of perjury, such person shall state (1) the date it was established; (2) its volume of production and sales for each year since its establishment; (3) its efforts to establish distributor relationships; (4) that a self-distribution exemption is necessary to facilitate the marketing of its wine; and (5) that it will comply with the liquor and revenue laws of the United States, this State, and any other state where it is licensed.
        (C) The Commission shall approve the application for
    	
a self-distribution exemption if such person: (1) is in compliance with State revenue and liquor laws; (2) is not a member of any affiliated group that produces more than 25,000 gallons of wine per annum or produces any other alcoholic liquor; (3) will not annually produce for sale more than 25,000 gallons of wine; and (4) will not annually sell more than 5,000 gallons of its wine to retail licensees.
        (D) A self-distribution exemption holder shall
    	
annually certify to the Commission its production of wine in the previous 12 months and its anticipated production and sales for the next 12 months. The Commission may fine, suspend, or revoke a self-distribution exemption after a hearing if it finds that the exemption holder has made a material misrepresentation in its application, violated a revenue or liquor law of Illinois, exceeded production of 25,000 gallons of wine in any calendar year, or become part of an affiliated group producing more than 25,000 gallons of wine or any other alcoholic liquor.
        (E) Except in hearings for violations of this Act or
    	
Public Act 95-634 or a bona fide investigation by duly sworn law enforcement officials, the Commission, or its agents, the Commission shall maintain the production and sales information of a self-distribution exemption holder as confidential and shall not release such information to any person.
        (F) The Commission shall issue regulations governing
    	
self-distribution exemptions consistent with this Section and this Act.
        (G) Nothing in this paragraph (17) shall prohibit a
    	
self-distribution exemption holder from entering into or simultaneously having a distribution agreement with a licensed Illinois distributor.
        (H) It is the intent of this paragraph (17) to
    	
promote and continue orderly markets. The General Assembly finds that in order to preserve Illinois' regulatory distribution system it is necessary to create an exception for smaller makers of wine as their wines are frequently adjusted in varietals, mixes, vintages, and taste to find and create market niches sometimes too small for distributor or importing distributor business strategies. Limited self-distribution rights will afford and allow smaller makers of wine access to the marketplace in order to develop a customer base without impairing the integrity of the 3-tier system.
        (18)(A) A class 1 brewer licensee, who must also be
    	
either a licensed brewer or licensed non-resident dealer and annually manufacture less than 930,000 gallons of beer, may make application to the State Commission for a self-distribution exemption to allow the sale of not more than 232,500 gallons of the exemption holder's beer per year to retail licensees and to brewers, class 1 brewers, and class 2 brewers that, pursuant to subsection (e) of Section 6-4 of this Act, sell beer, cider, or both beer and cider to non-licensees at their breweries.
        (B) In the application, which shall be sworn under
    	
penalty of perjury, the class 1 brewer licensee shall state (1) the date it was established; (2) its volume of beer manufactured and sold for each year since its establishment; (3) its efforts to establish distributor relationships; (4) that a self-distribution exemption is necessary to facilitate the marketing of its beer; and (5) that it will comply with the alcoholic beverage and revenue laws of the United States, this State, and any other state where it is licensed.
        (C) Any application submitted shall be posted on the
    	
State Commission's website at least 45 days prior to action by the State Commission. The State Commission shall approve the application for a self-distribution exemption if the class 1 brewer licensee: (1) is in compliance with the State, revenue, and alcoholic beverage laws; (2) is not a member of any affiliated group that manufactures more than 930,000 gallons of beer per annum or produces any other alcoholic beverages; (3) shall not annually manufacture for sale more than 930,000 gallons of beer; (4) shall not annually sell more than 232,500 gallons of its beer to retail licensees or to brewers, class 1 brewers, and class 2 brewers that, pursuant to subsection (e) of Section 6-4 of this Act, sell beer, cider, or both beer and cider to non-licensees at their breweries; and (5) has relinquished any brew pub license held by the licensee, including any ownership interest it held in the licensed brew pub.
        (D) A self-distribution exemption holder shall
    	
annually certify to the State Commission its manufacture of beer during the previous 12 months and its anticipated manufacture and sales of beer for the next 12 months. The State Commission may fine, suspend, or revoke a self-distribution exemption after a hearing if it finds that the exemption holder has made a material misrepresentation in its application, violated a revenue or alcoholic beverage law of Illinois, exceeded the manufacture of 930,000 gallons of beer in any calendar year or became part of an affiliated group manufacturing more than 930,000 gallons of beer or any other alcoholic beverage.
        (E) The State Commission shall issue rules and
    	
regulations governing self-distribution exemptions consistent with this Act.
        (F) Nothing in this paragraph (18) shall prohibit a
    	
self-distribution exemption holder from entering into or simultaneously having a distribution agreement with a licensed Illinois importing distributor or a distributor. If a self-distribution exemption holder enters into a distribution agreement and has assigned distribution rights to an importing distributor or distributor, then the self-distribution exemption holder's distribution rights in the assigned territories shall cease in a reasonable time not to exceed 60 days.
        (G) It is the intent of this paragraph (18) to
    	
promote and continue orderly markets. The General Assembly finds that in order to preserve Illinois' regulatory distribution system, it is necessary to create an exception for smaller manufacturers in order to afford and allow such smaller manufacturers of beer access to the marketplace in order to develop a customer base without impairing the integrity of the 3-tier system.
    (b) On or before April 30, 1999, the Commission shall present a written report to the Governor and the General Assembly that shall be based on a study of the impact of Public Act 90-739 on the business of soliciting, selling, and shipping alcoholic liquor from outside of this State directly to residents of this State.
    As part of its report, the Commission shall provide the following information:
        (i) the amount of State excise and sales tax revenues
    	
generated as a result of Public Act 90-739;
        (ii) the amount of licensing fees received as a
    	
result of Public Act 90-739;
        (iii) the number of reported violations, the number
    	
of cease and desist notices issued by the Commission, the number of notices of violations issued to the Department of Revenue, and the number of notices and complaints of violations to law enforcement officials.
(Source: P.A. 100-134, eff. 8-18-17; 100-201, eff. 8-18-17; 100-816, eff. 8-13-18; 100-1012, eff. 8-21-18; 100-1050, eff. 8-23-18; 101-81, eff. 7-12-19.)
 
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-482)
    Sec. 3-12. Powers and duties of State Commission.
    (a) The State Commission shall have the following powers, functions, and duties:
        (1) To receive applications and to issue licenses to
    	
manufacturers, foreign importers, importing distributors, distributors, non-resident dealers, on premise consumption retailers, off premise sale retailers, special event retailer licensees, special use permit licenses, auction liquor licenses, brew pubs, caterer retailers, non-beverage users, railroads, including owners and lessees of sleeping, dining and cafe cars, airplanes, boats, brokers, and wine maker's premises licensees in accordance with the provisions of this Act, and to suspend or revoke such licenses upon the State Commission's determination, upon notice after hearing, that a licensee has violated any provision of this Act or any rule or regulation issued pursuant thereto and in effect for 30 days prior to such violation. Except in the case of an action taken pursuant to a violation of Section 6-3, 6-5, or 6-9, any action by the State Commission to suspend or revoke a licensee's license may be limited to the license for the specific premises where the violation occurred. An action for a violation of this Act shall be commenced by the State Commission within 2 years after the date the State Commission becomes aware of the violation.
        In lieu of suspending or revoking a license, the
    	
commission may impose a fine, upon the State Commission's determination and notice after hearing, that a licensee has violated any provision of this Act or any rule or regulation issued pursuant thereto and in effect for 30 days prior to such violation.
        For the purpose of this paragraph (1), when
    	
determining multiple violations for the sale of alcohol to a person under the age of 21, a second or subsequent violation for the sale of alcohol to a person under the age of 21 shall only be considered if it was committed within 5 years after the date when a prior violation for the sale of alcohol to a person under the age of 21 was committed.
        The fine imposed under this paragraph may not exceed
    	
$500 for each violation. Each day that the activity, which gave rise to the original fine, continues is a separate violation. The maximum fine that may be levied against any licensee, for the period of the license, shall not exceed $20,000. The maximum penalty that may be imposed on a licensee for selling a bottle of alcoholic liquor with a foreign object in it or serving from a bottle of alcoholic liquor with a foreign object in it shall be the destruction of that bottle of alcoholic liquor for the first 10 bottles so sold or served from by the licensee. For the eleventh bottle of alcoholic liquor and for each third bottle thereafter sold or served from by the licensee with a foreign object in it, the maximum penalty that may be imposed on the licensee is the destruction of the bottle of alcoholic liquor and a fine of up to $50.
        Any notice issued by the State Commission to a
    	
licensee for a violation of this Act or any notice with respect to settlement or offer in compromise shall include the field report, photographs, and any other supporting documentation necessary to reasonably inform the licensee of the nature and extent of the violation or the conduct alleged to have occurred. The failure to include such required documentation shall result in the dismissal of the action.
        (2) To adopt such rules and regulations consistent
    	
with the provisions of this Act which shall be necessary to carry on its functions and duties to the end that the health, safety and welfare of the People of the State of Illinois shall be protected and temperance in the consumption of alcoholic liquors shall be fostered and promoted and to distribute copies of such rules and regulations to all licensees affected thereby.
        (3) To call upon other administrative departments of
    	
the State, county and municipal governments, county and city police departments and upon prosecuting officers for such information and assistance as it deems necessary in the performance of its duties.
        (4) To recommend to local commissioners rules and
    	
regulations, not inconsistent with the law, for the distribution and sale of alcoholic liquors throughout the State.
        (5) To inspect, or cause to be inspected, any
    	
premises in this State where alcoholic liquors are manufactured, distributed, warehoused, or sold. Nothing in this Act authorizes an agent of the Commission to inspect private areas within the premises without reasonable suspicion or a warrant during an inspection. "Private areas" include, but are not limited to, safes, personal property, and closed desks.
        (5.1) Upon receipt of a complaint or upon having
    	
knowledge that any person is engaged in business as a manufacturer, importing distributor, distributor, or retailer without a license or valid license, to notify the local liquor authority, file a complaint with the State's Attorney's Office of the county where the incident occurred, or initiate an investigation with the appropriate law enforcement officials.
        (5.2) To issue a cease and desist notice to persons
    	
shipping alcoholic liquor into this State from a point outside of this State if the shipment is in violation of this Act.
        (5.3) To receive complaints from licensees, local
    	
officials, law enforcement agencies, organizations, and persons stating that any licensee has been or is violating any provision of this Act or the rules and regulations issued pursuant to this Act. Such complaints shall be in writing, signed and sworn to by the person making the complaint, and shall state with specificity the facts in relation to the alleged violation. If the Commission has reasonable grounds to believe that the complaint substantially alleges a violation of this Act or rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this Act, it shall conduct an investigation. If, after conducting an investigation, the Commission is satisfied that the alleged violation did occur, it shall proceed with disciplinary action against the licensee as provided in this Act.
        (6) To hear and determine appeals from orders of a
    	
local commission in accordance with the provisions of this Act, as hereinafter set forth. Hearings under this subsection shall be held in Springfield or Chicago, at whichever location is the more convenient for the majority of persons who are parties to the hearing.
        (7) The commission shall establish uniform systems of
    	
accounts to be kept by all retail licensees having more than 4 employees, and for this purpose the commission may classify all retail licensees having more than 4 employees and establish a uniform system of accounts for each class and prescribe the manner in which such accounts shall be kept. The commission may also prescribe the forms of accounts to be kept by all retail licensees having more than 4 employees, including but not limited to accounts of earnings and expenses and any distribution, payment, or other distribution of earnings or assets, and any other forms, records and memoranda which in the judgment of the commission may be necessary or appropriate to carry out any of the provisions of this Act, including but not limited to such forms, records and memoranda as will readily and accurately disclose at all times the beneficial ownership of such retail licensed business. The accounts, forms, records and memoranda shall be available at all reasonable times for inspection by authorized representatives of the State Commission or by any local liquor control commissioner or his or her authorized representative. The commission, may, from time to time, alter, amend or repeal, in whole or in part, any uniform system of accounts, or the form and manner of keeping accounts.
        (8) In the conduct of any hearing authorized to be
    	
held by the commission, to appoint, at the commission's discretion, hearing officers to conduct hearings involving complex issues or issues that will require a protracted period of time to resolve, to examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any licensee, and to examine or cause to be examined the books and records of such licensee; to hear testimony and take proof material for its information in the discharge of its duties hereunder; to administer or cause to be administered oaths; for any such purpose to issue subpoena or subpoenas to require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, which shall be effective in any part of this State, and to adopt rules to implement its powers under this paragraph (8).
        Any circuit court may by order duly entered, require
    	
the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant books subpoenaed by the State Commission and the court may compel obedience to its order by proceedings for contempt.
        (9) To investigate the administration of laws in
    	
relation to alcoholic liquors in this and other states and any foreign countries, and to recommend from time to time to the Governor and through him or her to the legislature of this State, such amendments to this Act, if any, as it may think desirable and as will serve to further the general broad purposes contained in Section 1-2 hereof.
        (10) To adopt such rules and regulations consistent
    	
with the provisions of this Act which shall be necessary for the control, sale or disposition of alcoholic liquor damaged as a result of an accident, wreck, flood, fire or other similar occurrence.
        (11) To develop industry educational programs related
    	
to responsible serving and selling, particularly in the areas of overserving consumers and illegal underage purchasing and consumption of alcoholic beverages.
        (11.1) To license persons providing education and
    	
training to alcohol beverage sellers and servers for mandatory and non-mandatory training under the Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers Education and Training (BASSET) programs and to develop and administer a public awareness program in Illinois to reduce or eliminate the illegal purchase and consumption of alcoholic beverage products by persons under the age of 21. Application for a license shall be made on forms provided by the State Commission.
        (12) To develop and maintain a repository of license
    	
and regulatory information.
        (13) (Blank).
        (14) On or before April 30, 2008 and every 2 years
    	
thereafter, the Commission shall present a written report to the Governor and the General Assembly that shall be based on a study of the impact of Public Act 95-634 on the business of soliciting, selling, and shipping wine from inside and outside of this State directly to residents of this State. As part of its report, the Commission shall provide all of the following information:
            (A) The amount of State excise and sales tax
        	
revenues generated.
            (B) The amount of licensing fees received.
            (C) The number of cases of wine shipped from
        	
inside and outside of this State directly to residents of this State.
            (D) The number of alcohol compliance operations
        	
conducted.
            (E) The number of winery shipper's licenses
        	
issued.
            (F) The number of each of the following: reported
        	
violations; cease and desist notices issued by the Commission; notices of violations issued by the Commission and to the Department of Revenue; and notices and complaints of violations to law enforcement officials, including, without limitation, the Illinois Attorney General and the U.S. Department of Treasury's Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau.
        (15) As a means to reduce the underage consumption of
    	
alcoholic liquors, the Commission shall conduct alcohol compliance operations to investigate whether businesses that are soliciting, selling, and shipping wine from inside or outside of this State directly to residents of this State are licensed by this State or are selling or attempting to sell wine to persons under 21 years of age in violation of this Act.
        (16) The Commission shall, in addition to
    	
notifying any appropriate law enforcement agency, submit notices of complaints or violations of Sections 6-29 and 6-29.1 by persons who do not hold a winery shipper's license under this Act to the Illinois Attorney General and to the U.S. Department of Treasury's Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau.
        (17)(A) A person licensed to make wine under the laws
    	
of another state who has a winery shipper's license under this Act and annually produces less than 25,000 gallons of wine or a person who has a first-class or second-class wine manufacturer's license, a first-class or second-class wine-maker's license, or a limited wine manufacturer's license under this Act and annually produces less than 25,000 gallons of wine may make application to the Commission for a self-distribution exemption to allow the sale of not more than 5,000 gallons of the exemption holder's wine to retail licensees per year.
        (B) In the application, which shall be sworn under
    	
penalty of perjury, such person shall state (1) the date it was established; (2) its volume of production and sales for each year since its establishment; (3) its efforts to establish distributor relationships; (4) that a self-distribution exemption is necessary to facilitate the marketing of its wine; and (5) that it will comply with the liquor and revenue laws of the United States, this State, and any other state where it is licensed.
        (C) The Commission shall approve the application for
    	
a self-distribution exemption if such person: (1) is in compliance with State revenue and liquor laws; (2) is not a member of any affiliated group that produces more than 25,000 gallons of wine per annum or produces any other alcoholic liquor; (3) will not annually produce for sale more than 25,000 gallons of wine; and (4) will not annually sell more than 5,000 gallons of its wine to retail licensees.
        (D) A self-distribution exemption holder shall
    	
annually certify to the Commission its production of wine in the previous 12 months and its anticipated production and sales for the next 12 months. The Commission may fine, suspend, or revoke a self-distribution exemption after a hearing if it finds that the exemption holder has made a material misrepresentation in its application, violated a revenue or liquor law of Illinois, exceeded production of 25,000 gallons of wine in any calendar year, or become part of an affiliated group producing more than 25,000 gallons of wine or any other alcoholic liquor.
        (E) Except in hearings for violations of this Act or
    	
Public Act 95-634 or a bona fide investigation by duly sworn law enforcement officials, the Commission, or its agents, the Commission shall maintain the production and sales information of a self-distribution exemption holder as confidential and shall not release such information to any person.
        (F) The Commission shall issue regulations governing
    	
self-distribution exemptions consistent with this Section and this Act.
        (G) Nothing in this paragraph (17) shall prohibit a
    	
self-distribution exemption holder from entering into or simultaneously having a distribution agreement with a licensed Illinois distributor.
        (H) It is the intent of this paragraph (17) to
    	
promote and continue orderly markets. The General Assembly finds that in order to preserve Illinois' regulatory distribution system it is necessary to create an exception for smaller makers of wine as their wines are frequently adjusted in varietals, mixes, vintages, and taste to find and create market niches sometimes too small for distributor or importing distributor business strategies. Limited self-distribution rights will afford and allow smaller makers of wine access to the marketplace in order to develop a customer base without impairing the integrity of the 3-tier system.
        (18)(A) A class 1 brewer licensee, who must also be
    	
either a licensed brewer or licensed non-resident dealer and annually manufacture less than 930,000 gallons of beer, may make application to the State Commission for a self-distribution exemption to allow the sale of not more than 232,500 gallons of the exemption holder's beer per year to retail licensees and to brewers, class 1 brewers, and class 2 brewers that, pursuant to subsection (e) of Section 6-4 of this Act, sell beer, cider, or both beer and cider to non-licensees at their breweries.
        (B) In the application, which shall be sworn under
    	
penalty of perjury, the class 1 brewer licensee shall state (1) the date it was established; (2) its volume of beer manufactured and sold for each year since its establishment; (3) its efforts to establish distributor relationships; (4) that a self-distribution exemption is necessary to facilitate the marketing of its beer; and (5) that it will comply with the alcoholic beverage and revenue laws of the United States, this State, and any other state where it is licensed.
        (C) Any application submitted shall be posted on the
    	
State Commission's website at least 45 days prior to action by the State Commission. The State Commission shall approve the application for a self-distribution exemption if the class 1 brewer licensee: (1) is in compliance with the State, revenue, and alcoholic beverage laws; (2) is not a member of any affiliated group that manufactures more than 930,000 gallons of beer per annum or produces any other alcoholic beverages; (3) shall not annually manufacture for sale more than 930,000 gallons of beer; (4) shall not annually sell more than 232,500 gallons of its beer to retail licensees or to brewers, class 1 brewers, and class 2 brewers that, pursuant to subsection (e) of Section 6-4 of this Act, sell beer, cider, or both beer and cider to non-licensees at their breweries; and (5) has relinquished any brew pub license held by the licensee, including any ownership interest it held in the licensed brew pub.
        (D) A self-distribution exemption holder shall
    	
annually certify to the State Commission its manufacture of beer during the previous 12 months and its anticipated manufacture and sales of beer for the next 12 months. The State Commission may fine, suspend, or revoke a self-distribution exemption after a hearing if it finds that the exemption holder has made a material misrepresentation in its application, violated a revenue or alcoholic beverage law of Illinois, exceeded the manufacture of 930,000 gallons of beer in any calendar year or became part of an affiliated group manufacturing more than 930,000 gallons of beer or any other alcoholic beverage.
        (E) The State Commission shall issue rules and
    	
regulations governing self-distribution exemptions consistent with this Act.
        (F) Nothing in this paragraph (18) shall prohibit a
    	
self-distribution exemption holder from entering into or simultaneously having a distribution agreement with a licensed Illinois importing distributor or a distributor. If a self-distribution exemption holder enters into a distribution agreement and has assigned distribution rights to an importing distributor or distributor, then the self-distribution exemption holder's distribution rights in the assigned territories shall cease in a reasonable time not to exceed 60 days.
        (G) It is the intent of this paragraph (18) to
    	
promote and continue orderly markets. The General Assembly finds that in order to preserve Illinois' regulatory distribution system, it is necessary to create an exception for smaller manufacturers in order to afford and allow such smaller manufacturers of beer access to the marketplace in order to develop a customer base without impairing the integrity of the 3-tier system.
        (19)(A) A class 1 craft distiller licensee or a
    	
non-resident dealer who manufactures less than 50,000 gallons of distilled spirits per year may make application to the State Commission for a self-distribution exemption to allow the sale of not more than 5,000 gallons of the exemption holder's spirits to retail licensees per year.
        (B) In the application, which shall be sworn under
    	
penalty of perjury, the class 1 craft distiller licensee or non-resident dealer shall state (1) the date it was established; (2) its volume of spirits manufactured and sold for each year since its establishment; (3) its efforts to establish distributor relationships; (4) that a self-distribution exemption is necessary to facilitate the marketing of its spirits; and (5) that it will comply with the alcoholic beverage and revenue laws of the United States, this State, and any other state where it is licensed.
        (C) Any application submitted shall be posted on the
    	
State Commission's website at least 45 days prior to action by the State Commission. The State Commission shall approve the application for a self-distribution exemption if the applicant: (1) is in compliance with State revenue and alcoholic beverage laws; (2) is not a member of any affiliated group that produces more than 50,000 gallons of spirits per annum or produces any other alcoholic liquor; (3) does not annually manufacture for sale more than 50,000 gallons of spirits; and (4) does not annually sell more than 5,000 gallons of its spirits to retail licensees.
        (D) A self-distribution exemption holder shall
    	
annually certify to the State Commission its manufacture of spirits during the previous 12 months and its anticipated manufacture and sales of spirits for the next 12 months. The State Commission may fine, suspend, or revoke a self-distribution exemption after a hearing if it finds that the exemption holder has made a material misrepresentation in its application, violated a revenue or alcoholic beverage law of Illinois, exceeded the manufacture of 50,000 gallons of spirits in any calendar year, or has become part of an affiliated group manufacturing more than 50,000 gallons of spirits or any other alcoholic beverage.
        (E) The State Commission shall adopt rules governing
    	
self-distribution exemptions consistent with this Act.
        (F) Nothing in this paragraph (19) shall prohibit a
    	
self-distribution exemption holder from entering into or simultaneously having a distribution agreement with a licensed Illinois importing distributor or a distributor.
        (G) It is the intent of this paragraph (19) to
    	
promote and continue orderly markets. The General Assembly finds that in order to preserve Illinois' regulatory distribution system, it is necessary to create an exception for smaller manufacturers in order to afford and allow such smaller manufacturers of spirits access to the marketplace in order to develop a customer base without impairing the integrity of the 3-tier system.
    (b) On or before April 30, 1999, the Commission shall present a written report to the Governor and the General Assembly that shall be based on a study of the impact of Public Act 90-739 on the business of soliciting, selling, and shipping alcoholic liquor from outside of this State directly to residents of this State.
    As part of its report, the Commission shall provide the following information:
        (i) the amount of State excise and sales tax revenues
    	
generated as a result of Public Act 90-739;
        (ii) the amount of licensing fees received as a
    	
result of Public Act 90-739;
        (iii) the number of reported violations, the number
    	
of cease and desist notices issued by the Commission, the number of notices of violations issued to the Department of Revenue, and the number of notices and complaints of violations to law enforcement officials.
(Source: P.A. 100-134, eff. 8-18-17; 100-201, eff. 8-18-17; 100-816, eff. 8-13-18; 100-1012, eff. 8-21-18; 100-1050, eff. 8-23-18; 101-482, eff. 8-23-19.)

    (235 ILCS 5/3-13) (from Ch. 43, par. 108a)
    Sec. 3-13. The provisions of "The Illinois Administrative Procedure Act", as now or hereafter amended, are hereby expressly adopted and incorporated herein as though a part of this Act, and shall apply to all administrative rules and procedures of the State commission under this Act.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/3-14) (from Ch. 43, par. 109)
    Sec. 3-14. Issuance of license by Commission. Nothing contained in this Act shall, however, be construed to permit the State Commission to issue any license, other than manufacturer's, foreign importer's, importing distributor's, non-resident dealer's, and distributor's, broker's and non-beverage user's license for any premises in any prohibited territory, or to issue any license other than manufacturer's, foreign importer's, importing distributor's, non-resident dealer's, distributor's, railroad's, airplane's, boat's, or broker's license, auction liquor license, or non-beverage user's license, unless the person applying for such license shall have obtained a local license for the same premises. For purposes of this Section and only in regards to a hotel, the local license issued for the same premises may include multiple local licenses issued to a hotel operator for various portions of the hotel building, structure, or adjacent property owned and managed by the hotel operator in which alcoholic liquors may be stored, offered for sale, and sold; however, all of those portions of the hotel building, structure, or adjacent property shall be considered the hotel premises for purposes of the issuance of a retailer's license by the State Commission. When such person has obtained a local license and has made application to the State Commission in conformity with this Act and paid the license fee provided, it shall be the duty of the State Commission to issue a retailer's license to him; provided, however, that the State Commission may refuse the issuance or renewal of a retailer's license, upon notice and after hearing, upon the grounds authorized in Section 6-3 of this Act, and, provided further, that the issuance of such license shall not prejudice the State Commission's action in subsequently suspending or revoking such license if it is determined by the State Commission, upon notice and after hearing, that the licensee has, within the same or the preceding license period, violated any provision of this Act or any rule or regulation issued pursuant thereto and in effect for 30 days prior to such violation. The Commission may also refuse to renew a license if the licensee has failed to pay an offer in compromise, pre-disciplinary settlement, or a fine imposed by order.
(Source: P.A. 99-46, eff. 7-15-15.)

    (235 ILCS 5/3-20)
    Sec. 3-20. State Commission; separation from the Department of Revenue.
    (a) Executive Order No. 2003-9 is hereby superseded by this amendatory Act of the 100th General Assembly to the extent that Executive Order No. 2003-9 transferred clerks, management and staff support, employees, and other resources from the State Commission to the Department of Revenue.
    (b) To the extent that Executive Order No. 2003-9 transferred personnel and the Executive Director to the Department of Revenue from the State Commission, those personnel and the Executive Director shall be transferred to the State Commission. The status and rights of such employees under the Personnel Code shall not be affected by the transfer. The status and rights of the employees and the State of Illinois and its agencies under the Personnel Code, the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act, and applicable collective bargaining agreements or under any pension, retirement, or annuity plan shall not be affected by this amendatory Act of the 100th General Assembly. To the extent that an employee performs duties for the State Commission and the Department of Revenue itself or any other division or agency within the Department of Revenue, that employee shall be transferred at the Governor's discretion.
    (c) All books, records, papers, documents, property (real and personal), contracts, causes of action, and pending business pertaining to the powers, duties, rights, and responsibilities transferred by this amendatory Act of the 100th General Assembly from the Department of Revenue to the State Commission, including, but not limited to, material in electronic or magnetic format and necessary computer hardware and software, shall be transferred to the State Commission.
    (d) All unexpended appropriations and balances and other funds available for use by the Department of Revenue to operate the State Commission shall be transferred for use by the State Commission. Unexpended balances so transferred shall be expended only for the purpose for which the appropriations were originally made.
    (e) The powers, duties, rights, and responsibilities transferred from the Department of Revenue by this amendatory Act of the 100th General Assembly shall be vested in and shall be exercised by the State Commission.
    (f) Whenever reports or notices are now required to be made or given or papers or documents furnished or served by any person to or upon the Department of Revenue in connection with any of the powers, duties, rights, and responsibilities transferred by this amendatory Act of the 100th General Assembly, the same shall be made, given, furnished, or served in the same manner to or upon the State Commission.
    (g) Any rules of the Department of Revenue that relate to the functions transferred from the State Commission to the Department of Revenue by Executive Order No. 2003-9 that are in full force on the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 100th General Assembly shall become the rules of the State Commission. This amendatory Act of the 100th General Assembly does not affect the legality of any such rules in the Illinois Administrative Code.
    Any proposed rules filed with the Secretary of State by the Department of Revenue that are pending in the rulemaking process on the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 100th General Assembly and pertain to the functions transferred from the State Commission to the Department of Revenue by Executive Order No. 2003-9 shall be deemed to have been filed by the State Commission. As soon as practicable hereafter, the State Commission shall revise and clarify the rules transferred to it under this amendatory Act of the 100th General Assembly to reflect the reorganization of powers, duties, rights, and responsibilities affected by this amendatory Act of the 100th General Assembly, using the procedures for recodification of rules available under the Illinois Administrative Procedure Act, except that existing title, part, and section numbering for the affected rules may be retained.
(Source: P.A. 100-1050, eff. 7-1-19.)


 
    (235 ILCS 5/Art. IV heading)
ARTICLE IV. LOCAL CONTROL

    (235 ILCS 5/4-1) (from Ch. 43, par. 110)
    Sec. 4-1. In every city, village or incorporated town, the city council or president and board of trustees, and in counties in respect of territory outside the limits of any such city, village or incorporated town the county board shall have the power by general ordinance or resolution to determine the number, kind and classification of licenses, for sale at retail of alcoholic liquor not inconsistent with this Act and the amount of the local licensee fees to be paid for the various kinds of licenses to be issued in their political subdivision, except those issued to the specific non-beverage users exempt from payment of license fees under Section 5-3 which shall be issued without payment of any local license fees, and the manner of distribution of such fees after their collection; to regulate or prohibit the presence of persons under the age of 21 on the premises of licensed retail establishments of various kinds and classifications where alcoholic liquor is drawn, poured, mixed or otherwise served for consumption on the premises; to prohibit any minor from drawing, pouring, or mixing any alcoholic liquor as an employee of any retail licensee; and to prohibit any minor from at any time attending any bar and from drawing, pouring or mixing any alcoholic liquor in any licensed retail premises; and to establish such further regulations and restrictions upon the issuance of and operations under local licenses not inconsistent with law as the public good and convenience may require; and to provide penalties for the violation of regulations and restrictions, including those made by county boards, relative to operation under local licenses; provided, however, that in the exercise of any of the powers granted in this Section, the issuance of such licenses shall not be prohibited except for reasons specifically enumerated in Sections 6-2, 6-11, 6-12 and 6-25 of this Act.
    However, in any municipality with a population exceeding 1,000,000 that has adopted the form of government authorized under "An Act concerning cities, villages, and incorporated towns, and to repeal certain Acts herein named", approved August 15, 1941, as amended, no person shall be granted any license or privilege to sell alcoholic liquors between the hours of two o'clock a.m. and seven o'clock a.m. on week days unless such person has given at least 14 days prior written notice to the alderperson of the ward in which such person's licensed premises are located stating his intention to make application for such license or privilege and unless evidence confirming service of such written notice is included in such application. Any license or privilege granted in violation of this paragraph shall be null and void.
(Source: P.A. 102-15, eff. 6-17-21.)

    (235 ILCS 5/4-2) (from Ch. 43, par. 111)
    Sec. 4-2. The mayor or president of the board of trustees of each city, village or incorporated town or his or her designee, and the president or chairman of the county board or his or her designee, shall be the local liquor control commissioner for their respective cities, villages, incorporated towns and counties, and shall be charged with the administration in their respective jurisdictions of the appropriate provisions of this Act and of such ordinances and resolutions relating to alcoholic liquor as may be enacted; but the authority of the president or chairman of the county board or his or her designee shall extend only to that area in any county which lies outside the corporate limits of the cities, villages and incorporated towns therein and those areas which are owned by the county and are within the corporate limits of the cities, villages and incorporated towns with a population of less than 1,000,000, however, such county shall comply with the operating rules of the municipal ordinances affected when issuing their own licenses.
    However, such mayor, president of the board of trustees or president or chairman of the county board or his or her designee may appoint a person or persons to assist him in the exercise of the powers and the performance of the duties herein provided for such local liquor control commissioner.
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section to the contrary, the mayor of a city with a population of 55,000 or less or the president of a village with a population of 55,000 or less that has an interest in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor must direct the council or board over which he or she presides to appoint, by majority vote, a person other than him or her to serve as the local liquor control commissioner. The appointment must be made within 30 days from the day on which the mayor or president takes office, and the mayor or president cannot make nominations or serve any other role in the appointment. To prevent any conflict of interest, the mayor or president with the interest in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor shall not participate in any meetings, hearings, or decisions on matters impacting the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor. Further, the appointee (i) shall be an attorney with an active license to practice law in the State of Illinois, (ii) shall not legally represent liquor license applicants or holders before the jurisdiction over which he or she presides as local liquor control commissioner or before an adjacent jurisdiction, (iii) shall not have an interest in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor, and (iv) shall not be appointed to a term to exceed the term of the mayor, president, or members of the council or board.
(Source: P.A. 97-1059, eff. 8-24-12; 98-10, eff. 5-6-13.)

    (235 ILCS 5/4-3) (from Ch. 43, par. 111a)
    Sec. 4-3. The city council of each city and the president and board of trustees of each village and incorporated town and the county board are authorized to fix and pay compensation to the local liquor control commissioner of the particular city, village, incorporated town or county, as the case may be, and compensation to such deputies, assistants or employees as may be deemed necessary for the proper performance of the duties vested in him.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/4-4) (from Ch. 43, par. 112)
    Sec. 4-4. Each local liquor control commissioner shall also have the following powers, functions, and duties with respect to licenses, other than licenses to manufacturers, importing distributors, distributors, foreign importers, non-resident dealers, non-beverage users, brokers, railroads, airplanes, and boats:
        1. To grant or suspend for not more than 30 days or
    	
revoke for cause all local licenses issued to persons for premises within his jurisdiction;
        2. To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer
    	
to enter at any time upon any premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the provisions of this Act or any rules or regulations adopted by him or by the State Commission have been or are being violated, and at such time to examine said premises of said licensee in connection therewith;
        3. To notify the Secretary of State where a club
    	
incorporated under the General Not for Profit Corporation Act of 1986 or a foreign corporation functioning as a club in this State under a certificate of authority issued under that Act has violated this Act by selling or offering for sale at retail alcoholic liquors without a retailer's license;
        4. To receive a complaint from any citizen within his
    	
jurisdiction that any of the provisions of this Act, or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant hereto, have been or are being violated and to act upon the complaint in the manner hereinafter provided;
        5. To receive local license fees and pay the same
    	
forthwith to the city, village, town, or county treasurer, as the case may be.
    Each local liquor commissioner also has the duty to notify the Secretary of State of any convictions or dispositions of court supervision for a violation of Section 6-20 of this Act or a similar provision of a local ordinance.
    In counties and municipalities, the local liquor control commissioners shall also have the power to levy fines in accordance with Section 7-5 of this Act.
(Source: P.A. 100-863, eff. 8-14-18.)

    (235 ILCS 5/4-5) (from Ch. 43, par. 113)
    Sec. 4-5. The local liquor control commissioner shall have the right to examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant for a local license or for a renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom notice of revocation or suspension has been served in the manner hereinafter provided, and to examine or cause to be examined, the books and records of any such applicant or licensee; to hear testimony and take proof for his information in the performance of his duties, and for such purpose to issue subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of this State. For the purpose of obtaining any of the information desired by the local liquor control commissioner under this section, he may authorize his agent to act on his behalf.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/4-6) (from Ch. 43, par. 114)
    Sec. 4-6. When, in this Act, the local liquor control commissioner shall be referred to, it shall include any committee or other agency appointed by such local liquor control commissioner.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/4-7) (from Ch. 43, par. 114a)
    Sec. 4-7. The local liquor control commissioner shall have the right to require fingerprints of any applicant for a local license or for a renewal thereof other than an applicant who is an air carrier operating under a certificate or a foreign air permit issued pursuant to the Federal Aviation Act of 1958. Each applicant shall submit his or her fingerprints to the Department of State Police in the form and manner prescribed by the Department of State Police. These fingerprints shall be checked against the fingerprint records now and hereafter filed in the Department of State Police and Federal Bureau of Investigation criminal history records databases. The Department of State Police shall charge a fee for conducting the criminal history records check, which shall be deposited in the State Police Services Fund and shall not exceed the actual cost of the records check. The Department of State Police shall furnish pursuant to positive identification, records of conviction to the local liquor control commissioner. For purposes of obtaining fingerprints under this Section, the local liquor commissioner shall collect a fee and forward the fee to the appropriate policing body who shall submit the fingerprints and the fee to the Illinois Department of State Police.
(Source: P.A. 93-418, eff. 1-1-04.)


 
    (235 ILCS 5/Art. V heading)
ARTICLE V. LICENSES

    (235 ILCS 5/5-1) (from Ch. 43, par. 115)
    (Text of Section before amendment by P.A. 101-668)
    Sec. 5-1. Licenses issued by the Illinois Liquor Control Commission shall be of the following classes:
    (a) Manufacturer's license - Class 1. Distiller, Class 2. Rectifier, Class 3. Brewer, Class 4. First Class Wine Manufacturer, Class 5. Second Class Wine Manufacturer, Class 6. First Class Winemaker, Class 7. Second Class Winemaker, Class 8. Limited Wine Manufacturer, Class 9. Craft Distiller, Class 10. Class 1 Craft Distiller, Class 11. Class 2 Craft Distiller, Class 12. Class 1 Brewer, Class 13. Class 2 Brewer,
    (b) Distributor's license,
    (c) Importing Distributor's license,
    (d) Retailer's license,
    (e) Special Event Retailer's license (not-for-profit),
    (f) Railroad license,
    (g) Boat license,
    (h) Non-Beverage User's license,
    (i) Wine-maker's premises license,
    (j) Airplane license,
    (k) Foreign importer's license,
    (l) Broker's license,
    (m) Non-resident dealer's license,
    (n) Brew Pub license,
    (o) Auction liquor license,
    (p) Caterer retailer license,
    (q) Special use permit license,
    (r) Winery shipper's license,
    (s) Craft distiller tasting permit,
    (t) Brewer warehouse permit,
    (u) Distilling pub license,
    (v) Craft distiller warehouse permit.
    No person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other legal business entity that is engaged in the manufacturing of wine may concurrently obtain and hold a wine-maker's license and a wine manufacturer's license.
    (a) A manufacturer's license shall allow the manufacture, importation in bulk, storage, distribution and sale of alcoholic liquor to persons without the State, as may be permitted by law and to licensees in this State as follows:
    Class 1. A Distiller may make sales and deliveries of alcoholic liquor to distillers, rectifiers, importing distributors, distributors and non-beverage users and to no other licensees.
    Class 2. A Rectifier, who is not a distiller, as defined herein, may make sales and deliveries of alcoholic liquor to rectifiers, importing distributors, distributors, retailers and non-beverage users and to no other licensees.
    Class 3. A Brewer may make sales and deliveries of beer to importing distributors and distributors and may make sales as authorized under subsection (e) of Section 6-4 of this Act.
    Class 4. A first class wine-manufacturer may make sales and deliveries of up to 50,000 gallons of wine to manufacturers, importing distributors and distributors, and to no other licensees.
    Class 5. A second class Wine manufacturer may make sales and deliveries of more than 50,000 gallons of wine to manufacturers, importing distributors and distributors and to no other licensees.
    Class 6. A first-class wine-maker's license shall allow the manufacture of up to 50,000 gallons of wine per year, and the storage and sale of such wine to distributors in the State and to persons without the State, as may be permitted by law. A person who, prior to June 1, 2008 (the effective date of Public Act 95-634), is a holder of a first-class wine-maker's license and annually produces more than 25,000 gallons of its own wine and who distributes its wine to licensed retailers shall cease this practice on or before July 1, 2008 in compliance with Public Act 95-634.
    Class 7. A second-class wine-maker's license shall allow the manufacture of between 50,000 and 150,000 gallons of wine per year, and the storage and sale of such wine to distributors in this State and to persons without the State, as may be permitted by law. A person who, prior to June 1, 2008 (the effective date of Public Act 95-634), is a holder of a second-class wine-maker's license and annually produces more than 25,000 gallons of its own wine and who distributes its wine to licensed retailers shall cease this practice on or before July 1, 2008 in compliance with Public Act 95-634.
    Class 8. A limited wine-manufacturer may make sales and deliveries not to exceed 40,000 gallons of wine per year to distributors, and to non-licensees in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
    Class 9. A craft distiller license, which may only be held by a class 1 craft distiller licensee or class 2 craft distiller licensee but not held by both a class 1 craft distiller licensee and a class 2 craft distiller licensee, shall grant all rights conveyed by either: (i) a class 1 craft distiller license if the craft distiller holds a class 1 craft distiller license; or (ii) a class 2 craft distiller licensee if the craft distiller holds a class 2 craft distiller license.
    Class 10. A class 1 craft distiller license, which may only be issued to a licensed craft distiller or licensed non-resident dealer, shall allow the manufacture of up to 50,000 gallons of spirits per year provided that the class 1 craft distiller licensee does not manufacture more than a combined 50,000 gallons of spirits per year and is not a member of or affiliated with, directly or indirectly, a manufacturer that produces more than 50,000 gallons of spirits per year or any other alcoholic liquor. A class 1 craft distiller licensee may make sales and deliveries to importing distributors and distributors and to retail licensees in accordance with the conditions set forth in paragraph (19) of subsection (a) of Section 3-12 of this Act. However, the aggregate amount of spirits sold to non-licensees and sold or delivered to retail licensees may not exceed 5,000 gallons per year.
    A class 1 craft distiller licensee may sell up to 5,000 gallons of such spirits to non-licensees to the extent permitted by any exemption approved by the State Commission pursuant to Section 6-4 of this Act. A class 1 craft distiller license holder may store such spirits at a non-contiguous licensed location, but at no time shall a class 1 craft distiller license holder directly or indirectly produce in the aggregate more than 50,000 gallons of spirits per year.
    A class 1 craft distiller licensee may hold more than one class 1 craft distiller's license. However, a class 1 craft distiller that holds more than one class 1 craft distiller license shall not manufacture, in the aggregate, more than 50,000 gallons of spirits by distillation per year and shall not sell, in the aggregate, more than 5,000 gallons of such spirits to non-licensees in accordance with an exemption approved by the State Commission pursuant to Section 6-4 of this Act.
    Class 11. A class 2 craft distiller license, which may only be issued to a licensed craft distiller or licensed non-resident dealer, shall allow the manufacture of up to 100,000 gallons of spirits per year provided that the class 2 craft distiller licensee does not manufacture more than a combined 100,000 gallons of spirits per year and is not a member of or affiliated with, directly or indirectly, a manufacturer that produces more than 100,000 gallons of spirits per year or any other alcoholic liquor. A class 2 craft distiller licensee may make sales and deliveries to importing distributors and distributors, but shall not make sales or deliveries to any other licensee. If the State Commission provides prior approval, a class 2 craft distiller licensee may annually transfer up to 100,000 gallons of spirits manufactured by that class 2 craft distiller licensee to the premises of a licensed class 2 craft distiller wholly owned and operated by the same licensee. A class 2 craft distiller may transfer spirits to a distilling pub wholly owned and operated by the class 2 craft distiller subject to the following limitations and restrictions: (i) the transfer shall not annually exceed more than 5,000 gallons; (ii) the annual amount transferred shall reduce the distilling pub's annual permitted production limit; (iii) all spirits transferred shall be subject to Article VIII of this Act; (iv) a written record shall be maintained by the distiller and distilling pub specifying the amount, date of delivery, and receipt of the product by the distilling pub; and (v) the distilling pub shall be located no farther than 80 miles from the class 2 craft distiller's licensed location.
    A class 2 craft distiller shall, prior to transferring spirits to a distilling pub wholly owned by the class 2 craft distiller, furnish a written notice to the State Commission of intent to transfer spirits setting forth the name and address of the distilling pub and shall annually submit to the State Commission a verified report identifying the total gallons of spirits transferred to the distilling pub wholly owned by the class 2 craft distiller.
    A class 2 craft distiller license holder may store such spirits at a non-contiguous licensed location, but at no time shall a class 2 craft distiller license holder directly or indirectly produce in the aggregate more than 100,000 gallons of spirits per year.
    Class 12. A class 1 brewer license, which may only be issued to a licensed brewer or licensed non-resident dealer, shall allow the manufacture of up to 930,000 gallons of beer per year provided that the class 1 brewer licensee does not manufacture more than a combined 930,000 gallons of beer per year and is not a member of or affiliated with, directly or indirectly, a manufacturer that produces more than 930,000 gallons of beer per year or any other alcoholic liquor. A class 1 brewer licensee may make sales and deliveries to importing distributors and distributors and to retail licensees in accordance with the conditions set forth in paragraph (18) of subsection (a) of Section 3-12 of this Act. If the State Commission provides prior approval, a class 1 brewer may annually transfer up to 930,000 gallons of beer manufactured by that class 1 brewer to the premises of a licensed class 1 brewer wholly owned and operated by the same licensee.
    Class 13. A class 2 brewer license, which may only be issued to a licensed brewer or licensed non-resident dealer, shall allow the manufacture of up to 3,720,000 gallons of beer per year provided that the class 2 brewer licensee does not manufacture more than a combined 3,720,000 gallons of beer per year and is not a member of or affiliated with, directly or indirectly, a manufacturer that produces more than 3,720,000 gallons of beer per year or any other alcoholic liquor. A class 2 brewer licensee may make sales and deliveries to importing distributors and distributors, but shall not make sales or deliveries to any other licensee. If the State Commission provides prior approval, a class 2 brewer licensee may annually transfer up to 3,720,000 gallons of beer manufactured by that class 2 brewer licensee to the premises of a licensed class 2 brewer wholly owned and operated by the same licensee.
    A class 2 brewer may transfer beer to a brew pub wholly owned and operated by the class 2 brewer subject to the following limitations and restrictions: (i) the transfer shall not annually exceed more than 31,000 gallons; (ii) the annual amount transferred shall reduce the brew pub's annual permitted production limit; (iii) all beer transferred shall be subject to Article VIII of this Act; (iv) a written record shall be maintained by the brewer and brew pub specifying the amount, date of delivery, and receipt of the product by the brew pub; and (v) the brew pub shall be located no farther than 80 miles from the class 2 brewer's licensed location.
    A class 2 brewer shall, prior to transferring beer to a brew pub wholly owned by the class 2 brewer, furnish a written notice to the State Commission of intent to transfer beer setting forth the name and address of the brew pub and shall annually submit to the State Commission a verified report identifying the total gallons of beer transferred to the brew pub wholly owned by the class 2 brewer.
    (a-1) A manufacturer which is licensed in this State to make sales or deliveries of alcoholic liquor to licensed distributors or importing distributors and which enlists agents, representatives, or individuals acting on its behalf who contact licensed retailers on a regular and continual basis in this State must register those agents, representatives, or persons acting on its behalf with the State Commission.
    Registration of agents, representatives, or persons acting on behalf of a manufacturer is fulfilled by submitting a form to the Commission. The form shall be developed by the Commission and shall include the name and address of the applicant, the name and address of the manufacturer he or she represents, the territory or areas assigned to sell to or discuss pricing terms of alcoholic liquor, and any other questions deemed appropriate and necessary. All statements in the forms required to be made by law or by rule shall be deemed material, and any person who knowingly misstates any material fact under oath in an application is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. Fraud, misrepresentation, false statements, misleading statements, evasions, or suppression of material facts in the securing of a registration are grounds for suspension or revocation of the registration. The State Commission shall post a list of registered agents on the Commission's website.
    (b) A distributor's license shall allow (i) the wholesale purchase and storage of alcoholic liquors and sale of alcoholic liquors to licensees in this State and to persons without the State, as may be permitted by law; (ii) the sale of beer, cider, or both beer and cider to brewers, class 1 brewers, and class 2 brewers that, pursuant to subsection (e) of Section 6-4 of this Act, sell beer, cider, or both beer and cider to non-licensees at their breweries; and (iii) the sale of vermouth to class 1 craft distillers and class 2 craft distillers that, pursuant to subsection (e) of Section 6-4 of this Act, sell spirits, vermouth, or both spirits and vermouth to non-licensees at their distilleries. No person licensed as a distributor shall be granted a non-resident dealer's license.
    (c) An importing distributor's license may be issued to and held by those only who are duly licensed distributors, upon the filing of an application by a duly licensed distributor, with the Commission and the Commission shall, without the payment of any fee, immediately issue such importing distributor's license to the applicant, which shall allow the importation of alcoholic liquor by the licensee into this State from any point in the United States outside this State, and the purchase of alcoholic liquor in barrels, casks or other bulk containers and the bottling of such alcoholic liquors before resale thereof, but all bottles or containers so filled shall be sealed, labeled, stamped and otherwise made to comply with all provisions, rules and regulations governing manufacturers in the preparation and bottling of alcoholic liquors. The importing distributor's license shall permit such licensee to purchase alcoholic liquor from Illinois licensed non-resident dealers and foreign importers only. No person licensed as an importing distributor shall be granted a non-resident dealer's license.
    (d) A retailer's license shall allow the licensee to sell and offer for sale at retail, only in the premises specified in the license, alcoholic liquor for use or consumption, but not for resale in any form. Nothing in Public Act 95-634 shall deny, limit, remove, or restrict the ability of a holder of a retailer's license to transfer, deliver, or ship alcoholic liquor to the purchaser for use or consumption subject to any applicable local law or ordinance. Any retail license issued to a manufacturer shall only permit the manufacturer to sell beer at retail on the premises actually occupied by the manufacturer. For the purpose of further describing the type of business conducted at a retail licensed premises, a retailer's licensee may be designated by the State Commission as (i) an on premise consumption retailer, (ii) an off premise sale retailer, or (iii) a combined on premise consumption and off premise sale retailer.
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection (d), a retail licensee may sell alcoholic liquors to a special event retailer licensee for resale to the extent permitted under subsection (e).
    (e) A special event retailer's license (not-for-profit) shall permit the licensee to purchase alcoholic liquors from an Illinois licensed distributor (unless the licensee purchases less than $500 of alcoholic liquors for the special event, in which case the licensee may purchase the alcoholic liquors from a licensed retailer) and shall allow the licensee to sell and offer for sale, at retail, alcoholic liquors for use or consumption, but not for resale in any form and only at the location and on the specific dates designated for the special event in the license. An applicant for a special event retailer license must (i) furnish with the application: (A) a resale number issued under Section 2c of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act or evidence that the applicant is registered under Section 2a of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act, (B) a current, valid exemption identification number issued under Section 1g of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act, and a certification to the Commission that the purchase of alcoholic liquors will be a tax-exempt purchase, or (C) a statement that the applicant is not registered under Section 2a of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act, does not hold a resale number under Section 2c of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act, and does not hold an exemption number under Section 1g of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act, in which event the Commission shall set forth on the special event retailer's license a statement to that effect; (ii) submit with the application proof satisfactory to the State Commission that the applicant will provide dram shop liability insurance in the maximum limits; and (iii) show proof satisfactory to the State Commission that the applicant has obtained local authority approval.
    Nothing in this Act prohibits an Illinois licensed distributor from offering credit or a refund for unused, salable alcoholic liquors to a holder of a special event retailer's license or the special event retailer's licensee from accepting the credit or refund of alcoholic liquors at the conclusion of the event specified in the license.
    (f) A railroad license shall permit the licensee to import alcoholic liquors into this State from any point in the United States outside this State and to store such alcoholic liquors in this State; to make wholesale purchases of alcoholic liquors directly from manufacturers, foreign importers, distributors and importing distributors from within or outside this State; and to store such alcoholic liquors in this State; provided that the above powers may be exercised only in connection with the importation, purchase or storage of alcoholic liquors to be sold or dispensed on a club, buffet, lounge or dining car operated on an electric, gas or steam railway in this State; and provided further, that railroad licensees exercising the above powers shall be subject to all provisions of Article VIII of this Act as applied to importing distributors. A railroad license shall also permit the licensee to sell or dispense alcoholic liquors on any club, buffet, lounge or dining car operated on an electric, gas or steam railway regularly operated by a common carrier in this State, but shall not permit the sale for resale of any alcoholic liquors to any licensee within this State. A license shall be obtained for each car in which such sales are made.
    (g) A boat license shall allow the sale of alcoholic liquor in individual drinks, on any passenger boat regularly operated as a common carrier on navigable waters in this State or on any riverboat operated under the Illinois Gambling Act, which boat or riverboat maintains a public dining room or restaurant thereon.
    (h) A non-beverage user's license shall allow the licensee to purchase alcoholic liquor from a licensed manufacturer or importing distributor, without the imposition of any tax upon the business of such licensed manufacturer or importing distributor as to such alcoholic liquor to be used by such licensee solely for the non-beverage purposes set forth in subsection (a) of Section 8-1 of this Act, and such licenses shall be divided and classified and shall permit the purchase, possession and use of limited and stated quantities of alcoholic liquor as follows:
Class 1, not to exceed ........................... 500 gallons
Class 2, not to exceed ......................... 1,000 gallons
Class 3, not to exceed ......................... 5,000 gallons
Class 4, not to exceed ........................ 10,000 gallons
Class 5, not to exceed ........................ 50,000 gallons
    (i) A wine-maker's premises license shall allow a licensee that concurrently holds a first-class wine-maker's license to sell and offer for sale at retail in the premises specified in such license not more than 50,000 gallons of the first-class wine-maker's wine that is made at the first-class wine-maker's licensed premises per year for use or consumption, but not for resale in any form. A wine-maker's premises license shall allow a licensee who concurrently holds a second-class wine-maker's license to sell and offer for sale at retail in the premises specified in such license up to 100,000 gallons of the second-class wine-maker's wine that is made at the second-class wine-maker's licensed premises per year for use or consumption but not for resale in any form. A wine-maker's premises license shall allow a licensee that concurrently holds a first-class wine-maker's license or a second-class wine-maker's license to sell and offer for sale at retail at the premises specified in the wine-maker's premises license, for use or consumption but not for resale in any form, any beer, wine, and spirits purchased from a licensed distributor. Upon approval from the State Commission, a wine-maker's premises license shall allow the licensee to sell and offer for sale at (i) the wine-maker's licensed premises and (ii) at up to 2 additional locations for use and consumption and not for resale. Each location shall require additional licensing per location as specified in Section 5-3 of this Act. A wine-maker's premises licensee shall secure liquor liability insurance coverage in an amount at least equal to the maximum liability amounts set forth in subsection (a) of Section 6-21 of this Act.
    (j) An airplane license shall permit the licensee to import alcoholic liquors into this State from any point in the United States outside this State and to store such alcoholic liquors in this State; to make wholesale purchases of alcoholic liquors directly from manufacturers, foreign importers, distributors and importing distributors from within or outside this State; and to store such alcoholic liquors in this State; provided that the above powers may be exercised only in connection with the importation, purchase or storage of alcoholic liquors to be sold or dispensed on an airplane; and provided further, that airplane licensees exercising the above powers shall be subject to all provisions of Article VIII of this Act as applied to importing distributors. An airplane licensee shall also permit the sale or dispensing of alcoholic liquors on any passenger airplane regularly operated by a common carrier in this State, but shall not permit the sale for resale of any alcoholic liquors to any licensee within this State. A single airplane license shall be required of an airline company if liquor service is provided on board aircraft in this State. The annual fee for such license shall be as determined in Section 5-3.
    (k) A foreign importer's license shall permit such licensee to purchase alcoholic liquor from Illinois licensed non-resident dealers only, and to import alcoholic liquor other than in bulk from any point outside the United States and to sell such alcoholic liquor to Illinois licensed importing distributors and to no one else in Illinois; provided that (i) the foreign importer registers with the State Commission every brand of alcoholic liquor that it proposes to sell to Illinois licensees during the license period, (ii) the foreign importer complies with all of the provisions of Section 6-9 of this Act with respect to registration of such Illinois licensees as may be granted the right to sell such brands at wholesale, and (iii) the foreign importer complies with the provisions of Sections 6-5 and 6-6 of this Act to the same extent that these provisions apply to manufacturers.
    (l) (i) A broker's license shall be required of all persons who solicit orders for, offer to sell or offer to supply alcoholic liquor to retailers in the State of Illinois, or who offer to retailers to ship or cause to be shipped or to make contact with distillers, craft distillers, rectifiers, brewers or manufacturers or any other party within or without the State of Illinois in order that alcoholic liquors be shipped to a distributor, importing distributor or foreign importer, whether such solicitation or offer is consummated within or without the State of Illinois.
    No holder of a retailer's license issued by the Illinois Liquor Control Commission shall purchase or receive any alcoholic liquor, the order for which was solicited or offered for sale to such retailer by a broker unless the broker is the holder of a valid broker's license.
    The broker shall, upon the acceptance by a retailer of the broker's solicitation of an order or offer to sell or supply or deliver or have delivered alcoholic liquors, promptly forward to the Illinois Liquor Control Commission a notification of said transaction in such form as the Commission may by regulations prescribe.
    (ii) A broker's license shall be required of a person within this State, other than a retail licensee, who, for a fee or commission, promotes, solicits, or accepts orders for alcoholic liquor, for use or consumption and not for resale, to be shipped from this State and delivered to residents outside of this State by an express company, common carrier, or contract carrier. This Section does not apply to any person who promotes, solicits, or accepts orders for wine as specifically authorized in Section 6-29 of this Act.
    A broker's license under this subsection (l) shall not entitle the holder to buy or sell any alcoholic liquors for his own account or to take or deliver title to such alcoholic liquors.
    This subsection (l) shall not apply to distributors, employees of distributors, or employees of a manufacturer who has registered the trademark, brand or name of the alcoholic liquor pursuant to Section 6-9 of this Act, and who regularly sells such alcoholic liquor in the State of Illinois only to its registrants thereunder.
    Any agent, representative, or person subject to registration pursuant to subsection (a-1) of this Section shall not be eligible to receive a broker's license.
    (m) A non-resident dealer's license shall permit such licensee to ship into and warehouse alcoholic liquor into this State from any point outside of this State, and to sell such alcoholic liquor to Illinois licensed foreign importers and importing distributors and to no one else in this State; provided that (i) said non-resident dealer shall register with the Illinois Liquor Control Commission each and every brand of alcoholic liquor which it proposes to sell to Illinois licensees during the license period, (ii) it shall comply with all of the provisions of Section 6-9 hereof with respect to registration of such Illinois licensees as may be granted the right to sell such brands at wholesale by duly filing such registration statement, thereby authorizing the non-resident dealer to proceed to sell such brands at wholesale, and (iii) the non-resident dealer shall comply with the provisions of Sections 6-5 and 6-6 of this Act to the same extent that these provisions apply to manufacturers. No person licensed as a non-resident dealer shall be granted a distributor's or importing distributor's license.
    (n) A brew pub license shall allow the licensee to only (i) manufacture up to 155,000 gallons of beer per year only on the premises specified in the license, (ii) make sales of the beer manufactured on the premises or, with the approval of the Commission, beer manufactured on another brew pub licensed premises that is wholly owned and operated by the same licensee to importing distributors, distributors, and to non-licensees for use and consumption, (iii) store the beer upon the premises, (iv) sell and offer for sale at retail from the licensed premises for off-premises consumption no more than 155,000 gallons per year so long as such sales are only made in-person, (v) sell and offer for sale at retail for use and consumption on the premises specified in the license any form of alcoholic liquor purchased from a licensed distributor or importing distributor, (vi) with the prior approval of the Commission, annually transfer no more than 155,000 gallons of beer manufactured on the premises to a licensed brew pub wholly owned and operated by the same licensee, and (vii) notwithstanding item (i) of this subsection, brew pubs wholly owned and operated by the same licensee may combine each location's production limit of 155,000 gallons of beer per year and allocate the aggregate total between the wholly owned, operated, and licensed locations.
    A brew pub licensee shall not under any circumstance sell or offer for sale beer manufactured by the brew pub licensee to retail licensees.
    A person who holds a class 2 brewer license may simultaneously hold a brew pub license if the class 2 brewer (i) does not, under any circumstance, sell or offer for sale beer manufactured by the class 2 brewer to retail licensees; (ii) does not hold more than 3 brew pub licenses in this State; (iii) does not manufacture more than a combined 3,720,000 gallons of beer per year, including the beer manufactured at the brew pub; and (iv) is not a member of or affiliated with, directly or indirectly, a manufacturer that produces more than 3,720,000 gallons of beer per year or any other alcoholic liquor.
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, a licensed brewer, class 2 brewer, or non-resident dealer who before July 1, 2015 manufactured less than 3,720,000 gallons of beer per year and held a brew pub license on or before July 1, 2015 may (i) continue to qualify for and hold that brew pub license for the licensed premises and (ii) manufacture more than 3,720,000 gallons of beer per year and continue to qualify for and hold that brew pub license if that brewer, class 2 brewer, or non-resident dealer does not simultaneously hold a class 1 brewer license and is not a member of or affiliated with, directly or indirectly, a manufacturer that produces more than 3,720,000 gallons of beer per year or that produces any other alcoholic liquor.
    (o) A caterer retailer license shall allow the holder to serve alcoholic liquors as an incidental part of a food service that serves prepared meals which excludes the serving of snacks as the primary meal, either on or off-site whether licensed or unlicensed. A caterer retailer license shall allow the holder, a distributor, or an importing distributor to transfer any inventory to and from the holder's retail premises and shall allow the holder to purchase alcoholic liquor from a distributor or importing distributor to be delivered directly to an off-site event.
    Nothing in this Act prohibits a distributor or importing distributor from offering credit or a refund for unused, salable beer to a holder of a caterer retailer license or a caterer retailer licensee from accepting a credit or refund for unused, salable beer, in the event an act of God is the sole reason an off-site event is cancelled and if: (i) the holder of a caterer retailer license has not transferred alcoholic liquor from its caterer retailer premises to an off-site location; (ii) the distributor or importing distributor offers the credit or refund for the unused, salable beer that it delivered to the off-site premises and not for any unused, salable beer that the distributor or importing distributor delivered to the caterer retailer's premises; and (iii) the unused, salable beer would likely spoil if transferred to the caterer retailer's premises. A caterer retailer license shall allow the holder to transfer any inventory from any off-site location to its caterer retailer premises at the conclusion of an off-site event or engage a distributor or importing distributor to transfer any inventory from any off-site location to its caterer retailer premises at the conclusion of an off-site event, provided that the distributor or importing distributor issues bona fide charges to the caterer retailer licensee for fuel, labor, and delivery and the distributor or importing distributor collects payment from the caterer retailer licensee prior to the distributor or importing distributor transferring inventory to the caterer retailer premises.
    For purposes of this subsection (o), an "act of God" means an unforeseeable event, such as a rain or snow storm, hail, a flood, or a similar event, that is the sole cause of the cancellation of an off-site, outdoor event.
    (p) An auction liquor license shall allow the licensee to sell and offer for sale at auction wine and spirits for use or consumption, or for resale by an Illinois liquor licensee in accordance with provisions of this Act. An auction liquor license will be issued to a person and it will permit the auction liquor licensee to hold the auction anywhere in the State. An auction liquor license must be obtained for each auction at least 14 days in advance of the auction date.
    (q) A special use permit license shall allow an Illinois licensed retailer to transfer a portion of its alcoholic liquor inventory from its retail licensed premises to the premises specified in the license hereby created; to purchase alcoholic liquor from a distributor or importing distributor to be delivered directly to the location specified in the license hereby created; and to sell or offer for sale at retail, only in the premises specified in the license hereby created, the transferred or delivered alcoholic liquor for use or consumption, but not for resale in any form. A special use permit license may be granted for the following time periods: one day or less; 2 or more days to a maximum of 15 days per location in any 12-month period. An applicant for the special use permit license must also submit with the application proof satisfactory to the State Commission that the applicant will provide dram shop liability insurance to the maximum limits and have local authority approval.
    A special use permit license shall allow the holder to transfer any inventory from the holder's special use premises to its retail premises at the conclusion of the special use event or engage a distributor or importing distributor to transfer any inventory from the holder's special use premises to its retail premises at the conclusion of an off-site event, provided that the distributor or importing distributor issues bona fide charges to the special use permit licensee for fuel, labor, and delivery and the distributor or importing distributor collects payment from the retail licensee prior to the distributor or importing distributor transferring inventory to the retail premises.
    Nothing in this Act prohibits a distributor or importing distributor from offering credit or a refund for unused, salable beer to a special use permit licensee or a special use permit licensee from accepting a credit or refund for unused, salable beer at the conclusion of the event specified in the license if: (i) the holder of the special use permit license has not transferred alcoholic liquor from its retail licensed premises to the premises specified in the special use permit license; (ii) the distributor or importing distributor offers the credit or refund for the unused, salable beer that it delivered to the premises specified in the special use permit license and not for any unused, salable beer that the distributor or importing distributor delivered to the retailer's premises; and (iii) the unused, salable beer would likely spoil if transferred to the retailer premises.
    (r) A winery shipper's license shall allow a person with a first-class or second-class wine manufacturer's license, a first-class or second-class wine-maker's license, or a limited wine manufacturer's license or who is licensed to make wine under the laws of another state to ship wine made by that licensee directly to a resident of this State who is 21 years of age or older for that resident's personal use and not for resale. Prior to receiving a winery shipper's license, an applicant for the license must provide the Commission with a true copy of its current license in any state in which it is licensed as a manufacturer of wine. An applicant for a winery shipper's license must also complete an application form that provides any other information the Commission deems necessary. The application form shall include all addresses from which the applicant for a winery shipper's license intends to ship wine, including the name and address of any third party, except for a common carrier, authorized to ship wine on behalf of the manufacturer. The application form shall include an acknowledgement consenting to the jurisdiction of the Commission, the Illinois Department of Revenue, and the courts of this State concerning the enforcement of this Act and any related laws, rules, and regulations, including authorizing the Department of Revenue and the Commission to conduct audits for the purpose of ensuring compliance with Public Act 95-634, and an acknowledgement that the wine manufacturer is in compliance with Section 6-2 of this Act. Any third party, except for a common carrier, authorized to ship wine on behalf of a first-class or second-class wine manufacturer's licensee, a first-class or second-class wine-maker's licensee, a limited wine manufacturer's licensee, or a person who is licensed to make wine under the laws of another state shall also be disclosed by the winery shipper's licensee, and a copy of the written appointment of the third-party wine provider, except for a common carrier, to the wine manufacturer shall be filed with the State Commission as a supplement to the winery shipper's license application or any renewal thereof. The winery shipper's license holder shall affirm under penalty of perjury, as part of the winery shipper's license application or renewal, that he or she only ships wine, either directly or indirectly through a third-party provider, from the licensee's own production.
    Except for a common carrier, a third-party provider shipping wine on behalf of a winery shipper's license holder is the agent of the winery shipper's license holder and, as such, a winery shipper's license holder is responsible for the acts and omissions of the third-party provider acting on behalf of the license holder. A third-party provider, except for a common carrier, that engages in shipping wine into Illinois on behalf of a winery shipper's license holder shall consent to the jurisdiction of the State Commission and the State. Any third-party, except for a common carrier, holding such an appointment shall, by February 1 of each calendar year and upon request by the State Commission or the Department of Revenue, file with the State Commission a statement detailing each shipment made to an Illinois resident. The statement shall include the name and address of the third-party provider filing the statement, the time period covered by the statement, and the following information:
        (1) the name, address, and license number of the
    	
winery shipper on whose behalf the shipment was made;
        (2) the quantity of the products delivered; and
        (3) the date and address of the shipment.
If the Department of Revenue or the State Commission requests a statement under this paragraph, the third-party provider must provide that statement no later than 30 days after the request is made. Any books, records, supporting papers, and documents containing information and data relating to a statement under this paragraph shall be kept and preserved for a period of 3 years, unless their destruction sooner is authorized, in writing, by the Director of Revenue, and shall be open and available to inspection by the Director of Revenue or the State Commission or any duly authorized officer, agent, or employee of the State Commission or the Department of Revenue, at all times during business hours of the day. Any person who violates any provision of this paragraph or any rule of the State Commission for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this paragraph is guilty of a Class C misdemeanor. In case of a continuing violation, each day's continuance thereof shall be a separate and distinct offense.
    The State Commission shall adopt rules as soon as practicable to implement the requirements of Public Act 99-904 and shall adopt rules prohibiting any such third-party appointment of a third-party provider, except for a common carrier, that has been deemed by the State Commission to have violated the provisions of this Act with regard to any winery shipper licensee.
    A winery shipper licensee must pay to the Department of Revenue the State liquor gallonage tax under Section 8-1 for all wine that is sold by the licensee and shipped to a person in this State. For the purposes of Section 8-1, a winery shipper licensee shall be taxed in the same manner as a manufacturer of wine. A licensee who is not otherwise required to register under the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act must register under the Use Tax Act to collect and remit use tax to the Department of Revenue for all gallons of wine that are sold by the licensee and shipped to persons in this State. If a licensee fails to remit the tax imposed under this Act in accordance with the provisions of Article VIII of this Act, the winery shipper's license shall be revoked in accordance with the provisions of Article VII of this Act. If a licensee fails to properly register and remit tax under the Use Tax Act or the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act for all wine that is sold by the winery shipper and shipped to persons in this State, the winery shipper's license shall be revoked in accordance with the provisions of Article VII of this Act.
    A winery shipper licensee must collect, maintain, and submit to the Commission on a semi-annual basis the total number of cases per resident of wine shipped to residents of this State. A winery shipper licensed under this subsection (r) must comply with the requirements of Section 6-29 of this Act.
    Pursuant to paragraph (5.1) or (5.3) of subsection (a) of Section 3-12, the State Commission may receive, respond to, and investigate any complaint and impose any of the remedies specified in paragraph (1) of subsection (a) of Section 3-12.
    As used in this subsection, "third-party provider" means any entity that provides fulfillment house services, including warehousing, packaging, distribution, order processing, or shipment of wine, but not the sale of wine, on behalf of a licensed winery shipper.
    (s) A craft distiller tasting permit license shall allow an Illinois licensed class 1 craft distiller or class 2 craft distiller to transfer a portion of its alcoholic liquor inventory from its class 1 craft distiller or class 2 craft distiller licensed premises to the premises specified in the license hereby created and to conduct a sampling, only in the premises specified in the license hereby created, of the transferred alcoholic liquor in accordance with subsection (c) of Section 6-31 of this Act. The transferred alcoholic liquor may not be sold or resold in any form. An applicant for the craft distiller tasting permit license must also submit with the application proof satisfactory to the State Commission that the applicant will provide dram shop liability insurance to the maximum limits and have local authority approval.
    (t) A brewer warehouse permit may be issued to the holder of a class 1 brewer license or a class 2 brewer license. If the holder of the permit is a class 1 brewer licensee, the brewer warehouse permit shall allow the holder to store or warehouse up to 930,000 gallons of tax-determined beer manufactured by the holder of the permit at the premises specified on the permit. If the holder of the permit is a class 2 brewer licensee, the brewer warehouse permit shall allow the holder to store or warehouse up to 3,720,000 gallons of tax-determined beer manufactured by the holder of the permit at the premises specified on the permit. Sales to non-licensees are prohibited at the premises specified in the brewer warehouse permit.
    (u) A distilling pub license shall allow the licensee to only (i) manufacture up to 5,000 gallons of spirits per year only on the premises specified in the license, (ii) make sales of the spirits manufactured on the premises or, with the approval of the State Commission, spirits manufactured on another distilling pub licensed premises that is wholly owned and operated by the same licensee to importing distributors and distributors and to non-licensees for use and consumption, (iii) store the spirits upon the premises, (iv) sell and offer for sale at retail from the licensed premises for off-premises consumption no more than 5,000 gallons per year so long as such sales are only made in-person, (v) sell and offer for sale at retail for use and consumption on the premises specified in the license any form of alcoholic liquor purchased from a licensed distributor or importing distributor, and (vi) with the prior approval of the State Commission, annually transfer no more than 5,000 gallons of spirits manufactured on the premises to a licensed distilling pub wholly owned and operated by the same licensee.
    A distilling pub licensee shall not under any circumstance sell or offer for sale spirits manufactured by the distilling pub licensee to retail licensees.
    A person who holds a class 2 craft distiller license may simultaneously hold a distilling pub license if the class 2 craft distiller (i) does not, under any circumstance, sell or offer for sale spirits manufactured by the class 2 craft distiller to retail licensees; (ii) does not hold more than 3 distilling pub licenses in this State; (iii) does not manufacture more than a combined 100,000 gallons of spirits per year, including the spirits manufactured at the distilling pub; and (iv) is not a member of or affiliated with, directly or indirectly, a manufacturer that produces more than 100,000 gallons of spirits per year or any other alcoholic liquor.
    (v) A craft distiller warehouse permit may be issued to the holder of a class 1 craft distiller or class 2 craft distiller license. The craft distiller warehouse permit shall allow the holder to store or warehouse up to 500,000 gallons of spirits manufactured by the holder of the permit at the premises specified on the permit. Sales to non-licensees are prohibited at the premises specified in the craft distiller warehouse permit.
(Source: P.A. 100-17, eff. 6-30-17; 100-201, eff. 8-18-17; 100-816, eff. 8-13-18; 100-885, eff. 8-14-18; 100-1050, eff. 8-23-18; 101-16, eff. 6-14-19; 101-31, eff. 6-28-19; 101-81, eff. 7-12-19; 101-482, eff. 8-23-19; 101-517, eff. 8-23-19; 101-615, eff. 12-20-19.)
 
    (Text of Section after amendment by P.A. 101-668)
    Sec. 5-1. Licenses issued by the Illinois Liquor Control Commission shall be of the following classes:
    (a) Manufacturer's license - Class 1. Distiller, Class 2. Rectifier, Class 3. Brewer, Class 4. First Class Wine Manufacturer, Class 5. Second Class Wine Manufacturer, Class 6. First Class Winemaker, Class 7. Second Class Winemaker, Class 8. Limited Wine Manufacturer, Class 9. Craft Distiller, Class 10. Class 1 Craft Distiller, Class 11. Class 2 Craft Distiller, Class 12. Class 1 Brewer, Class 13. Class 2 Brewer,
    (b) Distributor's license,
    (c) Importing Distributor's license,
    (d) Retailer's license,
    (e) Special Event Retailer's license (not-for-profit),
    (f) Railroad license,
    (g) Boat license,
    (h) Non-Beverage User's license,
    (i) Wine-maker's premises license,
    (j) Airplane license,
    (k) Foreign importer's license,
    (l) Broker's license,
    (m) Non-resident dealer's license,
    (n) Brew Pub license,
    (o) Auction liquor license,
    (p) Caterer retailer license,
    (q) Special use permit license,
    (r) Winery shipper's license,
    (s) Craft distiller tasting permit,
    (t) Brewer warehouse permit,
    (u) Distilling pub license,
    (v) Craft distiller warehouse permit.
    No person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other legal business entity that is engaged in the manufacturing of wine may concurrently obtain and hold a wine-maker's license and a wine manufacturer's license.
    (a) A manufacturer's license shall allow the manufacture, importation in bulk, storage, distribution and sale of alcoholic liquor to persons without the State, as may be permitted by law and to licensees in this State as follows:
    Class 1. A Distiller may make sales and deliveries of alcoholic liquor to distillers, rectifiers, importing distributors, distributors and non-beverage users and to no other licensees.
    Class 2. A Rectifier, who is not a distiller, as defined herein, may make sales and deliveries of alcoholic liquor to rectifiers, importing distributors, distributors, retailers and non-beverage users and to no other licensees.
    Class 3. A Brewer may make sales and deliveries of beer to importing distributors and distributors and may make sales as authorized under subsection (e) of Section 6-4 of this Act.
    Class 4. A first class wine-manufacturer may make sales and deliveries of up to 50,000 gallons of wine to manufacturers, importing distributors and distributors, and to no other licensees.
    Class 5. A second class Wine manufacturer may make sales and deliveries of more than 50,000 gallons of wine to manufacturers, importing distributors and distributors and to no other licensees.
    Class 6. A first-class wine-maker's license shall allow the manufacture of up to 50,000 gallons of wine per year, and the storage and sale of such wine to distributors in the State and to persons without the State, as may be permitted by law. A person who, prior to June 1, 2008 (the effective date of Public Act 95-634), is a holder of a first-class wine-maker's license and annually produces more than 25,000 gallons of its own wine and who distributes its wine to licensed retailers shall cease this practice on or before July 1, 2008 in compliance with Public Act 95-634.
    Class 7. A second-class wine-maker's license shall allow the manufacture of between 50,000 and 150,000 gallons of wine per year, and the storage and sale of such wine to distributors in this State and to persons without the State, as may be permitted by law. A person who, prior to June 1, 2008 (the effective date of Public Act 95-634), is a holder of a second-class wine-maker's license and annually produces more than 25,000 gallons of its own wine and who distributes its wine to licensed retailers shall cease this practice on or before July 1, 2008 in compliance with Public Act 95-634.
    Class 8. A limited wine-manufacturer may make sales and deliveries not to exceed 40,000 gallons of wine per year to distributors, and to non-licensees in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
    Class 9. A craft distiller license, which may only be held by a class 1 craft distiller licensee or class 2 craft distiller licensee but not held by both a class 1 craft distiller licensee and a class 2 craft distiller licensee, shall grant all rights conveyed by either: (i) a class 1 craft distiller license if the craft distiller holds a class 1 craft distiller license; or (ii) a class 2 craft distiller licensee if the craft distiller holds a class 2 craft distiller license.
    Class 10. A class 1 craft distiller license, which may only be issued to a licensed craft distiller or licensed non-resident dealer, shall allow the manufacture of up to 50,000 gallons of spirits per year provided that the class 1 craft distiller licensee does not manufacture more than a combined 50,000 gallons of spirits per year and is not a member of or affiliated with, directly or indirectly, a manufacturer that produces more than 50,000 gallons of spirits per year or any other alcoholic liquor. A class 1 craft distiller licensee may make sales and deliveries to importing distributors and distributors and to retail licensees in accordance with the conditions set forth in paragraph (19) of subsection (a) of Section 3-12 of this Act. However, the aggregate amount of spirits sold to non-licensees and sold or delivered to retail licensees may not exceed 5,000 gallons per year.
    A class 1 craft distiller licensee may sell up to 5,000 gallons of such spirits to non-licensees to the extent permitted by any exemption approved by the State Commission pursuant to Section 6-4 of this Act. A class 1 craft distiller license holder may store such spirits at a non-contiguous licensed location, but at no time shall a class 1 craft distiller license holder directly or indirectly produce in the aggregate more than 50,000 gallons of spirits per year.
    A class 1 craft distiller licensee may hold more than one class 1 craft distiller's license. However, a class 1 craft distiller that holds more than one class 1 craft distiller license shall not manufacture, in the aggregate, more than 50,000 gallons of spirits by distillation per year and shall not sell, in the aggregate, more than 5,000 gallons of such spirits to non-licensees in accordance with an exemption approved by the State Commission pursuant to Section 6-4 of this Act.
    Class 11. A class 2 craft distiller license, which may only be issued to a licensed craft distiller or licensed non-resident dealer, shall allow the manufacture of up to 100,000 gallons of spirits per year provided that the class 2 craft distiller licensee does not manufacture more than a combined 100,000 gallons of spirits per year and is not a member of or affiliated with, directly or indirectly, a manufacturer that produces more than 100,000 gallons of spirits per year or any other alcoholic liquor. A class 2 craft distiller licensee may make sales and deliveries to importing distributors and distributors, but shall not make sales or deliveries to any other licensee. If the State Commission provides prior approval, a class 2 craft distiller licensee may annually transfer up to 100,000 gallons of spirits manufactured by that class 2 craft distiller licensee to the premises of a licensed class 2 craft distiller wholly owned and operated by the same licensee. A class 2 craft distiller may transfer spirits to a distilling pub wholly owned and operated by the class 2 craft distiller subject to the following limitations and restrictions: (i) the transfer shall not annually exceed more than 5,000 gallons; (ii) the annual amount transferred shall reduce the distilling pub's annual permitted production limit; (iii) all spirits transferred shall be subject to Article VIII of this Act; (iv) a written record shall be maintained by the distiller and distilling pub specifying the amount, date of delivery, and receipt of the product by the distilling pub; and (v) the distilling pub shall be located no farther than 80 miles from the class 2 craft distiller's licensed location.
    A class 2 craft distiller shall, prior to transferring spirits to a distilling pub wholly owned by the class 2 craft distiller, furnish a written notice to the State Commission of intent to transfer spirits setting forth the name and address of the distilling pub and shall annually submit to the State Commission a verified report identifying the total gallons of spirits transferred to the distilling pub wholly owned by the class 2 craft distiller.
    A class 2 craft distiller license holder may store such spirits at a non-contiguous licensed location, but at no time shall a class 2 craft distiller license holder directly or indirectly produce in the aggregate more than 100,000 gallons of spirits per year.
    Class 12. A class 1 brewer license, which may only be issued to a licensed brewer or licensed non-resident dealer, shall allow the manufacture of up to 930,000 gallons of beer per year provided that the class 1 brewer licensee does not manufacture more than a combined 930,000 gallons of beer per year and is not a member of or affiliated with, directly or indirectly, a manufacturer that produces more than 930,000 gallons of beer per year or any other alcoholic liquor. A class 1 brewer licensee may make sales and deliveries to importing distributors and distributors and to retail licensees in accordance with the conditions set forth in paragraph (18) of subsection (a) of Section 3-12 of this Act. If the State Commission provides prior approval, a class 1 brewer may annually transfer up to 930,000 gallons of beer manufactured by that class 1 brewer to the premises of a licensed class 1 brewer wholly owned and operated by the same licensee.
    Class 13. A class 2 brewer license, which may only be issued to a licensed brewer or licensed non-resident dealer, shall allow the manufacture of up to 3,720,000 gallons of beer per year provided that the class 2 brewer licensee does not manufacture more than a combined 3,720,000 gallons of beer per year and is not a member of or affiliated with, directly or indirectly, a manufacturer that produces more than 3,720,000 gallons of beer per year or any other alcoholic liquor. A class 2 brewer licensee may make sales and deliveries to importing distributors and distributors, but shall not make sales or deliveries to any other licensee. If the State Commission provides prior approval, a class 2 brewer licensee may annually transfer up to 3,720,000 gallons of beer manufactured by that class 2 brewer licensee to the premises of a licensed class 2 brewer wholly owned and operated by the same licensee.
    A class 2 brewer may transfer beer to a brew pub wholly owned and operated by the class 2 brewer subject to the following limitations and restrictions: (i) the transfer shall not annually exceed more than 31,000 gallons; (ii) the annual amount transferred shall reduce the brew pub's annual permitted production limit; (iii) all beer transferred shall be subject to Article VIII of this Act; (iv) a written record shall be maintained by the brewer and brew pub specifying the amount, date of delivery, and receipt of the product by the brew pub; and (v) the brew pub shall be located no farther than 80 miles from the class 2 brewer's licensed location.
    A class 2 brewer shall, prior to transferring beer to a brew pub wholly owned by the class 2 brewer, furnish a written notice to the State Commission of intent to transfer beer setting forth the name and address of the brew pub and shall annually submit to the State Commission a verified report identifying the total gallons of beer transferred to the brew pub wholly owned by the class 2 brewer.
    (a-1) A manufacturer which is licensed in this State to make sales or deliveries of alcoholic liquor to licensed distributors or importing distributors and which enlists agents, representatives, or individuals acting on its behalf who contact licensed retailers on a regular and continual basis in this State must register those agents, representatives, or persons acting on its behalf with the State Commission.
    Registration of agents, representatives, or persons acting on behalf of a manufacturer is fulfilled by submitting a form to the Commission. The form shall be developed by the Commission and shall include the name and address of the applicant, the name and address of the manufacturer he or she represents, the territory or areas assigned to sell to or discuss pricing terms of alcoholic liquor, and any other questions deemed appropriate and necessary. All statements in the forms required to be made by law or by rule shall be deemed material, and any person who knowingly misstates any material fact under oath in an application is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. Fraud, misrepresentation, false statements, misleading statements, evasions, or suppression of material facts in the securing of a registration are grounds for suspension or revocation of the registration. The State Commission shall post a list of registered agents on the Commission's website.
    (b) A distributor's license shall allow (i) the wholesale purchase and storage of alcoholic liquors and sale of alcoholic liquors to licensees in this State and to persons without the State, as may be permitted by law; (ii) the sale of beer, cider, or both beer and cider to brewers, class 1 brewers, and class 2 brewers that, pursuant to subsection (e) of Section 6-4 of this Act, sell beer, cider, or both beer and cider to non-licensees at their breweries; and (iii) the sale of vermouth to class 1 craft distillers and class 2 craft distillers that, pursuant to subsection (e) of Section 6-4 of this Act, sell spirits, vermouth, or both spirits and vermouth to non-licensees at their distilleries. No person licensed as a distributor shall be granted a non-resident dealer's license.
    (c) An importing distributor's license may be issued to and held by those only who are duly licensed distributors, upon the filing of an application by a duly licensed distributor, with the Commission and the Commission shall, without the payment of any fee, immediately issue such importing distributor's license to the applicant, which shall allow the importation of alcoholic liquor by the licensee into this State from any point in the United States outside this State, and the purchase of alcoholic liquor in barrels, casks or other bulk containers and the bottling of such alcoholic liquors before resale thereof, but all bottles or containers so filled shall be sealed, labeled, stamped and otherwise made to comply with all provisions, rules and regulations governing manufacturers in the preparation and bottling of alcoholic liquors. The importing distributor's license shall permit such licensee to purchase alcoholic liquor from Illinois licensed non-resident dealers and foreign importers only. No person licensed as an importing distributor shall be granted a non-resident dealer's license.
    (d) A retailer's license shall allow the licensee to sell and offer for sale at retail, only in the premises specified in the license, alcoholic liquor for use or consumption, but not for resale in any form. Except as provided in Section 6-16, 6-29, or 6-29.1, nothing in this Act shall deny, limit, remove, or restrict the ability of a holder of a retailer's license to transfer or ship alcoholic liquor to the purchaser for use or consumption subject to any applicable local law or ordinance. For the purposes of this Section, "shipping" means the movement of alcoholic liquor from a licensed retailer to a consumer via a common carrier. Except as provided in Section 6-16, 6-29, or 6-29.1, nothing in this Act shall deny, limit, remove, or restrict the ability of a holder of a retailer's license to deliver alcoholic liquor to the purchaser for use or consumption. The delivery shall be made only within 12 hours from the time the alcoholic liquor leaves the licensed premises of the retailer for delivery. For the purposes of this Section, "delivery" means the movement of alcoholic liquor purchased from a licensed retailer to a consumer through the following methods:
        (1) delivery within licensed retailer's parking lot,
    	
including curbside, for pickup by the consumer;
        (2) delivery by an owner, officer, director,
    	
shareholder, or employee of the licensed retailer; or
        (3) delivery by a third-party contractor, independent
    	
contractor, or agent with whom the licensed retailer has contracted to make deliveries of alcoholic liquors.
    Under subsection (1), (2), or (3), delivery shall not include the use of common carriers.
    Any retail license issued to a manufacturer shall only permit the manufacturer to sell beer at retail on the premises actually occupied by the manufacturer. For the purpose of further describing the type of business conducted at a retail licensed premises, a retailer's licensee may be designated by the State Commission as (i) an on premise consumption retailer, (ii) an off premise sale retailer, or (iii) a combined on premise consumption and off premise sale retailer.
    Except for a municipality with a population of more than 1,000,000 inhabitants, a home rule unit may not regulate the delivery of alcoholic liquor inconsistent with this subsection. This paragraph is a limitation under subsection (i) of Section 6 of Article VII of the Illinois Constitution on the concurrent exercise by home rule units of powers and functions exercised by the State.
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection (d), a retail licensee may sell alcoholic liquors to a special event retailer licensee for resale to the extent permitted under subsection (e).
    (e) A special event retailer's license (not-for-profit) shall permit the licensee to purchase alcoholic liquors from an Illinois licensed distributor (unless the licensee purchases less than $500 of alcoholic liquors for the special event, in which case the licensee may purchase the alcoholic liquors from a licensed retailer) and shall allow the licensee to sell and offer for sale, at retail, alcoholic liquors for use or consumption, but not for resale in any form and only at the location and on the specific dates designated for the special event in the license. An applicant for a special event retailer license must (i) furnish with the application: (A) a resale number issued under Section 2c of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act or evidence that the applicant is registered under Section 2a of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act, (B) a current, valid exemption identification number issued under Section 1g of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act, and a certification to the Commission that the purchase of alcoholic liquors will be a tax-exempt purchase, or (C) a statement that the applicant is not registered under Section 2a of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act, does not hold a resale number under Section 2c of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act, and does not hold an exemption number under Section 1g of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act, in which event the Commission shall set forth on the special event retailer's license a statement to that effect; (ii) submit with the application proof satisfactory to the State Commission that the applicant will provide dram shop liability insurance in the maximum limits; and (iii) show proof satisfactory to the State Commission that the applicant has obtained local authority approval.
    Nothing in this Act prohibits an Illinois licensed distributor from offering credit or a refund for unused, salable alcoholic liquors to a holder of a special event retailer's license or the special event retailer's licensee from accepting the credit or refund of alcoholic liquors at the conclusion of the event specified in the license.
    (f) A railroad license shall permit the licensee to import alcoholic liquors into this State from any point in the United States outside this State and to store such alcoholic liquors in this State; to make wholesale purchases of alcoholic liquors directly from manufacturers, foreign importers, distributors and importing distributors from within or outside this State; and to store such alcoholic liquors in this State; provided that the above powers may be exercised only in connection with the importation, purchase or storage of alcoholic liquors to be sold or dispensed on a club, buffet, lounge or dining car operated on an electric, gas or steam railway in this State; and provided further, that railroad licensees exercising the above powers shall be subject to all provisions of Article VIII of this Act as applied to importing distributors. A railroad license shall also permit the licensee to sell or dispense alcoholic liquors on any club, buffet, lounge or dining car operated on an electric, gas or steam railway regularly operated by a common carrier in this State, but shall not permit the sale for resale of any alcoholic liquors to any licensee within this State. A license shall be obtained for each car in which such sales are made.
    (g) A boat license shall allow the sale of alcoholic liquor in individual drinks, on any passenger boat regularly operated as a common carrier on navigable waters in this State or on any riverboat operated under the Illinois Gambling Act, which boat or riverboat maintains a public dining room or restaurant thereon.
    (h) A non-beverage user's license shall allow the licensee to purchase alcoholic liquor from a licensed manufacturer or importing distributor, without the imposition of any tax upon the business of such licensed manufacturer or importing distributor as to such alcoholic liquor to be used by such licensee solely for the non-beverage purposes set forth in subsection (a) of Section 8-1 of this Act, and such licenses shall be divided and classified and shall permit the purchase, possession and use of limited and stated quantities of alcoholic liquor as follows:
Class 1, not to exceed ........................... 500 gallons
Class 2, not to exceed ......................... 1,000 gallons
Class 3, not to exceed ......................... 5,000 gallons
Class 4, not to exceed ........................ 10,000 gallons
Class 5, not to exceed ........................ 50,000 gallons
    (i) A wine-maker's premises license shall allow a licensee that concurrently holds a first-class wine-maker's license to sell and offer for sale at retail in the premises specified in such license not more than 50,000 gallons of the first-class wine-maker's wine that is made at the first-class wine-maker's licensed premises per year for use or consumption, but not for resale in any form. A wine-maker's premises license shall allow a licensee who concurrently holds a second-class wine-maker's license to sell and offer for sale at retail in the premises specified in such license up to 100,000 gallons of the second-class wine-maker's wine that is made at the second-class wine-maker's licensed premises per year for use or consumption but not for resale in any form. A wine-maker's premises license shall allow a licensee that concurrently holds a first-class wine-maker's license or a second-class wine-maker's license to sell and offer for sale at retail at the premises specified in the wine-maker's premises license, for use or consumption but not for resale in any form, any beer, wine, and spirits purchased from a licensed distributor. Upon approval from the State Commission, a wine-maker's premises license shall allow the licensee to sell and offer for sale at (i) the wine-maker's licensed premises and (ii) at up to 2 additional locations for use and consumption and not for resale. Each location shall require additional licensing per location as specified in Section 5-3 of this Act. A wine-maker's premises licensee shall secure liquor liability insurance coverage in an amount at least equal to the maximum liability amounts set forth in subsection (a) of Section 6-21 of this Act.
    (j) An airplane license shall permit the licensee to import alcoholic liquors into this State from any point in the United States outside this State and to store such alcoholic liquors in this State; to make wholesale purchases of alcoholic liquors directly from manufacturers, foreign importers, distributors and importing distributors from within or outside this State; and to store such alcoholic liquors in this State; provided that the above powers may be exercised only in connection with the importation, purchase or storage of alcoholic liquors to be sold or dispensed on an airplane; and provided further, that airplane licensees exercising the above powers shall be subject to all provisions of Article VIII of this Act as applied to importing distributors. An airplane licensee shall also permit the sale or dispensing of alcoholic liquors on any passenger airplane regularly operated by a common carrier in this State, but shall not permit the sale for resale of any alcoholic liquors to any licensee within this State. A single airplane license shall be required of an airline company if liquor service is provided on board aircraft in this State. The annual fee for such license shall be as determined in Section 5-3.
    (k) A foreign importer's license shall permit such licensee to purchase alcoholic liquor from Illinois licensed non-resident dealers only, and to import alcoholic liquor other than in bulk from any point outside the United States and to sell such alcoholic liquor to Illinois licensed importing distributors and to no one else in Illinois; provided that (i) the foreign importer registers with the State Commission every brand of alcoholic liquor that it proposes to sell to Illinois licensees during the license period, (ii) the foreign importer complies with all of the provisions of Section 6-9 of this Act with respect to registration of such Illinois licensees as may be granted the right to sell such brands at wholesale, and (iii) the foreign importer complies with the provisions of Sections 6-5 and 6-6 of this Act to the same extent that these provisions apply to manufacturers.
    (l) (i) A broker's license shall be required of all persons who solicit orders for, offer to sell or offer to supply alcoholic liquor to retailers in the State of Illinois, or who offer to retailers to ship or cause to be shipped or to make contact with distillers, craft distillers, rectifiers, brewers or manufacturers or any other party within or without the State of Illinois in order that alcoholic liquors be shipped to a distributor, importing distributor or foreign importer, whether such solicitation or offer is consummated within or without the State of Illinois.
    No holder of a retailer's license issued by the Illinois Liquor Control Commission shall purchase or receive any alcoholic liquor, the order for which was solicited or offered for sale to such retailer by a broker unless the broker is the holder of a valid broker's license.
    The broker shall, upon the acceptance by a retailer of the broker's solicitation of an order or offer to sell or supply or deliver or have delivered alcoholic liquors, promptly forward to the Illinois Liquor Control Commission a notification of said transaction in such form as the Commission may by regulations prescribe.
    (ii) A broker's license shall be required of a person within this State, other than a retail licensee, who, for a fee or commission, promotes, solicits, or accepts orders for alcoholic liquor, for use or consumption and not for resale, to be shipped from this State and delivered to residents outside of this State by an express company, common carrier, or contract carrier. This Section does not apply to any person who promotes, solicits, or accepts orders for wine as specifically authorized in Section 6-29 of this Act.
    A broker's license under this subsection (l) shall not entitle the holder to buy or sell any alcoholic liquors for his own account or to take or deliver title to such alcoholic liquors.
    This subsection (l) shall not apply to distributors, employees of distributors, or employees of a manufacturer who has registered the trademark, brand or name of the alcoholic liquor pursuant to Section 6-9 of this Act, and who regularly sells such alcoholic liquor in the State of Illinois only to its registrants thereunder.
    Any agent, representative, or person subject to registration pursuant to subsection (a-1) of this Section shall not be eligible to receive a broker's license.
    (m) A non-resident dealer's license shall permit such licensee to ship into and warehouse alcoholic liquor into this State from any point outside of this State, and to sell such alcoholic liquor to Illinois licensed foreign importers and importing distributors and to no one else in this State; provided that (i) said non-resident dealer shall register with the Illinois Liquor Control Commission each and every brand of alcoholic liquor which it proposes to sell to Illinois licensees during the license period, (ii) it shall comply with all of the provisions of Section 6-9 hereof with respect to registration of such Illinois licensees as may be granted the right to sell such brands at wholesale by duly filing such registration statement, thereby authorizing the non-resident dealer to proceed to sell such brands at wholesale, and (iii) the non-resident dealer shall comply with the provisions of Sections 6-5 and 6-6 of this Act to the same extent that these provisions apply to manufacturers. No person licensed as a non-resident dealer shall be granted a distributor's or importing distributor's license.
    (n) A brew pub license shall allow the licensee to only (i) manufacture up to 155,000 gallons of beer per year only on the premises specified in the license, (ii) make sales of the beer manufactured on the premises or, with the approval of the Commission, beer manufactured on another brew pub licensed premises that is wholly owned and operated by the same licensee to importing distributors, distributors, and to non-licensees for use and consumption, (iii) store the beer upon the premises, (iv) sell and offer for sale at retail from the licensed premises for off-premises consumption no more than 155,000 gallons per year so long as such sales are only made in-person, (v) sell and offer for sale at retail for use and consumption on the premises specified in the license any form of alcoholic liquor purchased from a licensed distributor or importing distributor, (vi) with the prior approval of the Commission, annually transfer no more than 155,000 gallons of beer manufactured on the premises to a licensed brew pub wholly owned and operated by the same licensee, and (vii) notwithstanding item (i) of this subsection, brew pubs wholly owned and operated by the same licensee may combine each location's production limit of 155,000 gallons of beer per year and allocate the aggregate total between the wholly owned, operated, and licensed locations.
    A brew pub licensee shall not under any circumstance sell or offer for sale beer manufactured by the brew pub licensee to retail licensees.
    A person who holds a class 2 brewer license may simultaneously hold a brew pub license if the class 2 brewer (i) does not, under any circumstance, sell or offer for sale beer manufactured by the class 2 brewer to retail licensees; (ii) does not hold more than 3 brew pub licenses in this State; (iii) does not manufacture more than a combined 3,720,000 gallons of beer per year, including the beer manufactured at the brew pub; and (iv) is not a member of or affiliated with, directly or indirectly, a manufacturer that produces more than 3,720,000 gallons of beer per year or any other alcoholic liquor.
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, a licensed brewer, class 2 brewer, or non-resident dealer who before July 1, 2015 manufactured less than 3,720,000 gallons of beer per year and held a brew pub license on or before July 1, 2015 may (i) continue to qualify for and hold that brew pub license for the licensed premises and (ii) manufacture more than 3,720,000 gallons of beer per year and continue to qualify for and hold that brew pub license if that brewer, class 2 brewer, or non-resident dealer does not simultaneously hold a class 1 brewer license and is not a member of or affiliated with, directly or indirectly, a manufacturer that produces more than 3,720,000 gallons of beer per year or that produces any other alcoholic liquor.
    (o) A caterer retailer license shall allow the holder to serve alcoholic liquors as an incidental part of a food service that serves prepared meals which excludes the serving of snacks as the primary meal, either on or off-site whether licensed or unlicensed. A caterer retailer license shall allow the holder, a distributor, or an importing distributor to transfer any inventory to and from the holder's retail premises and shall allow the holder to purchase alcoholic liquor from a distributor or importing distributor to be delivered directly to an off-site event.
    Nothing in this Act prohibits a distributor or importing distributor from offering credit or a refund for unused, salable beer to a holder of a caterer retailer license or a caterer retailer licensee from accepting a credit or refund for unused, salable beer, in the event an act of God is the sole reason an off-site event is cancelled and if: (i) the holder of a caterer retailer license has not transferred alcoholic liquor from its caterer retailer premises to an off-site location; (ii) the distributor or importing distributor offers the credit or refund for the unused, salable beer that it delivered to the off-site premises and not for any unused, salable beer that the distributor or importing distributor delivered to the caterer retailer's premises; and (iii) the unused, salable beer would likely spoil if transferred to the caterer retailer's premises. A caterer retailer license shall allow the holder to transfer any inventory from any off-site location to its caterer retailer premises at the conclusion of an off-site event or engage a distributor or importing distributor to transfer any inventory from any off-site location to its caterer retailer premises at the conclusion of an off-site event, provided that the distributor or importing distributor issues bona fide charges to the caterer retailer licensee for fuel, labor, and delivery and the distributor or importing distributor collects payment from the caterer retailer licensee prior to the distributor or importing distributor transferring inventory to the caterer retailer premises.
    For purposes of this subsection (o), an "act of God" means an unforeseeable event, such as a rain or snow storm, hail, a flood, or a similar event, that is the sole cause of the cancellation of an off-site, outdoor event.
    (p) An auction liquor license shall allow the licensee to sell and offer for sale at auction wine and spirits for use or consumption, or for resale by an Illinois liquor licensee in accordance with provisions of this Act. An auction liquor license will be issued to a person and it will permit the auction liquor licensee to hold the auction anywhere in the State. An auction liquor license must be obtained for each auction at least 14 days in advance of the auction date.
    (q) A special use permit license shall allow an Illinois licensed retailer to transfer a portion of its alcoholic liquor inventory from its retail licensed premises to the premises specified in the license hereby created; to purchase alcoholic liquor from a distributor or importing distributor to be delivered directly to the location specified in the license hereby created; and to sell or offer for sale at retail, only in the premises specified in the license hereby created, the transferred or delivered alcoholic liquor for use or consumption, but not for resale in any form. A special use permit license may be granted for the following time periods: one day or less; 2 or more days to a maximum of 15 days per location in any 12-month period. An applicant for the special use permit license must also submit with the application proof satisfactory to the State Commission that the applicant will provide dram shop liability insurance to the maximum limits and have local authority approval.
    A special use permit license shall allow the holder to transfer any inventory from the holder's special use premises to its retail premises at the conclusion of the special use event or engage a distributor or importing distributor to transfer any inventory from the holder's special use premises to its retail premises at the conclusion of an off-site event, provided that the distributor or importing distributor issues bona fide charges to the special use permit licensee for fuel, labor, and delivery and the distributor or importing distributor collects payment from the retail licensee prior to the distributor or importing distributor transferring inventory to the retail premises.
    Nothing in this Act prohibits a distributor or importing distributor from offering credit or a refund for unused, salable beer to a special use permit licensee or a special use permit licensee from accepting a credit or refund for unused, salable beer at the conclusion of the event specified in the license if: (i) the holder of the special use permit license has not transferred alcoholic liquor from its retail licensed premises to the premises specified in the special use permit license; (ii) the distributor or importing distributor offers the credit or refund for the unused, salable beer that it delivered to the premises specified in the special use permit license and not for any unused, salable beer that the distributor or importing distributor delivered to the retailer's premises; and (iii) the unused, salable beer would likely spoil if transferred to the retailer premises.
    (r) A winery shipper's license shall allow a person with a first-class or second-class wine manufacturer's license, a first-class or second-class wine-maker's license, or a limited wine manufacturer's license or who is licensed to make wine under the laws of another state to ship wine made by that licensee directly to a resident of this State who is 21 years of age or older for that resident's personal use and not for resale. Prior to receiving a winery shipper's license, an applicant for the license must provide the Commission with a true copy of its current license in any state in which it is licensed as a manufacturer of wine. An applicant for a winery shipper's license must also complete an application form that provides any other information the Commission deems necessary. The application form shall include all addresses from which the applicant for a winery shipper's license intends to ship wine, including the name and address of any third party, except for a common carrier, authorized to ship wine on behalf of the manufacturer. The application form shall include an acknowledgement consenting to the jurisdiction of the Commission, the Illinois Department of Revenue, and the courts of this State concerning the enforcement of this Act and any related laws, rules, and regulations, including authorizing the Department of Revenue and the Commission to conduct audits for the purpose of ensuring compliance with Public Act 95-634, and an acknowledgement that the wine manufacturer is in compliance with Section 6-2 of this Act. Any third party, except for a common carrier, authorized to ship wine on behalf of a first-class or second-class wine manufacturer's licensee, a first-class or second-class wine-maker's licensee, a limited wine manufacturer's licensee, or a person who is licensed to make wine under the laws of another state shall also be disclosed by the winery shipper's licensee, and a copy of the written appointment of the third-party wine provider, except for a common carrier, to the wine manufacturer shall be filed with the State Commission as a supplement to the winery shipper's license application or any renewal thereof. The winery shipper's license holder shall affirm under penalty of perjury, as part of the winery shipper's license application or renewal, that he or she only ships wine, either directly or indirectly through a third-party provider, from the licensee's own production.
    Except for a common carrier, a third-party provider shipping wine on behalf of a winery shipper's license holder is the agent of the winery shipper's license holder and, as such, a winery shipper's license holder is responsible for the acts and omissions of the third-party provider acting on behalf of the license holder. A third-party provider, except for a common carrier, that engages in shipping wine into Illinois on behalf of a winery shipper's license holder shall consent to the jurisdiction of the State Commission and the State. Any third-party, except for a common carrier, holding such an appointment shall, by February 1 of each calendar year and upon request by the State Commission or the Department of Revenue, file with the State Commission a statement detailing each shipment made to an Illinois resident. The statement shall include the name and address of the third-party provider filing the statement, the time period covered by the statement, and the following information:
        (1) the name, address, and license number of the
    	
winery shipper on whose behalf the shipment was made;
        (2) the quantity of the products delivered; and
        (3) the date and address of the shipment.
If the Department of Revenue or the State Commission requests a statement under this paragraph, the third-party provider must provide that statement no later than 30 days after the request is made. Any books, records, supporting papers, and documents containing information and data relating to a statement under this paragraph shall be kept and preserved for a period of 3 years, unless their destruction sooner is authorized, in writing, by the Director of Revenue, and shall be open and available to inspection by the Director of Revenue or the State Commission or any duly authorized officer, agent, or employee of the State Commission or the Department of Revenue, at all times during business hours of the day. Any person who violates any provision of this paragraph or any rule of the State Commission for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this paragraph is guilty of a Class C misdemeanor. In case of a continuing violation, each day's continuance thereof shall be a separate and distinct offense.
    The State Commission shall adopt rules as soon as practicable to implement the requirements of Public Act 99-904 and shall adopt rules prohibiting any such third-party appointment of a third-party provider, except for a common carrier, that has been deemed by the State Commission to have violated the provisions of this Act with regard to any winery shipper licensee.
    A winery shipper licensee must pay to the Department of Revenue the State liquor gallonage tax under Section 8-1 for all wine that is sold by the licensee and shipped to a person in this State. For the purposes of Section 8-1, a winery shipper licensee shall be taxed in the same manner as a manufacturer of wine. A licensee who is not otherwise required to register under the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act must register under the Use Tax Act to collect and remit use tax to the Department of Revenue for all gallons of wine that are sold by the licensee and shipped to persons in this State. If a licensee fails to remit the tax imposed under this Act in accordance with the provisions of Article VIII of this Act, the winery shipper's license shall be revoked in accordance with the provisions of Article VII of this Act. If a licensee fails to properly register and remit tax under the Use Tax Act or the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act for all wine that is sold by the winery shipper and shipped to persons in this State, the winery shipper's license shall be revoked in accordance with the provisions of Article VII of this Act.
    A winery shipper licensee must collect, maintain, and submit to the Commission on a semi-annual basis the total number of cases per resident of wine shipped to residents of this State. A winery shipper licensed under this subsection (r) must comply with the requirements of Section 6-29 of this Act.
    Pursuant to paragraph (5.1) or (5.3) of subsection (a) of Section 3-12, the State Commission may receive, respond to, and investigate any complaint and impose any of the remedies specified in paragraph (1) of subsection (a) of Section 3-12.
    As used in this subsection, "third-party provider" means any entity that provides fulfillment house services, including warehousing, packaging, distribution, order processing, or shipment of wine, but not the sale of wine, on behalf of a licensed winery shipper.
    (s) A craft distiller tasting permit license shall allow an Illinois licensed class 1 craft distiller or class 2 craft distiller to transfer a portion of its alcoholic liquor inventory from its class 1 craft distiller or class 2 craft distiller licensed premises to the premises specified in the license hereby created and to conduct a sampling, only in the premises specified in the license hereby created, of the transferred alcoholic liquor in accordance with subsection (c) of Section 6-31 of this Act. The transferred alcoholic liquor may not be sold or resold in any form. An applicant for the craft distiller tasting permit license must also submit with the application proof satisfactory to the State Commission that the applicant will provide dram shop liability insurance to the maximum limits and have local authority approval.
    (t) A brewer warehouse permit may be issued to the holder of a class 1 brewer license or a class 2 brewer license. If the holder of the permit is a class 1 brewer licensee, the brewer warehouse permit shall allow the holder to store or warehouse up to 930,000 gallons of tax-determined beer manufactured by the holder of the permit at the premises specified on the permit. If the holder of the permit is a class 2 brewer licensee, the brewer warehouse permit shall allow the holder to store or warehouse up to 3,720,000 gallons of tax-determined beer manufactured by the holder of the permit at the premises specified on the permit. Sales to non-licensees are prohibited at the premises specified in the brewer warehouse permit.
    (u) A distilling pub license shall allow the licensee to only (i) manufacture up to 5,000 gallons of spirits per year only on the premises specified in the license, (ii) make sales of the spirits manufactured on the premises or, with the approval of the State Commission, spirits manufactured on another distilling pub licensed premises that is wholly owned and operated by the same licensee to importing distributors and distributors and to non-licensees for use and consumption, (iii) store the spirits upon the premises, (iv) sell and offer for sale at retail from the licensed premises for off-premises consumption no more than 5,000 gallons per year so long as such sales are only made in-person, (v) sell and offer for sale at retail for use and consumption on the premises specified in the license any form of alcoholic liquor purchased from a licensed distributor or importing distributor, and (vi) with the prior approval of the State Commission, annually transfer no more than 5,000 gallons of spirits manufactured on the premises to a licensed distilling pub wholly owned and operated by the same licensee.
    A distilling pub licensee shall not under any circumstance sell or offer for sale spirits manufactured by the distilling pub licensee to retail licensees.
    A person who holds a class 2 craft distiller license may simultaneously hold a distilling pub license if the class 2 craft distiller (i) does not, under any circumstance, sell or offer for sale spirits manufactured by the class 2 craft distiller to retail licensees; (ii) does not hold more than 3 distilling pub licenses in this State; (iii) does not manufacture more than a combined 100,000 gallons of spirits per year, including the spirits manufactured at the distilling pub; and (iv) is not a member of or affiliated with, directly or indirectly, a manufacturer that produces more than 100,000 gallons of spirits per year or any other alcoholic liquor.
    (v) A craft distiller warehouse permit may be issued to the holder of a class 1 craft distiller or class 2 craft distiller license. The craft distiller warehouse permit shall allow the holder to store or warehouse up to 500,000 gallons of spirits manufactured by the holder of the permit at the premises specified on the permit. Sales to non-licensees are prohibited at the premises specified in the craft distiller warehouse permit.
(Source: P.A. 100-17, eff. 6-30-17; 100-201, eff. 8-18-17; 100-816, eff. 8-13-18; 100-885, eff. 8-14-18; 100-1050, eff. 8-23-18; 101-16, eff. 6-14-19; 101-31, eff. 6-28-19; 101-81, eff. 7-12-19; 101-482, eff. 8-23-19; 101-517, eff. 8-23-19; 101-615, eff. 12-20-19; 101-668, eff. 1-1-22.)

    (235 ILCS 5/5-2) (from Ch. 43, par. 117)
    Sec. 5-2. All licenses, except a non-beverage user's, a special use permit, and a special event retailer's license, issued by the State Commission, shall be valid from the date of issuance through the last day of the eleventh month that begins after the month in which the license is issued unless sooner revoked or suspended as provided in this Act. A non-beverage user's license shall expire only when the quantity of alcoholic liquor which may be purchased under it has been exhausted. A special use permit license and a special event retailer's license (not-for-profit) shall be issued for a specific time period, not to exceed 15 days per licensee per location in any 12 month period. Licenses shall state thereon the class to which they belong, the names of the licensees and the addresses and description of the premises for which they are granted, or in the case of caterer retailers, auctions, railroads, airplanes and boats, a designation thereof by number or name; and shall state the dates of their issuance and expiration.
(Source: P.A. 93-627, eff. 6-1-04.)

    (235 ILCS 5/5-3) (from Ch. 43, par. 118)
    Sec. 5-3. License fees. Except as otherwise provided herein, at the time application is made to the State Commission for a license of any class, the applicant shall pay to the State Commission the fee hereinafter provided for the kind of license applied for.
    The fee for licenses issued by the State Commission shall be as follows:

Online	Initial

renewal	license

or

non-online

renewal
    For a manufacturer's license:		
    Class 1. Distiller ...........	$4,000	$5,000
    Class 2. Rectifier ...........	4,000	5,000
    Class 3. Brewer .............	1,200	1,500
    Class 4. First-class Wine		
        Manufacturer ............	750	900
    Class 5. Second-class		
        Wine Manufacturer .........	1,500	1,750
    Class 6. First-class wine-maker ...	750	900
    Class 7. Second-class wine-maker ..	1,500	1,750
    Class 8. Limited Wine		
        Manufacturer.............	250	350
    Class 9. Craft Distiller........
$2,000	$2,500
    Class 10. Class 1 Craft Distiller..	50	75
    Class 11. Class 2 Craft Distiller..	75	100
    Class 12. Class 1 Brewer........	50	75
    Class 13. Class 2 Brewer........	75	100
    For a Brew Pub License.........	1,200	1,500
    For a Distilling Pub License.....	1,200	1,500
    For a caterer retailer's license...	350	500
    For a foreign importer's license ..	25	25
    For an importing distributor's		
        license................	25	25
    For a distributor's license		
        (11,250,000 gallons		
        or over)................	1,450	2,200
    For a distributor's license		
        (over 4,500,000 gallons, but		
        under 11,250,000 gallons).....	950	1,450
    For a distributor's license		
        (4,500,000 gallons or under)...	300	450
    For a non-resident dealer's license		
        (500,000 gallons or over) ....	1,200	1,500
    For a non-resident dealer's license		
        (under 500,000 gallons) .....	250	350
    For a wine-maker's premises		
        license ................	250	500
    For a winery shipper's license		
        (under 250,000 gallons)......	200	350
    For a winery shipper's license		
        (250,000 or over, but		
        under 500,000 gallons)......	750	1,000
    For a winery shipper's license		
        (500,000 gallons or over).....	1,200	1,500
    For a wine-maker's premises		
        license, second location .....	500	1,000
    For a wine-maker's premises		
        license, third location .....	500	1,000
    For a retailer's license .......	600	750
    For a special event retailer's		
        license, (not-for-profit) ....	25	25
    For a special use permit license,		
        one day only ............	100	150
        2 days or more ...........	150	250
    For a railroad license ........	100	150
    For a boat license ...........	500	1,000
    For an airplane license, times the		
        licensee's maximum number of		
        aircraft in flight, serving		
        liquor over the State at any		
        given time, which either		
        originate, terminate, or make		
        an intermediate stop in		
        the State...............	100	150
    For a non-beverage user's license:		
        Class 1 ................	24	24
        Class 2 ................	60	60
        Class 3 ................	120	120
        Class 4 ................	240	240
        Class 5 ................	600	600
    For a broker's license ........	750	1,000
    For an auction liquor license ....	100	150
    For a homebrewer special		
        event permit.............	25	25
    For a craft distiller		
        tasting permit............	25	25
    For a BASSET trainer license.....	300	350
    For a tasting representative		
        license................	200	300
    For a brewer warehouse permit.....	25	25
    For a craft distiller		
        warehouse permit..........	25	25
    Fees collected under this Section shall be paid into the Dram Shop Fund. On and after July 1, 2003 and until June 30, 2016, of the funds received for a retailer's license, in addition to the first $175, an additional $75 shall be paid into the Dram Shop Fund, and $250 shall be paid into the General Revenue Fund. On and after June 30, 2016, one-half of the funds received for a retailer's license shall be paid into the Dram Shop Fund and one-half of the funds received for a retailer's license shall be paid into the General Revenue Fund. Beginning June 30, 1990 and on June 30 of each subsequent year through June 29, 2003, any balance over $5,000,000 remaining in the Dram Shop Fund shall be credited to State liquor licensees and applied against their fees for State liquor licenses for the following year. The amount credited to each licensee shall be a proportion of the balance in the Dram Fund that is the same as the proportion of the license fee paid by the licensee under this Section for the period in which the balance was accumulated to the aggregate fees paid by all licensees during that period.
    No fee shall be paid for licenses issued by the State Commission to the following non-beverage users:
        (a) Hospitals, sanitariums, or clinics when their use
    	
of alcoholic liquor is exclusively medicinal, mechanical or scientific.
        (b) Universities, colleges of learning or schools
    	
when their use of alcoholic liquor is exclusively medicinal, mechanical or scientific.
        (c) Laboratories when their use is exclusively for
    	
the purpose of scientific research.
(Source: P.A. 100-201, eff. 8-18-17; 100-816, eff. 8-13-18; 101-482, eff. 8-23-19; 101-615, eff. 12-20-19.)

    (235 ILCS 5/5-4) (from Ch. 43, par. 118.1)
    Sec. 5-4. Duplicate license; fee. In the event of the loss or destruction of a license issued pursuant to this Article the State Commission, upon written application stating such fact and accompanied by the required fee, shall issue a duplicate of such license. A duplicate license must also be obtained if a licensee is transferring a license pursuant to Section 7-14. The fee for the issuance of a duplicate license shall be $12 if the original license fee was $200 or less, and $24 if the original license fee was more than $200.
(Source: P.A. 88-91; 89-250, eff. 1-1-96.)

    (235 ILCS 5/5-5)
    Sec. 5-5. Late filing fees. In the event that a liquor license holder fails to submit a license renewal application to the Commission before or on the expiration date of the current license, the licensee will be assessed a late filing fee of $25. Late applications and instruments of payment will be returned to the licensee. Late filing fees will be in addition to any fines or penalties ordered for operating without a valid license.
    Late filing fees shall not apply to a liquor license holder whose business or business operations have been suspended in any capacity due to any executive order issued on or after March 16, 2020 or any subsequent rule established by the Department of Public Health or any other agency of the State as a result of COVID-19. The late filing fee waiver shall remain in effect for 6 months after whichever of the following dates occurs the latest:
        (1) the day on which the region in which the liquor
    	
licensee is located enters Phase 4 of the Governor's Restore Illinois Plan as issued on May 5, 2020;
        (2) the day after the expiration of the latest
    	
executive order that limits or interrupts the business or business operations as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic; or
        (3) the day after the expiration of any rules
    	
established by the Department of Public Health or any other agency of the State that limit or interrupt the business or business operations as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
(Source: P.A. 101-631, eff. 6-2-20.)

    (235 ILCS 5/5-6)
    Sec. 5-6. FDA grant funds. Grant funds received from the Food and Drug Administration of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services for conducting unannounced investigations of Illinois tobacco vendors shall be deposited into the Dram Shop Fund until June 30, 2018.
(Source: P.A. 100-1012, eff. 8-21-18.)

    (235 ILCS 5/5-7)
    Sec. 5-7. Temporary liquor license fee deferral. A liquor license holder whose business or business operations have been suspended in any capacity due to any executive order issued on or after March 16, 2020 or any subsequent rule established by the Department of Public Health or any other agency of the State as a result of COVID-19 shall be allowed to defer liquor license fees under this Section. The liquor license holder shall be allowed to defer the payment of liquor license fees for 6 months after whichever of the following dates occurs the latest:
        (1) the day on which the region in which the liquor
    	
licensee is located enters Phase 4 of the Governor's Restore Illinois Plan as issued on May 5, 2020;
        (2) the day after the expiration of the latest
    	
executive order that limits or interrupts the business or business operations as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic; or
        (3) the day after the expiration of any rules
    	
established by the Department of Public Health or any other agency of the State that limit or interrupt the business or business operations as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
(Source: P.A. 101-631, eff. 6-2-20.)


 
    (235 ILCS 5/Art. VI heading)
ARTICLE VI. GENERAL PROVISIONS

    (235 ILCS 5/6-1) (from Ch. 43, par. 119)
    Sec. 6-1. Privilege granted by license; nature as to property; transferability; tax delinquencies. A license shall be purely a personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year after issuance, except a non-beverage user's license, unless sooner revoked as in this Act provided, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. Such license shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon the death of the licensee, provided that executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee, and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the sale or manufacture of alcoholic liquor under order of the appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of such decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of such license but not longer than six months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee. Except in the case of a non-beverage user's license, a refund shall be made of that portion of the license fees paid for any period in which the licensee shall be prevented from operating under such license in accordance with the provisions of this paragraph.
    Any licensee may renew his license at the expiration thereof, provided he is then qualified to receive a license and the premises for which such renewal license is sought are suitable for such purpose; and provided further that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the city council or village president and board of trustees or county board, as the case may be, from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within its jurisdiction. No retailer's license shall be renewed if the Department of Revenue has reported to the Illinois Liquor Control Commission that such retailer is delinquent in filing any required tax returns or paying any amounts owed to the State of Illinois until the applicant is issued a certificate by the Department of Revenue stating that all delinquent returns or amounts owed have been paid by guaranteed remittance or the payment agreement to pay all amounts owed has been accepted by the Department. No retailer's license issued by a local liquor control commissioner shall be renewed unless the applicant provides documentation that any tax owed to (i) the municipality in which the applicant is located (in the case of a license issued by the mayor or president of the board of trustees of a city, village or incorporated town acting as local liquor control commissioner) or (ii) the county in which the applicant is located (in the case of a license issued by the president or chairman of a county board acting as local liquor control commissioner) by the applicant has been satisfied by payment in the form of a cashier's check, certified check, money order, or cash.
    For a liquor license holder whose business or business operations have been suspended in any capacity due to any executive order issued on or after March 16, 2020 or any subsequent rule established by the Department of Public Health or any other agency of the State as a result of COVID-19, renewal of the license shall be automatically approved and the license shall be extended without limitation for 120 days after whichever of the following dates occurs the latest:
        (1) the day on which the region in which the liquor
    	
licensee is located enters Phase 4 of the Governor's Restore Illinois Plan as issued on May 5, 2020;
        (2) the day after the expiration of the latest
    	
executive order that limits or interrupts the business or business operations as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic; or
        (3) the day after the expiration of any rules
    	
established by the Department of Public Health or any other agency of the State that limit or interrupt the business or business operations as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The renewal shall be based upon the most recent liquor license application or application for renewal that was approved and received by the State Commission prior to the limitations or interruptions implemented by the Executive Order on March 16, 2020.
    A negotiable instrument received as payment for a license fee, transfer fee, late fee, offer in compromise, pre-disciplinary conference settlement, or fine imposed by order that is dishonored on presentation shall not be considered payment and shall be cause for disciplinary action.
(Source: P.A. 101-631, eff. 6-2-20.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-1.5)
    Sec. 6-1.5. Three-tier regulatory system; public policy and rule of statutory construction. The General Assembly hereby restates that it is the policy of this State that the primary purpose of this Act is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of this State through the sound and careful control and regulation of the manufacture, distribution, and sale of alcoholic liquor through a 3-tier regulatory system. To ensure and maintain a 3-tier regulatory system, the General Assembly finds that it is the obligation and duty of the State Commission to construe the provisions of this Act in a manner that conforms to State policy and this Act's primary purpose as articulated in this Section and to exercise its statutory authority in a manner consistent with that purpose whether or not the provisions of this Act are unambiguous or capable of one or more reasonable constructions.
(Source: P.A. 98-21, eff. 6-13-13.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-2) (from Ch. 43, par. 120)
    Sec. 6-2. Issuance of licenses to certain persons prohibited.
    (a) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this Section and in paragraph (1) of subsection (a) of Section 3-12, no license of any kind issued by the State Commission or any local commission shall be issued to:
        (1) A person who is not a resident of any city,
    	
village or county in which the premises covered by the license are located; except in case of railroad or boat licenses.
        (2) A person who is not of good character and
    	
reputation in the community in which he resides.
        (3) (Blank).
        (4) A person who has been convicted of a felony under
    	
any Federal or State law, unless the Commission determines that such person will not be impaired by the conviction in engaging in the licensed practice after considering matters set forth in such person's application in accordance with Section 6-2.5 of this Act and the Commission's investigation.
        (5) A person who has been convicted of keeping a
    	
place of prostitution or keeping a place of juvenile prostitution, promoting prostitution that involves keeping a place of prostitution, or promoting juvenile prostitution that involves keeping a place of juvenile prostitution.
        (6) A person who has been convicted of pandering.
        (7) A person whose license issued under this Act has
    	
been revoked for cause.
        (8) A person who at the time of application for
    	
renewal of any license issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first application.
        (9) A copartnership, if any general partnership
    	
thereof, or any limited partnership thereof, owning more than 5% of the aggregate limited partner interest in such copartnership would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than residence within the political subdivision, unless residency is required by local ordinance.
        (10) A corporation or limited liability company, if
    	
any member, officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than 5% of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than residence within the political subdivision.
        (10a) A corporation or limited liability company
    	
unless it is incorporated or organized in Illinois, or unless it is a foreign corporation or foreign limited liability company which is qualified under the Business Corporation Act of 1983 or the Limited Liability Company Act to transact business in Illinois. The Commission shall permit and accept from an applicant for a license under this Act proof prepared from the Secretary of State's website that the corporation or limited liability company is in good standing and is qualified under the Business Corporation Act of 1983 or the Limited Liability Company Act to transact business in Illinois.
        (11) A person whose place of business is conducted by
    	
a manager or agent unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required by the licensee.
        (12) A person who has been convicted of a violation
    	
of any Federal or State law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, subsequent to the passage of this Act or has forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation, unless the Commission determines, in accordance with Section 6-2.5 of this Act, that the person will not be impaired by the conviction in engaging in the licensed practice.
        (13) A person who does not beneficially own the
    	
premises for which a license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is to be issued.
        (14) Any law enforcing public official, including
    	
members of local liquor control commissions, any mayor, alderperson, or member of the city council or commission, any president of the village board of trustees, any member of a village board of trustees, or any president or member of a county board; and no such official shall have a direct interest in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor, except that a license may be granted to such official in relation to premises that are not located within the territory subject to the jurisdiction of that official if the issuance of such license is approved by the State Liquor Control Commission and except that a license may be granted, in a city or village with a population of 55,000 or less, to any alderperson, member of a city council, or member of a village board of trustees in relation to premises that are located within the territory subject to the jurisdiction of that official if (i) the sale of alcoholic liquor pursuant to the license is incidental to the selling of food, (ii) the issuance of the license is approved by the State Commission, (iii) the issuance of the license is in accordance with all applicable local ordinances in effect where the premises are located, and (iv) the official granted a license does not vote on alcoholic liquor issues pending before the board or council to which the license holder is elected. Notwithstanding any provision of this paragraph (14) to the contrary, an alderperson or member of a city council or commission, a member of a village board of trustees other than the president of the village board of trustees, or a member of a county board other than the president of a county board may have a direct interest in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor as long as he or she is not a law enforcing public official, a mayor, a village board president, or president of a county board. To prevent any conflict of interest, the elected official with the direct interest in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor shall not participate in any meetings, hearings, or decisions on matters impacting the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor. Furthermore, the mayor of a city with a population of 55,000 or less or the president of a village with a population of 55,000 or less may have an interest in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor as long as the council or board over which he or she presides has made a local liquor control commissioner appointment that complies with the requirements of Section 4-2 of this Act.
        (15) A person who is not a beneficial owner of the
    	
business to be operated by the licensee.
        (16) A person who has been convicted of a gambling
    	
offense as proscribed by any of subsections (a) (3) through (a) (11) of Section 28-1 of, or as proscribed by Section 28-1.1 or 28-3 of, the Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012, or as proscribed by a statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory provisions.
        (17) A person or entity to whom a federal wagering
    	
stamp has been issued by the federal government, unless the person or entity is eligible to be issued a license under the Raffles and Poker Runs Act or the Illinois Pull Tabs and Jar Games Act.
        (18) A person who intends to sell alcoholic liquors
    	
for use or consumption on his or her licensed retail premises who does not have liquor liability insurance coverage for that premises in an amount that is at least equal to the maximum liability amounts set out in subsection (a) of Section 6-21.
        (19) A person who is licensed by any licensing
    	
authority as a manufacturer of beer, or any partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or trust or any subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or any other form of business enterprise licensed as a manufacturer of beer, having any legal, equitable, or beneficial interest, directly or indirectly, in a person licensed in this State as a distributor or importing distributor. For purposes of this paragraph (19), a person who is licensed by any licensing authority as a "manufacturer of beer" shall also mean a brewer and a non-resident dealer who is also a manufacturer of beer, including a partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or trust or any subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or any other form of business enterprise licensed as a manufacturer of beer.
        (20) A person who is licensed in this State as a
    	
distributor or importing distributor, or any partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or trust or any subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or any other form of business enterprise licensed in this State as a distributor or importing distributor having any legal, equitable, or beneficial interest, directly or indirectly, in a person licensed as a manufacturer of beer by any licensing authority, or any partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or trust or any subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or any other form of business enterprise, except for a person who owns, on or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 98th General Assembly, no more than 5% of the outstanding shares of a manufacturer of beer whose shares are publicly traded on an exchange within the meaning of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. For the purposes of this paragraph (20), a person who is licensed by any licensing authority as a "manufacturer of beer" shall also mean a brewer and a non-resident dealer who is also a manufacturer of beer, including a partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or trust or any subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or any other form of business enterprise licensed as a manufacturer of beer.
    (b) A criminal conviction of a corporation is not grounds for the denial, suspension, or revocation of a license applied for or held by the corporation if the criminal conviction was not the result of a violation of any federal or State law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, the offense that led to the conviction did not result in any financial gain to the corporation and the corporation has terminated its relationship with each director, officer, employee, or controlling shareholder whose actions directly contributed to the conviction of the corporation. The Commission shall determine if all provisions of this subsection (b) have been met before any action on the corporation's license is initiated.
(Source: P.A. 101-541, eff. 8-23-19; 102-15, eff. 6-17-21.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-2.5)
    Sec. 6-2.5. Applicant convictions.
    (a) The Commission shall not require applicants to report the following information and shall not consider the following criminal history records in connection with an application for a license under this Act:
        (1) Juvenile adjudications of delinquent minors as
    	
defined in Section 5-105 of the Juvenile Court Act of 1987, subject to the restrictions set forth in Section 5-130 of the Juvenile Court Act of 1987.
        (2) Law enforcement records, court records, and
    	
conviction records of an individual who was 17 years old at the time of the offense and before January 1, 2014, unless the nature of the offense required the individual to be tried as an adult.
        (3) Records of arrest not followed by a conviction.
        (4) Convictions overturned by a higher court.
        (5) Convictions or arrests that have been sealed or
    	
expunged.
    (b) The Commission, upon a finding that an applicant for a license was convicted of a felony or a violation of any federal or State law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, shall consider any evidence of rehabilitation and mitigating factors contained in the applicant's record, including any of the following factors and evidence, to determine if the conviction will impair the ability of the applicant to engage in the position for which a license is sought:
        (1) the lack of direct relation of the offense for
    	
which the applicant was previously convicted to the duties, functions, and responsibilities of the position for which a license is sought;
        (2) whether 5 years since a felony conviction or 3
    	
years since release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is later, have passed without a subsequent conviction;
        (3) if the applicant was previously licensed or
    	
employed in this State or other states or jurisdictions, then the lack of prior misconduct arising from or related to the licensed position or position of employment;
        (4) the age of the person at the time of the criminal
    	
offense;
        (5) successful completion of sentence and, for
    	
applicants serving a term of parole or probation, a progress report provided by the applicant's probation or parole officer that documents the applicant's compliance with conditions of supervision;
        (6) evidence of the applicant's present fitness and
    	
professional character;
        (7) evidence of rehabilitation or rehabilitative
    	
effort during or after incarceration, or during or after a term of supervision, including, but not limited to, a certificate of good conduct under Section 5-5.5-25 of the Unified Code of Corrections or a certificate of relief from disabilities under Section 5-5.5-10 of the Unified Code of Corrections; and
        (8) any other mitigating factors that contribute to
    	
the person's potential and current ability to perform the duties and responsibilities of the position for which a license or employment is sought.
    (c) If the Commission refuses to issue a license to an applicant, then the Commission shall notify the applicant of the denial in writing with the following included in the notice of denial:
        (1) a statement about the decision to refuse to issue
    	
a license;
        (2) a list of the convictions that the Commission
    	
determined will impair the applicant's ability to engage in the position for which a license is sought;
        (3) a list of convictions that formed the sole or
    	
partial basis for the refusal; and
        (4) a summary of the appeal process or the earliest
    	
the applicant may reapply for a license, whichever is applicable.
    (d) No later than May 1 of each year, the Commission must prepare, publicly announce, and publish a report of summary statistical information relating to new and renewal license applications during the preceding calendar year. Each report shall show, at a minimum:
        (1) the number of applicants for a new or renewal
    	
license under this Act within the previous calendar year;
        (2) the number of applicants for a new or renewal
    	
license under this Act within the previous calendar year who had any criminal conviction;
        (3) the number of applicants for a new or renewal
    	
license under this Act in the previous calendar year who were granted a license;
        (4) the number of applicants for a new or renewal
    	
license with a criminal conviction who were granted a license under this Act within the previous calendar year;
        (5) the number of applicants for a new or renewal
    	
license under this Act within the previous calendar year who were denied a license; and
        (6) the number of applicants for a new or renewal
    	
license with a criminal conviction who were denied a license under this Act in the previous calendar year in whole or in part because of a prior conviction.
(Source: P.A. 100-286, eff. 1-1-18.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-3) (from Ch. 43, par. 120a)
    Sec. 6-3. Violation of tax Acts; refusal, revocation, or suspension of license.
    (a) In addition to other grounds specified in this Act, the State Commission or the local liquor control commissioner, on complaint of the Department, shall refuse the issuance or renewal of a license, or suspend or revoke the license, of any person, for any of the following violations of any tax Act administered by the Department:
        1. Failure to make a tax return.
        2. The filing of a fraudulent return.
        3. Failure to pay all or part of any tax or penalty
    	
finally determined to be due.
        4. Failure to keep books and records.
        5. Failure to secure and display a certificate or
    	
sub-certificates of registration, if required.
        6. Wilful violation of any rule or regulation of the
    	
Department relating to the administration and enforcement of tax liability.
    (b) Upon receiving notice from the Department that a violation of any of items 1 through 6 of subsection (a) have been corrected or otherwise resolved to the Department's satisfaction, the Commission may vacate an Order of Revocation.
(Source: P.A. 89-250, eff. 1-1-96.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-4) (from Ch. 43, par. 121)
    Sec. 6-4. (a) No person licensed by any licensing authority as a distiller, or a wine manufacturer, or any subsidiary or affiliate thereof, or any officer, associate, member, partner, representative, employee, agent or shareholder owning more than 5% of the outstanding shares of such person shall be issued an importing distributor's or distributor's license, nor shall any person licensed by any licensing authority as an importing distributor, distributor or retailer, or any subsidiary or affiliate thereof, or any officer or associate, member, partner, representative, employee, agent or shareholder owning more than 5% of the outstanding shares of such person be issued a distiller's license, a craft distiller's license, or a wine manufacturer's license; and no person or persons licensed as a distiller, craft distiller, class 1 craft distiller, or class 2 craft distiller by any licensing authority shall have any interest, directly or indirectly, with such distributor or importing distributor.
    However, an importing distributor or distributor, which on January 1, 1985 is owned by a brewer, or any subsidiary or affiliate thereof or any officer, associate, member, partner, representative, employee, agent or shareholder owning more than 5% of the outstanding shares of the importing distributor or distributor referred to in this paragraph, may own or acquire an ownership interest of more than 5% of the outstanding shares of a wine manufacturer and be issued a wine manufacturer's license by any licensing authority.
    (b) The foregoing provisions shall not apply to any person licensed by any licensing authority as a distiller or wine manufacturer, or to any subsidiary or affiliate of any distiller or wine manufacturer who shall have been heretofore licensed by the State Commission as either an importing distributor or distributor during the annual licensing period expiring June 30, 1947, and shall actually have made sales regularly to retailers.
    (c) Provided, however, that in such instances where a distributor's or importing distributor's license has been issued to any distiller or wine manufacturer or to any subsidiary or affiliate of any distiller or wine manufacturer who has, during the licensing period ending June 30, 1947, sold or distributed as such licensed distributor or importing distributor alcoholic liquors and wines to retailers, such distiller or wine manufacturer or any subsidiary or affiliate of any distiller or wine manufacturer holding such distributor's or importing distributor's license may continue to sell or distribute to retailers such alcoholic liquors and wines which are manufactured, distilled, processed or marketed by distillers and wine manufacturers whose products it sold or distributed to retailers during the whole or any part of its licensing periods; and such additional brands and additional products may be added to the line of such distributor or importing distributor, provided, that such brands and such products were not sold or distributed by any distributor or importing distributor licensed by the State Commission during the licensing period ending June 30, 1947, but can not sell or distribute to retailers any other alcoholic liquors or wines.
    (d) It shall be unlawful for any distiller licensed anywhere to have any stock ownership or interest in any distributor's or importing distributor's license wherein any other person has an interest therein who is not a distiller and does not own more than 5% of any stock in any distillery. Nothing herein contained shall apply to such distillers or their subsidiaries or affiliates, who had a distributor's or importing distributor's license during the licensing period ending June 30, 1947, which license was owned in whole by such distiller, or subsidiaries or affiliates of such distiller.
    (e) Any person licensed as a brewer, class 1 brewer, or class 2 brewer shall be permitted to sell on the licensed premises to non-licensees for on or off-premises consumption for the premises in which he or she actually conducts such business: (i) beer manufactured by the brewer, class 1 brewer, or class 2 brewer; (ii) beer manufactured by any other brewer, class 1 brewer, or class 2 brewer; and (iii) cider. Such sales shall be limited to on-premises, in-person sales only, for lawful consumption on or off premises. Such authorization shall be considered a privilege granted by the brewer license and, other than a manufacturer of beer as stated above, no manufacturer or distributor or importing distributor, excluding airplane licensees exercising powers provided in paragraph (i) of Section 5-1 of this Act, or any subsidiary or affiliate thereof, or any officer, associate, member, partner, representative, employee or agent, or shareholder shall be issued a retailer's license, nor shall any person having a retailer's license, excluding airplane licensees exercising powers provided in paragraph (i) of Section 5-1 of this Act, or any subsidiary or affiliate thereof, or any officer, associate, member, partner, representative or agent, or shareholder be issued a manufacturer's license or importing distributor's license.
    A manufacturer of beer that imports or transfers beer into this State must comply with Sections 6-8 and 8-1 of this Act.
    A person who holds a class 1 or class 2 brewer license and is authorized by this Section to sell beer to non-licensees shall not sell beer to non-licensees from more than 3 total brewer or commonly owned brew pub licensed locations in this State. The class 1 or class 2 brewer shall designate to the State Commission the brewer or brew pub locations from which it will sell beer to non-licensees.
    A person licensed as a class 1 craft distiller or a class 2 craft distiller, including a person who holds more than one class 1 craft distiller or class 2 craft distiller license, not affiliated with any other person manufacturing spirits may be authorized by the State Commission to sell (1) up to 5,000 gallons of spirits produced by the person to non-licensees for on or off-premises consumption for the premises in which he or she actually conducts business permitting only the retail sale of spirits manufactured at such premises and (2) vermouth purchased through a licensed distributor for on-premises consumption. Such sales shall be limited to on-premises, in-person sales only, for lawful consumption on or off premises, and such authorization shall be considered a privilege granted by the class 1 craft distiller or class 2 craft distiller license. A class 1 craft distiller or class 2 craft distiller licensed for retail sale shall secure liquor liability insurance coverage in an amount at least equal to the maximum liability amounts set forth in subsection (a) of Section 6-21 of this Act.
    A class 1 craft distiller or class 2 craft distiller license holder shall not deliver any alcoholic liquor to any non-licensee off the licensed premises. A class 1 craft distiller or class 2 craft distiller shall affirm in its annual license application that it does not produce more than 50,000 or 100,000 gallons of distilled spirits annually, whichever is applicable, and that the craft distiller does not sell more than 5,000 gallons of spirits to non-licensees for on or off-premises consumption. In the application, which shall be sworn under penalty of perjury, the class 1 craft distiller or class 2 craft distiller shall state the volume of production and sales for each year since the class 1 craft distiller's or class 2 craft distiller's establishment.
    A person who holds a class 1 craft distiller or class 2 craft distiller license and is authorized by this Section to sell spirits to non-licensees shall not sell spirits to non-licensees from more than 3 total distillery or commonly owned distilling pub licensed locations in this State. The class 1 craft distiller or class 2 craft distiller shall designate to the State Commission the distillery or distilling pub locations from which it will sell spirits to non-licensees.
    (f) (Blank).
    (g) Notwithstanding any of the foregoing prohibitions, a limited wine manufacturer may sell at retail at its manufacturing site for on or off premises consumption and may sell to distributors. A limited wine manufacturer licensee shall secure liquor liability insurance coverage in an amount at least equal to the maximum liability amounts set forth in subsection (a) of Section 6-21 of this Act.
    (h) The changes made to this Section by Public Act 99-47 shall not diminish or impair the rights of any person, whether a distiller, wine manufacturer, agent, or affiliate thereof, who requested in writing and submitted documentation to the State Commission on or before February 18, 2015 to be approved for a retail license pursuant to what has heretofore been subsection (f); provided that, on or before that date, the State Commission considered the intent of that person to apply for the retail license under that subsection and, by recorded vote, the State Commission approved a resolution indicating that such a license application could be lawfully approved upon that person duly filing a formal application for a retail license and if that person, within 90 days of the State Commission appearance and recorded vote, first filed an application with the appropriate local commission, which application was subsequently approved by the appropriate local commission prior to consideration by the State Commission of that person's application for a retail license. It is further provided that the State Commission may approve the person's application for a retail license or renewals of such license if such person continues to diligently adhere to all representations made in writing to the State Commission on or before February 18, 2015, or thereafter, or in the affidavit filed by that person with the State Commission to support the issuance of a retail license and to abide by all applicable laws and duly adopted rules.
(Source: P.A. 100-201, eff. 8-18-17; 100-816, eff. 8-13-18; 100-885, eff. 8-14-18; 101-81, eff. 7-12-19; 101-482, eff. 8-23-19; 101-615, eff. 12-20-19.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-4.5)
    Sec. 6-4.5. Prohibited ownership interests in a distributor, importing distributor, manufacturer of beer, or non-resident dealer.
    (a) The General Assembly finds, consistent with Section 6-1.5, that the 3-tier regulatory system is designed to prevent a manufacturer of beer as described in paragraph (19) of subsection (a) of Section 6-2 from exercising vertical integration between a manufacturer of beer and a distributor or importing distributor through any ownership interest, or through control of the distributor or importing distributor. The General Assembly further finds, consistent with Section 6-1.5, that the 3-tier regulatory system is designed to prevent a distributor or importing distributor as described in paragraph (20) of subsection (a) of Section 6-2 from having any ownership interest in a manufacturer of beer as described in paragraph (20) of subsection (a) of Section 6-2 except for the ownership of no more than 5% of the outstanding shares of a manufacturer of beer whose shares are publicly traded on an exchange within the meaning of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. The General Assembly further finds that it is necessary to have the State Commission undertake an expedited investigation, in accordance with procedural due process, to determine whether any existing manufacturer of beer described in paragraph (19) of subsection (a) of Section 6-2 or any existing distributor or importing distributor described in paragraph (20) of subsection (a) of Section 6-2 owns a prohibited ownership interest, and an orderly process by which an existing manufacturer of beer, distributor, or importing distributor may divest itself of or sever the prohibited ownership interest by no later than January 1, 2015.
    (b) Notwithstanding any provision of this Act to the contrary, no person licensed as a manufacturer of beer as described in paragraph (19) of subsection (a) of Section 6-2 shall have any prohibited ownership interest, directly or indirectly, in a person licensed as a distributor or importing distributor. Any person who holds a prohibited ownership interest in a person licensed as a distributor or importing distributor prior to this amendatory Act of the 98th General Assembly shall, in accordance with paragraph (19) of subsection (a) of Section 6-2, be ineligible to receive or hold any license issued by the State Commission, unless that person complies with the provisions of this Section.
    (c) Notwithstanding any provision of this Act to the contrary, no person licensed in this State as a distributor or importing distributor as described in paragraph (20) of subsection (a) of Section 6-2 shall have any prohibited ownership interest, directly or indirectly, in a person licensed as a manufacturer of beer as described in paragraph (20) of subsection (a) of Section 6-2. Any person who holds an interest in a person licensed as a distributor or importing distributor in this State prior to this amendatory Act of the 98th General Assembly shall, in accordance with paragraph (20) of subsection (a) of Section 6-2, be ineligible to receive or hold a license by the State Commission, unless the person complies with the provisions of this Section. This subsection (c) shall not apply to a person who owns, on or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 98th General Assembly, no more than 5% of the outstanding shares of a manufacturer of beer whose shares are publicly traded on an exchange within the meaning of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
    (d) Within 30 days after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 98th General Assembly, the State Commission shall notify in writing all persons licensed by the State Commission as a manufacturer of beer, as described in paragraph (19) of subsection (a) of Section 6-2 of the prohibited ownership interest provision set forth in subsection (b) of this Section and paragraph (19) of subsection (a) of Section 6-2. Also within 30 days after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 98th General Assembly, the State Commission shall notify in writing all persons licensed by the State Commission as a distributor or importing distributor of the prohibited ownership interest provision set forth in subsection (c) of this Section and paragraph (20) of subsection (a) of Section 6-2. The notice provided by the State Commission shall also state for a manufacturer of beer, as described in paragraph (19) of subsection (a) of Section 6-2, that it is required to disclose in writing any ownership interest it directly or indirectly possesses in a distributor or importing distributor, as described in paragraph (20) of subsection (a) of Section 6-2, the type and amount of ownership interest possessed by it, the length of time the manufacturer of beer has held the ownership interest in the distributor or importing distributor, and any other information specified by the State Commission in its written notice. The notice provided by the State Commission shall also state for a distributor or importing distributor, as described in paragraph (20) of subsection (a) of Section 6-2, that it is required to disclose in writing any ownership interest it directly or indirectly possesses in a manufacturer of beer, as described in paragraph (19) of subsection (a) of Section 6-2, the type and amount of ownership interest possessed by it, the length of time the manufacturer of beer has held the ownership interest in the distributor or importing distributor, and any other information specified by the State Commission in its written notice.
    (e) Within 60 days after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 98th General Assembly, each manufacturer of beer, distributor, or importing distributor subject to notification under subsection (d) of this Section shall disclose in writing and under oath the relevant ownership interest and other required information specified in the notification provided by the State Commission pursuant to that subsection. The written disclosure shall, as a mandatory obligation, be tendered to the State Commission by either personal service or via certified or registered mail at the State Commission's Springfield or Chicago office on or before the 60th day during regular business hours. Failure to tender the required written disclosure shall result in the immediate entry of an order by the State Commission suspending the licensee's license within 5 days after the 60th day, and the initiation of proceedings by the State Commission to enter an order to permanently revoke the licensee's license no later than 45 days after providing the licensee with notice and an opportunity for a hearing. Whenever the State Commission has reason to believe that a person has failed to comply with the Commission notice under this Section, it shall notify the Department of Revenue and the Attorney General, and shall file a complaint with the State's Attorney of the county where the alcoholic liquor was delivered or with appropriate law enforcement officials. Failure to make the written disclosure required under this subsection shall constitute a business offense for which the person shall be fined not more than $5,000 for a first offense, not more than $10,000 for a second offense, and not more than $15,000 for a third or subsequent offense.
    (f) Within 180 days after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 98th General Assembly, the State Commission shall review each of the disclosures tendered to the State Commission by licensees pursuant to subsection (e) and enter an order determining whether or not each licensee is in compliance with subsection (b) or (c) of this Section, whichever is applicable, after providing each licensee with notice and an opportunity for a hearing. As part of making its determination, the State Commission shall also consider any information otherwise admissible under Section 10-40 of the Illinois Administrative Procedure Act.
    (g) If the State Commission determines, based on a preponderance of record evidence, that a manufacturer of beer, distributor, or importing distributor has no prohibited ownership interest in a licensee in violation of subsection (b) or (c) of this Section, then the State Commission shall enter an order finding that the manufacturer of beer, distributor, or importing distributor is in compliance with this Section, record the matter as closed, and serve a copy of the order of compliance on the licensee and each person with an ownership interest in the licensee.
    If the State Commission determines, based on a preponderance of record evidence, that a manufacturer of beer, as described in paragraph (19) of subsection (a) of Section 6-2, has a prohibited ownership interest as set forth in subsection (b) of this Section, then the State Commission shall enter an order finding that the manufacturer of beer is not in compliance with this Section and that the manufacturer of beer shall divest itself of that interest on or before January 1, 2015, subject to the State Commission's approval of the successive owner pursuant to the State Commission's authority provided in this Act. In addition, the State Commission shall find that the relevant distributor or importing distributor is not in compliance with this Section and that the distributor or importing distributor is required to sever the prohibited ownership interest possessed by the relevant manufacturer of beer on or before January 1, 2015, subject to the State Commission's approval of the successive owner pursuant to the State Commission's authority provided in this Act.
    If the State Commission determines, based on a preponderance of record evidence, that a distributor or importing distributor, as described in paragraph (20) of subsection (a) of Section 6-2, has a prohibited ownership interest as set forth in subsection (c) of this Section, then the State Commission shall enter an order finding that the relevant distributor or importing distributor is not in compliance with this Section and that the relevant distributor or importing distributor shall divest itself of that interest on or before January 1, 2015, subject to the State Commission's approval of the successive owner pursuant to the State Commission's authority provided in this Act. In addition, the State Commission shall find that the manufacturer of beer is not in compliance with this Section and that the manufacturer of beer shall sever the prohibited ownership interest possessed by the distributor or importing distributor on or before January 1, 2015, subject to the State Commission's approval of the successive owner pursuant to the State Commission's authority provided in this Act.
    The State Commission's order shall further find that the continued ownership of the prohibited ownership interest beyond January 1, 2015 by the manufacturer of beer, distributor, or importing distributor is against the public interest and a violation of this Section and Section 6-1.5 of the Act.
    The State Commission's order shall further find for a manufacturer of beer, as described in paragraph (19) of subsection (a) of Section 6-2, found in non-compliance with subsection (b) of this Section that its license is revoked on January 16, 2015 as to the transport, transfer, or sale of any alcoholic liquor to the relevant distributor or importing distributor that the manufacturer of beer has a prohibited ownership interest in if that interest is not properly divested on January 1, 2015, subject to the State Commission's approval of the successive owner pursuant to the State Commission's authority provided in this Act. In addition, the State Commission shall find that the license of a distributor or importing distributor that is subject to the prohibited ownership interest of the manufacturer of beer is revoked on January 16, 2015 as to the transport, transfer, or sale of alcoholic liquor from the relevant manufacturer of beer to any retailer if that ownership interest is not properly severed on January 1, 2015, subject to the State Commission's approval of the successive owner pursuant to the State Commission's authority provided in this Act.
    The State Commission's order shall further find for a distributor or importing distributor, as described in paragraph (20) of subsection (a) of Section 6-2, found in non-compliance with subsection (c) of this Section, that its license is revoked on January 16, 2015 as to the transport, transfer, or sale of any alcoholic liquor from the relevant manufacturer of beer to any retailer if that prohibited ownership interest in the manufacturer of beer is not properly divested on January 1, 2015, subject to the State Commission's approval of the successive owner pursuant to the State Commission's authority provided in this Act. In addition, the State Commission shall find that the license of the manufacturer of beer that is subject to the prohibited ownership interest of a distributor or importing distributor is revoked on January 16, 2015 as to the transport, transfer, or sale of alcoholic liquor to the distributor or importing distributor if that ownership interest is not properly severed on January 1, 2015, subject to the State Commission's approval of the successive owner pursuant to the State Commission's authority provided in this Act.
    The State Commission shall serve a copy of the order of non-compliance on the licensee and each person with an ownership interest in the licensee.
    (h) If a person with a prohibited ownership interest in a licensee under subsection (b) or (c) of this Section succeeds in divesting itself of or severing that interest and obtains the State Commission's approval of the successive owner pursuant to its authority provided in this Act on or before January 1, 2015, then the State Commission shall enter an order finding that the licensee is in compliance, record the matter as closed, and serve a copy of the order of compliance on the licensee and each person with an ownership interest in the licensee.
    If a person with a prohibited ownership interest in violation of subsection (b) or (c) of this Section fails to divest itself of or sever that interest and obtain the State Commission's approval of the successive owner pursuant to the State Commission's authority provided in this Act on or before January 1, 2015, then the State Commission shall, after notice and an opportunity for a hearing, revoke each licensee's license as specified in subsection (g) of this Section on January 16, 2015. The State Commission, when entering the order, shall give notice to the person by certified mail to cease and desist all shipments of alcoholic liquor into or within this State and to withdraw from this State within 5 working days after receipt of the notice all shipments of alcoholic liquor in transit. Whenever the State Commission has reason to believe that a person has failed to comply with the State Commission's notice under this Section, it shall notify the Department of Revenue and the Attorney General, and shall file a complaint with the State's Attorney of the county where the alcoholic liquor was delivered, or with appropriate law enforcement officials. Failure to comply with the notice issued by the State Commission under this Section is against the public interest and constitutes a business offense for which the person shall be fined not more than $5,000 for a first offense, not more than $10,000 for a second offense, and not more than $15,000 for a third or subsequent offense. Each shipment or transfer of alcoholic liquor in violation of the cease and desist notice shall constitute a separate offense.
    (i) The power and authority granted to the State Commission under this Section is in addition to any existing power or authority the State Commission has under this Act and its exercise shall be accorded precedence on the State Commission's meeting agenda so as to fully accommodate the schedule for any proceeding under the provisions of this Section. Nothing in this Act shall be construed as limiting or otherwise impairing the ability of the State Commission to conduct future investigations and proceedings sua sponte or pursuant to a complaint to ensure compliance with this Section or paragraph (19) or (20) of subsection (a) of Section 6-2 of this Act. Any future investigations and proceedings shall be conducted by the State Commission on an expedited basis and pursuant to an initiating order entered by the State Commission. The State Commission shall enter its initiating order within 30 days after the receipt of a complaint. The initiating order shall set forth a schedule by which the required notices, disclosures, determinations, or orders specified in subsections (d), (e), (f), (g), and (h) shall be made or entered, and the period of time by which a licensee shall divest itself of or sever a prohibited ownership interest, which shall be no later than 540 days after the entry of the initiating order.
    (j) Any association or non-profit corporation representing beer distributors in this State shall have standing to intervene and otherwise participate as a party in any proceeding undertaken by the State Commission under this Section to review and determine compliance or non-compliance with this Section.
    (k) For purposes of this Section, the term "ownership interest" means a legal, equitable, or beneficial interest recognized under Illinois law. The term "prohibited ownership interest" means an ownership interest in a distributor, importing distributor, or manufacturer of beer as specified in this Section.
(Source: P.A. 98-21, eff. 6-13-13.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-5) (from Ch. 43, par. 122)
    Sec. 6-5. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, it is unlawful for any person having a retailer's license or any officer, associate, member, representative or agent of such licensee to accept, receive or borrow money, or anything else of value, or accept or receive credit (other than merchandising credit in the ordinary course of business for a period not to exceed 30 days) directly or indirectly from any manufacturer, importing distributor or distributor of alcoholic liquor, or from any person connected with or in any way representing, or from any member of the family of, such manufacturer, importing distributor, distributor or wholesaler, or from any stockholders in any corporation engaged in manufacturing, distributing or wholesaling of such liquor, or from any officer, manager, agent or representative of said manufacturer. Except as provided below, it is unlawful for any manufacturer or distributor or importing distributor to give or lend money or anything of value, or otherwise loan or extend credit (except such merchandising credit) directly or indirectly to any retail licensee or to the manager, representative, agent, officer or director of such licensee. A manufacturer, distributor or importing distributor may furnish free advertising, posters, signs, brochures, hand-outs, or other promotional devices or materials to any unit of government owning or operating any auditorium, exhibition hall, recreation facility or other similar facility holding a retailer's license, provided that the primary purpose of such promotional devices or materials is to promote public events being held at such facility. A unit of government owning or operating such a facility holding a retailer's license may accept such promotional devices or materials designed primarily to promote public events held at the facility. No retail licensee delinquent beyond the 30 day period specified in this Section shall solicit, accept or receive credit, purchase or acquire alcoholic liquors, directly or indirectly from any other licensee, and no manufacturer, distributor or importing distributor shall knowingly grant or extend credit, sell, furnish or supply alcoholic liquors to any such delinquent retail licensee; provided that the purchase price of all beer sold to a retail licensee shall be paid by the retail licensee in cash on or before delivery of the beer, and unless the purchase price payable by a retail licensee for beer sold to him in returnable bottles shall expressly include a charge for the bottles and cases, the retail licensee shall, on or before delivery of such beer, pay the seller in cash a deposit in an amount not less than the deposit required to be paid by the distributor to the brewer; but where the brewer sells direct to the retailer, the deposit shall be an amount no less than that required by the brewer from his own distributors; and provided further, that in no instance shall this deposit be less than 50 cents for each case of beer in pint or smaller bottles and 60 cents for each case of beer in quart or half-gallon bottles; and provided further, that the purchase price of all beer sold to an importing distributor or distributor shall be paid by such importing distributor or distributor in cash on or before the 15th day (Sundays and holidays excepted) after delivery of such beer to such purchaser; and unless the purchase price payable by such importing distributor or distributor for beer sold in returnable bottles and cases shall expressly include a charge for the bottles and cases, such importing distributor or distributor shall, on or before the 15th day (Sundays and holidays excepted) after delivery of such beer to such purchaser, pay the seller in cash a required amount as a deposit to assure the return of such bottles and cases. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit any licensee from crediting or refunding to a purchaser the actual amount of money paid for bottles, cases, kegs or barrels returned by the purchaser to the seller or paid by the purchaser as a deposit on bottles, cases, kegs or barrels, when such containers or packages are returned to the seller. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit any manufacturer, importing distributor or distributor from extending usual and customary credit for alcoholic liquor sold to customers or purchasers who live in or maintain places of business outside of this State when such alcoholic liquor is actually transported and delivered to such points outside of this State.
    A manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor may furnish free social media advertising to a retail licensee if the social media advertisement does not contain the retail price of any alcoholic liquor and the social media advertisement complies with any applicable rules or regulations issued by the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau of the United States Department of the Treasury. A manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor may list the names of one or more unaffiliated retailers in the advertisement of alcoholic liquor through social media. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit a retailer from communicating with a manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor on social media or sharing media on the social media of a manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor. A retailer may request free social media advertising from a manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit a manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor from sharing, reposting, or otherwise forwarding a social media post by a retail licensee, so long as the sharing, reposting, or forwarding of the social media post does not contain the retail price of any alcoholic liquor. No manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor shall pay or reimburse a retailer, directly or indirectly, for any social media advertising services, except as specifically permitted in this Act. No retailer shall accept any payment or reimbursement, directly or indirectly, for any social media advertising services offered by a manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor, except as specifically permitted in this Act. For the purposes of this Section, "social media" means a service, platform, or site where users communicate with one another and share media, such as pictures, videos, music, and blogs, with other users free of charge.
    No right of action shall exist for the collection of any claim based upon credit extended to a distributor, importing distributor or retail licensee contrary to the provisions of this Section.
    Every manufacturer, importing distributor and distributor shall submit or cause to be submitted, to the State Commission, in triplicate, not later than Thursday of each calendar week, a verified written list of the names and respective addresses of each retail licensee purchasing spirits or wine from such manufacturer, importing distributor or distributor who, on the first business day of that calendar week, was delinquent beyond the above mentioned permissible merchandising credit period of 30 days; or, if such is the fact, a verified written statement that no retail licensee purchasing spirits or wine was then delinquent beyond such permissible merchandising credit period of 30 days.
    Every manufacturer, importing distributor and distributor shall submit or cause to be submitted, to the State Commission, in triplicate, a verified written list of the names and respective addresses of each previously reported delinquent retail licensee who has cured such delinquency by payment, which list shall be submitted not later than the close of the second full business day following the day such delinquency was so cured.
    Such written verified reports required to be submitted by this Section shall be posted by the State Commission in each of its offices in places available for public inspection not later than the day following receipt thereof by the Commission. The reports so posted shall constitute notice to every manufacturer, importing distributor and distributor of the information contained therein. Actual notice to manufacturers, importing distributors and distributors of the information contained in any such posted reports, however received, shall also constitute notice of such information.
    The 30 day merchandising credit period allowed by this Section shall commence with the day immediately following the date of invoice and shall include all successive days including Sundays and holidays to and including the 30th successive day.
    In addition to other methods allowed by law, payment by check during the period for which merchandising credit may be extended under the provisions of this Section shall be considered payment. All checks received in payment for alcoholic liquor shall be promptly deposited for collection. A post dated check or a check dishonored on presentation for payment shall not be deemed payment.
    A retail licensee shall not be deemed to be delinquent in payment for any alleged sale to him of alcoholic liquor when there exists a bona fide dispute between such retailer and a manufacturer, importing distributor or distributor with respect to the amount of indebtedness existing because of such alleged sale. A retail licensee shall not be deemed to be delinquent under this provision and 11 Ill. Adm. Code 100.90 until 30 days after the date on which the region in which the retail licensee is located enters Phase 4 of the Governor's Restore Illinois Plan as issued on May 5, 2020.
    A delinquent retail licensee who engages in the retail liquor business at 2 or more locations shall be deemed to be delinquent with respect to each such location.
    The license of any person who violates any provision of this Section shall be subject to suspension or revocation in the manner provided by this Act.
    If any part or provision of this Article or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined by its operation to the controversy in which it was mentioned and shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of this Article or the application thereof to any other person or circumstance and to this and the provisions of this Article are declared severable.
(Source: P.A. 101-631, eff. 6-2-20.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-5.5)
    Sec. 6-5.5. Consignment sales prohibited; retailer returns.
    (a) In this Section, "retailer" means a retailer, special event retailer, special use permit licensee, caterer retailer, or brew pub.
    (b) It is unlawful for a manufacturer with self-distribution privileges, importing distributor, or distributor to sell, offer for sale, or contract to sell to any retailer, or for any such retailer to purchase, offer to purchase, or contract to purchase any products:
        (1) on consignment or conditional sale,
    	
pursuant to which the retailer has no obligation to pay for the product until sold;
        (2) with the privilege of return unless
    	
expressly authorized in this Act;
        (3) on any basis other than a bona fide sale;
    	
or
        (4) if any part of the sale involves, directly
    	
or indirectly, the acquisition by the retailer of other products from a manufacturer with self-distribution privileges, importing distributor, or distributor, or an agreement to acquire other products from the manufacturer with self-distribution privileges, importing distributor, or distributor.
    (c) Transactions involving the bona fide return of products for ordinary and usual commercial reasons arising after the product has been sold are not prohibited.
    (d) Unless there is a bona fide business reason for replacement of an alcoholic liquor product when delivered, the alcoholic liquor product may not be replaced free of charge to a retailer. Replacement of an alcoholic liquor product damaged while in a retailer's possession constitutes the providing of something of value and is a violation of Sections 6-4, 6-5, and 6-6 of this Act. A manufacturer with self-distribution privileges, importing distributor, or distributor is not required to accept the return of products for the reasons stated in items (1) through (7) of subsection (f).
        (1) A manufacturer with self-distribution
    	
privileges, importing distributor, or distributor may not accept the return of alcoholic liquor products as breakage if the product was damaged after delivery and while in the possession of the retailer. The manufacturer with self-distribution privileges, importing distributor, or distributor may replace damaged cartons, packaging, or carrying containers of alcoholic liquor at any time.
        (2) Alcoholic liquor products or other compensation
    	
shall not be furnished to a retailer for product breakage that occurs as a result of handling by the retailer or its agents, employees, or customers.
        (3) If an alcoholic liquor product has been
    	
damaged prior to or at the time of actual delivery, the product may only be exchanged for an equal quantity of identical product or returned for credit. If an identical product is unavailable, a similar type of product, including a similarly priced product, may be exchanged.
        (4) If an alcoholic liquor product has been
    	
damaged prior to or at the time of actual delivery, the product may be exchanged no later than 15 days after delivery under the following conditions:
            (A) If the pre-delivery damage is visible at
        	
the time of delivery, the retailer must identify the damaged product immediately.
            (B) If the damage is latent and not visible
        	
at the time of delivery, the retailer must notify the manufacturer with self-distribution privileges, importing distributor, or distributor of the pre-delivery damage within 15 days after delivery, or the date of invoice, whichever is later.
    (e) It is unlawful to sell, offer to sell, or contract to sell alcoholic liquor products with the privilege of return for any reason, other than those considered to be ordinary and usual commercial reasons, arising after the product has been sold. A manufacturer with self-distribution privileges, importing distributor, or distributor is under no obligation to accept a return or make an exchange for any product. A manufacturer with self-distribution privileges, importing distributor, or distributor that elects to make an authorized exchange of a product or return of a product for cash or credit does so at its sole discretion and must maintain proper books and records of the transaction in accordance with 11 Ill. Adm. Code 100.130.
    (f) Ordinary and usual commercial reasons for the return of alcoholic liquor products are limited to the following:
        (1) Defective products. Products that are
    	
unmarketable because of product deterioration, leaking containers, damaged labels, or missing or mutilated tamper evident closures may be exchanged for an equal quantity of identical or similar products, including similarly priced products, or credit against outstanding indebtedness.
        (2) Error in products delivered. Any
    	
discrepancy between products ordered and products delivered may be corrected, within 15 days after the date of delivery or date of invoice, whichever is later, by exchange of the products delivered for those that were ordered or by a return for credit against outstanding indebtedness.
        (3) Products that may no longer be lawfully
    	
sold. Products that may no longer be lawfully sold may be returned for credit against outstanding indebtedness. This includes situations in which, due to a change in regulation or administrative procedure over which a retailer has no control, a particular size or brand is no longer permitted to be sold.
        (4) Termination of business. Products on hand
    	
at the time a retailer terminates operations may be returned for cash or credit against outstanding indebtedness. This does not include a temporary seasonal shutdown.
        (5) Change in products. A retailer's inventory
    	
of a product that has been changed in formula, proof, label, or container may be exchanged for equal quantities of the new version of that product.
        (6) Discontinued products. If a manufacturer,
    	
non-resident dealer, foreign importer, or importing distributor discontinues the production or importation of a product, a retailer may return its inventory of that product for cash or credit against outstanding indebtedness.
        (7) Seasonal dealers. Manufacturers with
    	
self-distribution privileges, importing distributors, or distributors may accept the return of product from retailers who are only open a portion of the year if the products are likely to spoil during the off-season. These returns shall be for cash or credit against outstanding indebtedness.
    (g) Without limitation, the following are not considered ordinary and commercial reasons to justify a return of an alcoholic liquor product:
        (1) Overstocked and slow-moving alcoholic
    	
liquor products. The return or exchange of a product because it is overstocked or slow moving does not constitute a return for ordinary and usual commercial reasons.
        (2) Seasonal alcoholic liquor products. The
    	
return for cash or credit or exchange of wine or spirits for which there is only a limited or seasonal demand, such as holiday decanters and certain distinctive bottles, does not constitute a return for ordinary and usual commercial reasons. Nothing in this item (2) prohibits the exchange of seasonal beer products for similarly priced beer products.
    (h) Nothing in this Section prohibits a manufacturer with self-distribution privileges, importing distributor, or distributor from accepting the return of beer from a retailer if the beer is near or beyond its freshness date, code date, pull date, or other similar date marking the deterioration or freshness of the beer if:
        (1) the brewer has policies and procedures in place
    	
that specify the date the retailer must pull the product;
        (2) the brewer's freshness return or exchange
    	
policies and procedures are readily verifiable and consistently followed by the brewer; and
        (3) the container has identifying markings that
    	
correspond with this date.
    Returns under this subsection may be accepted in return for credit against indebtedness or equal amounts of the same or similar beer, including a similarly priced product.
    For purposes of this Section, beer is near code on any date on or before the freshness or code date not to exceed 30 days prior to the freshness or code date. If near-code beer is returned, a manufacturer with self-distribution privileges, importing distributor, or distributor may sell near-code beer to another retailer who may reasonably sell the beer on or before the expiration of the freshness or code date. No beer shall be returned as near-code prior to 30 days of the freshness or code date.
    It is a violation of this Section for a retailer to hold beer for the purpose of returning beer as out of code.
(Source: P.A. 101-16, eff. 6-14-19.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-6) (from Ch. 43, par. 123)
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-16)
    Sec. 6-6. Except as otherwise provided in this Act no manufacturer or distributor or importing distributor shall, directly or indirectly, sell, supply, furnish, give or pay for, or loan or lease, any furnishing, fixture or equipment on the premises of a place of business of another licensee authorized under this Act to sell alcoholic liquor at retail, either for consumption on or off the premises, nor shall he or she, directly or indirectly, pay for any such license, or advance, furnish, lend or give money for payment of such license, or purchase or become the owner of any note, mortgage, or other evidence of indebtedness of such licensee or any form of security therefor, nor shall such manufacturer, or distributor, or importing distributor, directly or indirectly, be interested in the ownership, conduct or operation of the business of any licensee authorized to sell alcoholic liquor at retail, nor shall any manufacturer, or distributor, or importing distributor be interested directly or indirectly or as owner or part owner of said premises or as lessee or lessor thereof, in any premises upon which alcoholic liquor is sold at retail.
    No manufacturer or distributor or importing distributor shall, directly or indirectly or through a subsidiary or affiliate, or by any officer, director or firm of such manufacturer, distributor or importing distributor, furnish, give, lend or rent, install, repair or maintain, to or for any retail licensee in this State, any signs or inside advertising materials except as provided in this Section and Section 6-5. With respect to retail licensees, other than any government owned or operated auditorium, exhibition hall, recreation facility or other similar facility holding a retailer's license as described in Section 6-5, a manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor may furnish, give, lend or rent and erect, install, repair and maintain to or for any retail licensee, for use at any one time in or about or in connection with a retail establishment on which the products of the manufacturer, distributor or importing distributor are sold, the following signs and inside advertising materials as authorized in subparts (i), (ii), (iii), and (iv):
        (i) Permanent outside signs shall cost not more than
    	
$3,000 per brand, exclusive of erection, installation, repair and maintenance costs, and permit fees and shall bear only the manufacturer's name, brand name, trade name, slogans, markings, trademark, or other symbols commonly associated with and generally used in identifying the product including, but not limited to, "cold beer", "on tap", "carry out", and "packaged liquor".
        (ii) Temporary outside signs shall include, but not
    	
be limited to, banners, flags, pennants, streamers, and other items of a temporary and non-permanent nature, and shall cost not more than $1,000 per manufacturer. Each temporary outside sign must include the manufacturer's name, brand name, trade name, slogans, markings, trademark, or other symbol commonly associated with and generally used in identifying the product. Temporary outside signs may also include, for example, the product, price, packaging, date or dates of a promotion and an announcement of a retail licensee's specific sponsored event, if the temporary outside sign is intended to promote a product, and provided that the announcement of the retail licensee's event and the product promotion are held simultaneously. However, temporary outside signs may not include names, slogans, markings, or logos that relate to the retailer. Nothing in this subpart (ii) shall prohibit a distributor or importing distributor from bearing the cost of creating or printing a temporary outside sign for the retail licensee's specific sponsored event or from bearing the cost of creating or printing a temporary sign for a retail licensee containing, for example, community goodwill expressions, regional sporting event announcements, or seasonal messages, provided that the primary purpose of the temporary outside sign is to highlight, promote, or advertise the product. In addition, temporary outside signs provided by the manufacturer to the distributor or importing distributor may also include, for example, subject to the limitations of this Section, preprinted community goodwill expressions, sporting event announcements, seasonal messages, and manufacturer promotional announcements. However, a distributor or importing distributor shall not bear the cost of such manufacturer preprinted signs.
        (iii) Permanent inside signs, whether visible from
    	
the outside or the inside of the premises, include, but are not limited to: alcohol lists and menus that may include names, slogans, markings, or logos that relate to the retailer; neons; illuminated signs; clocks; table lamps; mirrors; tap handles; decalcomanias; window painting; and window trim. All neons, illuminated signs, clocks, table lamps, mirrors, and tap handles are the property of the manufacturer and shall be returned to the manufacturer or its agent upon request. All permanent inside signs in place and in use at any one time shall cost in the aggregate not more than $6,000 per manufacturer. A permanent inside sign must include the manufacturer's name, brand name, trade name, slogans, markings, trademark, or other symbol commonly associated with and generally used in identifying the product. However, permanent inside signs may not include names, slogans, markings, or logos that relate to the retailer. For the purpose of this subpart (iii), all permanent inside signs may be displayed in an adjacent courtyard or patio commonly referred to as a "beer garden" that is a part of the retailer's licensed premises.
        (iv) Temporary inside signs shall include, but are
    	
not limited to, lighted chalk boards, acrylic table tent beverage or hors d'oeuvre list holders, banners, flags, pennants, streamers, and inside advertising materials such as posters, placards, bowling sheets, table tents, inserts for acrylic table tent beverage or hors d'oeuvre list holders, sports schedules, or similar printed or illustrated materials and product displays, such as display racks, bins, barrels, or similar items, the primary function of which is to temporarily hold and display alcoholic beverages; however, such items, for example, as coasters, trays, napkins, glassware and cups shall not be deemed to be inside signs or advertising materials and may only be sold to retailers at fair market value, which shall be no less than the cost of the item to the manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor. All temporary inside signs and inside advertising materials in place and in use at any one time shall cost in the aggregate not more than $1,000 per manufacturer. Nothing in this subpart (iv) prohibits a distributor or importing distributor from paying the cost of printing or creating any temporary inside banner or inserts for acrylic table tent beverage or hors d'oeuvre list holders for a retail licensee, provided that the primary purpose for the banner or insert is to highlight, promote, or advertise the product. For the purpose of this subpart (iv), all temporary inside signs and inside advertising materials may be displayed in an adjacent courtyard or patio commonly referred to as a "beer garden" that is a part of the retailer's licensed premises.
    The restrictions contained in this Section 6-6 do not apply to signs, or promotional or advertising materials furnished by manufacturers, distributors or importing distributors to a government owned or operated facility holding a retailer's license as described in Section 6-5.
    No distributor or importing distributor shall directly or indirectly or through a subsidiary or affiliate, or by any officer, director or firm of such manufacturer, distributor or importing distributor, furnish, give, lend or rent, install, repair or maintain, to or for any retail licensee in this State, any signs or inside advertising materials described in subparts (i), (ii), (iii), or (iv) of this Section except as the agent for or on behalf of a manufacturer, provided that the total cost of any signs and inside advertising materials including but not limited to labor, erection, installation and permit fees shall be paid by the manufacturer whose product or products said signs and inside advertising materials advertise and except as follows:
    A distributor or importing distributor may purchase from or enter into a written agreement with a manufacturer or a manufacturer's designated supplier and such manufacturer or the manufacturer's designated supplier may sell or enter into an agreement to sell to a distributor or importing distributor permitted signs and advertising materials described in subparts (ii), (iii), or (iv) of this Section for the purpose of furnishing, giving, lending, renting, installing, repairing, or maintaining such signs or advertising materials to or for any retail licensee in this State. Any purchase by a distributor or importing distributor from a manufacturer or a manufacturer's designated supplier shall be voluntary and the manufacturer may not require the distributor or the importing distributor to purchase signs or advertising materials from the manufacturer or the manufacturer's designated supplier.
    A distributor or importing distributor shall be deemed the owner of such signs or advertising materials purchased from a manufacturer or a manufacturer's designated supplier.
    The provisions of Public Act 90-373 concerning signs or advertising materials delivered by a manufacturer to a distributor or importing distributor shall apply only to signs or advertising materials delivered on or after August 14, 1997.
    A manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor may furnish free social media advertising to a retail licensee if the social media advertisement does not contain the retail price of any alcoholic liquor and the social media advertisement complies with any applicable rules or regulations issued by the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau of the United States Department of the Treasury. A manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor may list the names of one or more unaffiliated retailers in the advertisement of alcoholic liquor through social media. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit a retailer from communicating with a manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor on social media or sharing media on the social media of a manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor. A retailer may request free social media advertising from a manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit a manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor from sharing, reposting, or otherwise forwarding a social media post by a retail licensee, so long as the sharing, reposting, or forwarding of the social media post does not contain the retail price of any alcoholic liquor. No manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor shall pay or reimburse a retailer, directly or indirectly, for any social media advertising services, except as specifically permitted in this Act. No retailer shall accept any payment or reimbursement, directly or indirectly, for any social media advertising services offered by a manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor, except as specifically permitted in this Act. For the purposes of this Section, "social media" means a service, platform, or site where users communicate with one another and share media, such as pictures, videos, music, and blogs, with other users free of charge.
    No person engaged in the business of manufacturing, importing or distributing alcoholic liquors shall, directly or indirectly, pay for, or advance, furnish, or lend money for the payment of any license for another. Any licensee who shall permit or assent, or be a party in any way to any violation or infringement of the provisions of this Section shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Act, and any money loaned contrary to a provision of this Act shall not be recovered back, or any note, mortgage or other evidence of indebtedness, or security, or any lease or contract obtained or made contrary to this Act shall be unenforceable and void.
    This Section shall not apply to airplane licensees exercising powers provided in paragraph (i) of Section 5-1 of this Act.
(Source: P.A. 100-885, eff. 8-14-18; 101-16, eff. 6-14-19.)
 
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-517)
    Sec. 6-6. Except as otherwise provided in this Act no manufacturer or distributor or importing distributor shall, directly or indirectly, sell, supply, furnish, give or pay for, or loan or lease, any furnishing, fixture or equipment on the premises of a place of business of another licensee authorized under this Act to sell alcoholic liquor at retail, either for consumption on or off the premises, nor shall he or she, directly or indirectly, pay for any such license, or advance, furnish, lend or give money for payment of such license, or purchase or become the owner of any note, mortgage, or other evidence of indebtedness of such licensee or any form of security therefor, nor shall such manufacturer, or distributor, or importing distributor, directly or indirectly, be interested in the ownership, conduct or operation of the business of any licensee authorized to sell alcoholic liquor at retail, nor shall any manufacturer, or distributor, or importing distributor be interested directly or indirectly or as owner or part owner of said premises or as lessee or lessor thereof, in any premises upon which alcoholic liquor is sold at retail.
    No manufacturer or distributor or importing distributor shall, directly or indirectly or through a subsidiary or affiliate, or by any officer, director or firm of such manufacturer, distributor or importing distributor, furnish, give, lend or rent, install, repair or maintain, to or for any retail licensee in this State, any signs or inside advertising materials except as provided in this Section and Section 6-5. With respect to retail licensees, other than any government owned or operated auditorium, exhibition hall, recreation facility or other similar facility holding a retailer's license as described in Section 6-5, a manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor may furnish, give, lend or rent and erect, install, repair and maintain to or for any retail licensee, for use at any one time in or about or in connection with a retail establishment on which the products of the manufacturer, distributor or importing distributor are sold, the following signs and inside advertising materials as authorized in subparts (i), (ii), (iii), and (iv):
        (i) Permanent outside signs shall cost not more than
    	
$3,000 per manufacturer, exclusive of erection, installation, repair and maintenance costs, and permit fees and shall bear only the manufacturer's name, brand name, trade name, slogans, markings, trademark, or other symbols commonly associated with and generally used in identifying the product including, but not limited to, "cold beer", "on tap", "carry out", and "packaged liquor".
        (ii) Temporary outside signs shall include, but not
    	
be limited to, banners, flags, pennants, streamers, and other items of a temporary and non-permanent nature, and shall cost not more than $1,000 per manufacturer. Each temporary outside sign must include the manufacturer's name, brand name, trade name, slogans, markings, trademark, or other symbol commonly associated with and generally used in identifying the product. Temporary outside signs may also include, for example, the product, price, packaging, date or dates of a promotion and an announcement of a retail licensee's specific sponsored event, if the temporary outside sign is intended to promote a product, and provided that the announcement of the retail licensee's event and the product promotion are held simultaneously. However, temporary outside signs may not include names, slogans, markings, or logos that relate to the retailer. Nothing in this subpart (ii) shall prohibit a distributor or importing distributor from bearing the cost of creating or printing a temporary outside sign for the retail licensee's specific sponsored event or from bearing the cost of creating or printing a temporary sign for a retail licensee containing, for example, community goodwill expressions, regional sporting event announcements, or seasonal messages, provided that the primary purpose of the temporary outside sign is to highlight, promote, or advertise the product. In addition, temporary outside signs provided by the manufacturer to the distributor or importing distributor may also include, for example, subject to the limitations of this Section, preprinted community goodwill expressions, sporting event announcements, seasonal messages, and manufacturer promotional announcements. However, a distributor or importing distributor shall not bear the cost of such manufacturer preprinted signs.
        (iii) Permanent inside signs, whether visible from
    	
the outside or the inside of the premises, include, but are not limited to: alcohol lists and menus that may include names, slogans, markings, or logos that relate to the retailer; neons; illuminated signs; clocks; table lamps; mirrors; tap handles; decalcomanias; window painting; and window trim. All neons, illuminated signs, clocks, table lamps, mirrors, and tap handles are the property of the manufacturer and shall be returned to the manufacturer or its agent upon request. All permanent inside signs in place and in use at any one time shall cost in the aggregate not more than $6,000 per manufacturer. A permanent inside sign must include the manufacturer's name, brand name, trade name, slogans, markings, trademark, or other symbol commonly associated with and generally used in identifying the product. However, permanent inside signs may not include names, slogans, markings, or logos that relate to the retailer. For the purpose of this subpart (iii), all permanent inside signs may be displayed in an adjacent courtyard or patio commonly referred to as a "beer garden" that is a part of the retailer's licensed premises.
        (iv) Temporary inside signs shall include, but are
    	
not limited to, lighted chalk boards, acrylic table tent beverage or hors d'oeuvre list holders, banners, flags, pennants, streamers, and inside advertising materials such as posters, placards, bowling sheets, table tents, inserts for acrylic table tent beverage or hors d'oeuvre list holders, sports schedules, or similar printed or illustrated materials and product displays, such as display racks, bins, barrels, or similar items, the primary function of which is to temporarily hold and display alcoholic beverages; however, such items, for example, as coasters, trays, napkins, glassware, growlers, crowlers, and cups shall not be deemed to be inside signs or advertising materials and may only be sold to retailers at fair market value, which shall be no less than the cost of the item to the manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor. All temporary inside signs and inside advertising materials in place and in use at any one time shall cost in the aggregate not more than $1,000 per manufacturer. Nothing in this subpart (iv) prohibits a distributor or importing distributor from paying the cost of printing or creating any temporary inside banner or inserts for acrylic table tent beverage or hors d'oeuvre list holders for a retail licensee, provided that the primary purpose for the banner or insert is to highlight, promote, or advertise the product. For the purpose of this subpart (iv), all temporary inside signs and inside advertising materials may be displayed in an adjacent courtyard or patio commonly referred to as a "beer garden" that is a part of the retailer's licensed premises.
    The restrictions contained in this Section 6-6 do not apply to signs, or promotional or advertising materials furnished by manufacturers, distributors or importing distributors to a government owned or operated facility holding a retailer's license as described in Section 6-5.
    No distributor or importing distributor shall directly or indirectly or through a subsidiary or affiliate, or by any officer, director or firm of such manufacturer, distributor or importing distributor, furnish, give, lend or rent, install, repair or maintain, to or for any retail licensee in this State, any signs or inside advertising materials described in subparts (i), (ii), (iii), or (iv) of this Section except as the agent for or on behalf of a manufacturer, provided that the total cost of any signs and inside advertising materials including but not limited to labor, erection, installation and permit fees shall be paid by the manufacturer whose product or products said signs and inside advertising materials advertise and except as follows:
    A distributor or importing distributor may purchase from or enter into a written agreement with a manufacturer or a manufacturer's designated supplier and such manufacturer or the manufacturer's designated supplier may sell or enter into an agreement to sell to a distributor or importing distributor permitted signs and advertising materials described in subparts (ii), (iii), or (iv) of this Section for the purpose of furnishing, giving, lending, renting, installing, repairing, or maintaining such signs or advertising materials to or for any retail licensee in this State. Any purchase by a distributor or importing distributor from a manufacturer or a manufacturer's designated supplier shall be voluntary and the manufacturer may not require the distributor or the importing distributor to purchase signs or advertising materials from the manufacturer or the manufacturer's designated supplier.
    A distributor or importing distributor shall be deemed the owner of such signs or advertising materials purchased from a manufacturer or a manufacturer's designated supplier.
    The provisions of Public Act 90-373 concerning signs or advertising materials delivered by a manufacturer to a distributor or importing distributor shall apply only to signs or advertising materials delivered on or after August 14, 1997.
    A manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor may furnish free social media advertising to a retail licensee if the social media advertisement does not contain the retail price of any alcoholic liquor and the social media advertisement complies with any applicable rules or regulations issued by the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau of the United States Department of the Treasury. A manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor may list the names of one or more unaffiliated retailers in the advertisement of alcoholic liquor through social media. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit a retailer from communicating with a manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor on social media or sharing media on the social media of a manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor. A retailer may request free social media advertising from a manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit a manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor from sharing, reposting, or otherwise forwarding a social media post by a retail licensee, so long as the sharing, reposting, or forwarding of the social media post does not contain the retail price of any alcoholic liquor. No manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor shall pay or reimburse a retailer, directly or indirectly, for any social media advertising services, except as specifically permitted in this Act. No retailer shall accept any payment or reimbursement, directly or indirectly, for any social media advertising services offered by a manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor, except as specifically permitted in this Act. For the purposes of this Section, "social media" means a service, platform, or site where users communicate with one another and share media, such as pictures, videos, music, and blogs, with other users free of charge.
    No person engaged in the business of manufacturing, importing or distributing alcoholic liquors shall, directly or indirectly, pay for, or advance, furnish, or lend money for the payment of any license for another. Any licensee who shall permit or assent, or be a party in any way to any violation or infringement of the provisions of this Section shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Act, and any money loaned contrary to a provision of this Act shall not be recovered back, or any note, mortgage or other evidence of indebtedness, or security, or any lease or contract obtained or made contrary to this Act shall be unenforceable and void.
    This Section shall not apply to airplane licensees exercising powers provided in paragraph (i) of Section 5-1 of this Act.
(Source: P.A. 100-885, eff. 8-14-18; 101-517, eff. 8-23-19.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-6.3)
    Sec. 6-6.3. Non-alcoholic merchandise.
    (a) Nothing in this Act shall authorize the Illinois Liquor Control Commission to regulate or exercise jurisdiction over any action, transaction, and business of manufacturers, distributors, or retailers engaged in any transaction involving the furnishing, selling, or offering for sale of non-alcoholic merchandise by manufacturers, distributors, or retailers, unless the transaction involves expressed or implied agreements or understandings prohibited by this Act.
    (b) Non-alcoholic merchandise may be sold by a manufacturer class license holder, non-resident dealer, foreign importer, importing distributor, or distributor to a retail licensee if:
        (1) the manufacturer class license holder,
    	
non-resident dealer, foreign importer, importing distributor, or distributor is also in business as a bona fide producer or vendor of other merchandise;
        (2) the merchandise is sold at its fair market value;
        (3) the non-alcoholic merchandise is not sold in
    	
combination with alcoholic liquor or conditioned on the sale of alcoholic liquor;
        (4) the manufacturer class license holder's,
    	
non-resident dealer's, foreign importer's, importing distributor's, or distributor's acquisition or production costs of the non-alcoholic merchandise appear on the manufacturer class license holder's, non-resident dealer's, foreign importer's, importing distributor's, or distributor's purchase invoices or other records;
        (5) the individual selling prices of the
    	
non-alcoholic merchandise and alcoholic liquor sold in a single transaction can be determined from commercial documents covering the sales transaction if non-alcoholic merchandise is sold in the same transaction as alcoholic liquor; and
        (6) the price is collected by the manufacturer class
    	
license holder, non-resident dealer, foreign importer, or distributor within 30 days of the date of the sale, unless other terms are established in writing between the parties.
    (c) The State Commission may not prohibit the sale of non-alcoholic merchandise if it is sold in the manner in which the non-alcoholic merchandise is sold by a manufacturer or distributor that is not licensed by the State Commission; provided, however, that all invoices for non-alcoholic merchandise sold by a manufacturer class license holder, non-resident dealer, foreign importer, importing distributor, or distributor that is also in business as a bona fide producer or vendor of other merchandise must be in compliance with the books and records requirements of 11 Ill. Adm. Code 100.130. If the non-alcoholic merchandise is sold on the same invoice as an alcoholic liquor product, the 30-day merchandising credit provisions of Section 6-5 of this Act shall apply to the entire transaction, including the non-alcoholic merchandise.
    (d) Except as provided in subsection (f), a manufacturer class license holder, non-resident dealer, foreign importer, importing distributor, or distributor that is also in business as a bona fide producer or vendor of non-alcoholic merchandise shall not condition the sale of its alcoholic liquor on the sale of its non-alcoholic merchandise and shall not combine the sale of its alcoholic liquor with the sale of its non-alcoholic merchandise. A manufacturer class license holder, non-resident dealer, foreign importer, importing distributor, or distributor that is also in business as a bona fide producer or vendor of non-alcoholic merchandise may sell, market, and promote non-alcoholic merchandise in the same manner in which the non-alcoholic merchandise is sold, marketed, or promoted by a manufacturer or distributor not licensed by the State Commission.
    (e) Notwithstanding the prohibited furnishing or providing of fixtures, equipment, and furnishings to retailers as contained in Section 6-6 of this Act, the act of a manufacturer class license holder, non-resident dealer, foreign importer, importing distributor, or distributor furnishing or providing retailers with fixtures, equipment, or furnishings for the limited purpose of storing, servicing, displaying, advertising, furnishing, selling, or aiding in the sale of non-alcoholic merchandise is permitted, only to the extent allowed by this Section, and such fixtures, equipment, and furnishings shall not be used by the retail licensee to store, service, display, advertise, furnish, sell, or aid in the sale of alcoholic liquors. All such fixtures, equipment, or furnishings shall be identified by the retail licensee as being furnished by a manufacturer class license holder, non-resident dealer, foreign importer, importing distributor, or distributor licensed by the State Commission and, if purchased by the retail licensee and sold on the same invoice as alcoholic liquor products, the price must be collected by the manufacturer class license holder, non-resident dealer, foreign importer, importing distributor, or distributor selling the same within 30 days of the date of sale.
    (f) Notwithstanding any provision of this Act to the contrary, a manufacturer class license holder, non-resident dealer, foreign importer, importing distributor, or distributor may package and distribute alcoholic liquor in combination with other non-alcoholic merchandise products if the alcoholic liquor and non-alcoholic merchandise was originally packaged together for ultimate sale to consumers by the manufacturer or agent of the manufacturer as originally packaged by the manufacturer or agent of the manufacturer for ultimate sale to consumers.
(Source: P.A. 99-282, eff. 8-5-15.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-6.5)
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-16)
    Sec. 6-6.5. Sanitation. A manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor may sell coil cleaning services to a retail licensee at fair market cost.
    A manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor may sell dispensing accessories to retail licensees at a price not less than the cost to the manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor who initially purchased them. Dispensing accessories include, but are not limited to, items such as standards, faucets, cold plates, rods, vents, taps, tap standards, hoses, washers, couplings, gas gauges, vent tongues, shanks, and check valves. A manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor may service, balance, or inspect draft beer, wine, or distilled spirits systems at regular intervals and may provide labor to replace or install dispensing accessories.
    Coil cleaning supplies consisting of detergents, cleaning chemicals, brushes, or similar type cleaning devices may be sold at a price not less than the cost to the manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor.
(Source: P.A. 101-16, eff. 6-14-19.)
 
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-517)
    Sec. 6-6.5. Sanitation and use of growlers and crowlers.
    (a) A manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor may not provide for free, but may sell coil cleaning services and installation services, including labor costs, to a retail licensee at fair market cost.
    A manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor may not provide for free, but may sell dispensing accessories to retail licensees at a price not less than the cost to the manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor who initially purchased them. Dispensing accessories include, but are not limited to, items such as standards, faucets, cold plates, rods, vents, taps, tap standards, hoses, washers, couplings, gas gauges, vent tongues, shanks, glycol draught systems, pumps, and check valves.
    Coil cleaning supplies consisting of detergents, cleaning chemicals, brushes, or similar type cleaning devices may be sold at a price not less than the cost to the manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor.
    (a-5) A manufacturer of beer licensed under subsection (e) of Section 6-4 or a brew pub may transfer any beer manufactured or sold on its licensed premises to a growler or crowler and sell those growlers or crowlers to non-licensees for consumption off the premises. A manufacturer of beer under subsection (e) of Section 6-4 or a brew pub is not subject to subsection (b) of this Section.
    (b) An on-premises retail licensee may transfer beer to a growler or crowler, which is not an original manufacturer container, but is a reusable rigid container that holds up to 128 fluid ounces of beer and is designed to be sealed on premises by the licensee for off-premises consumption, if the following requirements are met:
        (1) the beer is transferred within the licensed
    	
premises by an employee of the licensed premises at the time of sale;
        (2) the person transferring the alcohol to be sold to
    	
the end consumer is 21 years of age or older;
        (3) the growler or crowler holds no more than 128
    	
fluid ounces;
        (4) the growler or crowler bears a twist-type
    	
closure, cork, stopper, or plug and includes a one-time use tamper-proof seal;
        (5) the growler or crowler is affixed with a label or
    	
tag that contains the following information:
            (A) the brand name of the product dispensed;
            (B) the name of the brewer or bottler;
            (C) the type of product, such as beer, ale,
        	
lager, bock, stout, or other brewed or fermented beverage;
            (D) the net contents;
            (E) the name and address of the business that
        	
cleaned, sanitized, labeled, and filled or refilled the growler or crowler; and
            (F) the date the growler or crowler was filled or
        	
refilled;
        (5.5) the growler or crowler has been purged with CO2
    	
prior to sealing the container;
        (6) the on-premises retail licensee complies with the
    	
sanitation requirements under subsections (a) through (c) of 11 Ill. Adm. Code 100.160 when sanitizing the dispensing equipment used to draw beer to fill the growler or crowler or refill the growler;
        (7) before filling the growler or crowler or
    	
refilling the growler, the on-premises retail licensee or licensee's employee shall clean and sanitize the growler or crowler in one of the following manners:
            (A) By manual washing in a 3-compartment sink.
                (i) Before sanitizing the growler or crowler,
            	
the sinks and work area shall be cleaned to remove any chemicals, oils, or grease from other cleaning activities.
                (ii) Any residual liquid from the growler
            	
shall be emptied into a drain. A growler shall not be emptied into the cleaning water.
                (iii) The growler and cap shall be cleaned in
            	
water and detergent. The water temperature shall be, at a minimum, 110 degrees Fahrenheit or the temperature specified on the cleaning agent manufacturer's label instructions. The detergent shall not be fat-based or oil-based.
                (iv) Any residues on the interior and
            	
exterior of the growler shall be removed.
                (v) The growler and cap shall be rinsed with
            	
water in the middle compartment. Rinsing may be from the spigot with a spray arm, from a spigot, or from a tub as long as the water for rinsing is not stagnant but is continually refreshed.
                (vi) The growler shall be sanitized in the
            	
third compartment. Chemical sanitizer shall be used in accordance with the United States Environmental Protection Agency-registered label use instructions and shall meet the minimum water temperature requirements of that chemical.
                (vii) A test kit or other device that
            	
accurately measures the concentration in milligrams per liter of chemical sanitizing solutions shall be provided and be readily accessible for use.
            (B) By using a mechanical washing and sanitizing
        	
machine.
                (i) Mechanical washing and sanitizing
            	
machines shall be provided with an easily accessible and readable data plate affixed to the machine by the manufacturer and shall be used according to the machine's design and operation specifications.
                (ii) Mechanical washing and sanitizing
            	
machines shall be equipped with chemical or hot water sanitization.
                (iii) The concentration of the sanitizing
            	
solution or the water temperature shall be accurately determined by using a test kit or other device.
                (iv) The machine shall be regularly serviced
            	
based upon the manufacturer's or installer's guidelines.
            (C) By transferring beer to a growler or crowler
        	
with a tube.
                (i) Beer may be transferred to a growler or
            	
crowler from the bottom of the growler or crowler to the top with a tube that is attached to the tap and extends to the bottom of the growler or crowler or with a commercial filling machine.
                (ii) Food grade sanitizer shall be used in
            	
accordance with the United States Environmental Protection Agency-registered label use instructions.
                (iii) A container of liquid food grade
            	
sanitizer shall be maintained for no more than 10 malt beverage taps that will be used for filling growlers or crowlers and refilling growlers.
                (iv) Each container shall contain no less
            	
than 5 tubes that will be used only for filling growlers or crowlers and refilling growlers.
                (v) The growler or crowler must be inspected
            	
visually for contamination.
                (vi) After each transfer of beer to a growler
            	
or crowler, the tube shall be immersed in the container with the liquid food grade sanitizer.
                (vii) A different tube from the container
            	
must be used for each fill of a growler or crowler or refill of a growler.
    (c) Growlers and crowlers that comply with items (4) and (5) of subsection (b) shall not be deemed an unsealed container for purposes of Section 11-502 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
    (d) Growlers and crowlers, as described and authorized under this Section, are not original packages for the purposes of this Act. Upon a consumer taking possession of a growler or crowler from an on-premises retail licensee, the growler or crowler and its contents are deemed to be in the sole custody, control, and care of the consumer.
(Source: P.A. 101-517, eff. 8-23-19.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-6.6)
    Sec. 6-6.6. Giving, selling, and leasing dispensing equipment. Notwithstanding any provision of this Act to the contrary, a manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor may:
        (1) give dispensing equipment free of charge to a
    	
retailer, special use permit licensee, or caterer retailer one time per year for a one-day period. A manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor shall not supply a retailer, special use permit licensee, or caterer retailer with free beer, wine, spirits, or any other item of value for the same one-day period the dispensing equipment is given, except as otherwise provided in this Act or the Illinois Administrative Code;
        (2) give dispensing equipment free of charge to a
    	
special event retailer only for the duration of the licensed special event. A manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor shall not supply a special event retailer with free beer, wine, or distilled spirits for the event the dispensing equipment is given, except as otherwise provided in this Act or the Illinois Administrative Code; or
        (3) sell dispensing equipment to a retailer, special
    	
event retailer, special use permit licensee, or caterer retailer for a price that is not less than the cost to the manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor. For purposes of this paragraph (3), the cost of dispensing equipment is the amount that the manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor paid for the dispensing equipment. If the manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor did not pay for the dispensing equipment but was given the equipment, the cost of the dispensing equipment is equal to (i) the amount another manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor paid for the dispensing equipment, (ii) the cost of manufacturing or producing the dispensing equipment, or (iii) the fair market value of the dispensing equipment.
    A manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor may also enter into a written lease for the fair market value of the dispensing equipment to retailers, special event retailers, special use permit licensees, or caterer retailers. The manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor shall invoice and collect the sale price or payment for the entire lease period from the retailer, special event retailer, special use permit licensee, or caterer retailer within 30 days of the date of the invoice or from the date the lease is executed. The term of any lease for dispensing equipment shall not exceed 180 days in the aggregate in one calendar year, and no lease shall be renewed automatically. There shall be a lapse of 90 consecutive days before the beginning of a new lease term.
    At the direction of the manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor, the retailer, special event retailer, special use permit licensee, or caterer retailer shall return the equipment or the manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor shall retrieve the dispensing equipment at the termination of the lease.
    In this Section, "dispensing equipment" means any portable or temporary unit the primary purpose of which is to pour alcoholic liquor or to maintain the alcoholic liquor in a consumable state. "Dispensing equipment" includes courtesy wagons, beer wagons, beer trailers, ice bins, draft coolers, coil boxes, portable bars, and kiosks. "Dispensing equipment" does not include permanent tap systems, permanent refrigeration systems, or any other built-in or physically attached fixture of the retailer, special event retailer, special use permit licensee, or caterer retailer.
    In this Section, "fair market value" for the purposes of leasing dispensing equipment means (i) the cost of depreciation of the dispensing equipment to the manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor for the same period of the lease or (ii) the cost of depreciation the manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor would have incurred based upon the market value of the dispensing equipment if the manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor did not pay for the dispensing equipment or if the dispensing equipment is fully depreciated.
(Source: P.A. 101-16, eff. 6-14-19.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-7) (from Ch. 43, par. 124)
    Sec. 6-7. No manufacturer or distributor or importing distributor or foreign importer shall sell or deliver any package containing alcoholic liquor manufactured or distributed by him unless the same shall have affixed thereto all cancelled revenue stamps which may be provided by Federal law, and shall also bear thereon a clear and legible label containing the name and address of the manufacturer, the kind of alcoholic liquor contained therein, and in the case of alcoholic liquor (other than beer and imported Scotch whiskey and brandy 4 years old or more) the date when manufactured and the minimum alcoholic content thereof. No person or persons, corporation, partnership or firm shall label alcoholic liquor as "whiskey" or "gin" or shall import for sale or shall sell in this State alcoholic liquor labeled as "whiskey" or "gin" unless the entire alcoholic content thereof, except flavoring materials, is a distillate of fermented mash of grain or mixture of grains. Alcoholic liquor of the type of whiskey or gin not conforming to this requirement must be labeled "imitation whiskey" or "imitation gin" (as the case may be). No spirits shall contain any substance, compound or ingredient which is injurious to health or deleterious for human consumption. No package shall be delivered by any manufacturer or distributor or importing distributor or foreign importer unless the same shall be securely sealed so that the contents thereof cannot be removed without breaking the seal so placed thereon by said manufacturer, and no other licensee shall sell, have in his possession, or use any package or container which does not comply with this Section or does not bear evidence that said package, when delivered to him, complied herewith.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-8) (from Ch. 43, par. 125)
    Sec. 6-8. Each manufacturer or importing distributor or foreign importer shall keep an accurate record of all alcoholic liquors manufactured, distributed, sold, used, or delivered by him in this State during each month, showing therein to whom sold, and shall furnish a copy thereof or a report thereon to the State Commission, as the State Commission may, request.
    Each importing distributor or manufacturer to whom alcoholic liquors imported into this State have been consigned shall effect possession and physical control thereof by storing such alcoholic liquors in the premises wherein such importing distributor or manufacturer is licensed to engage in such business as an importing distributor or manufacturer and to make such alcoholic liquors together with accompanying invoices, bills of lading and receiving tickets available for inspection by an agent or representative of the Department of Revenue and of the State Commission.
    All alcoholic liquor imported into this State must be off-loaded from the common carrier, vehicle, or mode of transportation by which the alcoholic liquor was delivered into this State. The alcoholic liquor shall be stored at the licensed premises of the importing distributor before sale and delivery to licensees in this State. A distributor or importing distributor, upon application to the Commission, may secure a waiver of the provisions of this Section for purposes of delivering beer directly to a licensee holding or otherwise participating in a special event sponsored by a unit of government or a not-for-profit organization.
    A manufacturer of beer that imports or transfers beer into this State must comply with the provisions of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 100-885, eff. 8-14-18.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-9) (from Ch. 43, par. 126)
    Sec. 6-9. Registration of trade marks; sale within geographical area; delivery to authorized persons. The Legislature hereby finds and declares that for purposes of ensuring the preservation and enhancement of interbrand competition in the alcoholic liquor industry within the State, ensuring that importation and distribution of alcoholic liquor in the State will be subject to thorough and inexpensive monitoring by the State, reducing the importation of illicit or untaxed alcoholic liquor into the State, excluding misbranded alcoholic liquor products from the State, providing incentives to distributors to service and sell to larger numbers of retail licensees in the geographic area where such distributors are engaged in business, and reducing the amount of spoiled and overaged alcoholic liquor products sold to consumers, it is necessary to restrict the purchase of alcoholic liquors at wholesale in the State to those persons selected by the manufacturer, distributor, importing distributor or foreign importer who owns or controls the trade mark, brand or name of the alcoholic liquor products sold to such persons, and to restrict the geographic area or areas within which such persons sell such alcoholic liquor at wholesale, as provided in this Section.
    Each manufacturer, non-resident dealer, distributor, importing distributor, or foreign importer who owns or controls the trade mark, brand or name of any alcoholic liquor shall register with the State Commission, in the Chicago office, on or before the effective date, the name of each person to whom such manufacturer, non-resident dealer, distributor, importing distributor, or foreign importer grants the right to sell at wholesale in this State any such alcoholic liquor, specifying the particular trade mark, brand or name of alcoholic liquor as to which such right is granted, the geographical area or areas for which such right is granted and the period of time for which such rights are granted to such person. Each manufacturer, non-resident dealer, distributor or importing distributor, or foreign importer who is required to register under this Section must furnish a copy of the registration statement at the time of appointment to the person who has been granted the right to sell alcoholic liquor at wholesale. However, if a person who has been appointed the right to sell alcoholic liquor at wholesale does not receive a copy of the registration statement as required under this Section, such person may file a registration statement with the State Commission, provided that the person furnishes a copy of that registration statement to the manufacturer, non-resident dealer, distributor, importing distributor, or foreign importer within 30 days of filing the registration statement. The registration statement shall state:
    (1) the name of the person appointed;
    (2) the name of the manufacturer, non-resident dealer, distributor, importing distributor, or foreign importer from whom the person received the right to sell alcoholic liquor;
    (3) the particular trade mark, brand, or name of alcoholic liquor as to which the right to sell at wholesale is granted; and
    (4) the geographical areas for which the right to sell at wholesale is granted.
    Such manufacturer, non-resident dealer, distributor, importing distributor, or foreign importer may grant the right to sell at wholesale any trade mark, brand or name of any alcoholic liquor in any geographical area to more than one person. If the registration is received after the effective date, the Commission shall treat the date the registration was received in the Chicago office as the effective date. Such registration shall be made on a form prescribed by the State Commission and the State Commission may require such registration to be on a form provided by it.
    A non-resident dealer or foreign importer who is not a manufacturer shall file the registration statement jointly with the manufacturer identifying the person authorized by the manufacturer to sign the registration statement on behalf of the manufacturer.
    No such registration shall be made in any other manner than as is provided in this Section and only those persons registered by the manufacturer, non-resident dealer, distributor, importing distributor or foreign importer, shall have the right to sell at wholesale in this State, the brand of alcoholic liquor specified on the registration form.
    However, a licensed Illinois distributor who has not been registered to sell a brand of alcoholic liquor, but for a period of 2 years prior to November 8, 1979 has been engaged in the purchase of a brand for resale from a licensed Illinois distributor who has the right to sell that brand at wholesale, may continue to purchase and resell the brand at wholesale, and may purchase from the same distributor and resell at wholesale any new brands of the same manufacturer, provided that:
        (1) Within 60 days after November 8, 1979 he
    	
identifies the brand which he so purchased to the State Commission and the Commission within 30 days thereafter verifies that the purchases have occurred;
        (2) Thereafter, he notifies the State Commission in
    	
writing of any brands of the same manufacturer which he wishes to purchase from the same distributor that were not available for distribution on or before November 8, 1979, and that the Commission within 30 days of such notification verifies that the brand is a new brand of the same manufacturer, and that the same licensed Illinois distributor has the right to sell the new brand at wholesale;
        (3) His licensed business address is within the
    	
geographical area for which the licensed Illinois distributor from whom the purchases are made has the right to sell said brand or brands of alcoholic liquor; and
        (4) His sales are made within the geographical area
    	
for which the licensed Illinois distributor from whom the purchases are made has the right to sell the brand or brands of alcoholic liquor and only to retail licensees whose licensed premises are located within the aforementioned geographical area.
    No person to whom such right is granted shall sell at wholesale in this State any alcoholic liquor bearing such trade mark, brand or name outside of the geographical area for which such person holds such selling right, as registered with the State Commission, nor shall he sell such alcoholic liquor within such geographical area to a retail licensee if the premises specified in such retailer's license are located outside such geographical area. Any licensed Illinois distributor who has not been granted the right to sell any alcoholic liquor at wholesale and is purchasing alcoholic liquor from a person who has been granted the right to sell at wholesale may sell and deliver only to retail licensees whose licensed premises are within the same geographical area as the person who has been granted the right to sell at wholesale.
    No manufacturer, importing distributor, distributor, non-resident dealer, or foreign importer shall sell or deliver any package containing alcoholic liquor manufactured or distributed by him for resale, unless the person to whom such package is sold or delivered is authorized to receive such package in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(Source: P.A. 96-482, eff. 8-14-09.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-9.1)
    Sec. 6-9.1. Deliveries to retail establishments.
    (a) A distributor of wine or spirits shall deliver to any retailer within any geographic area in which that distributor has been granted by a wholesaler the right to sell its trademark, brand, or name at least once every 2 weeks if (i) in the case of a retailer located in a county with a population of at least 3,000,000 inhabitants or in a county adjacent to a county with at least 3,000,000 inhabitants, the retailer agrees to purchase at least $200 of wine or spirits from the distributor every 2 weeks; or (ii) in the case of a retailer located in a county with a population of less than 3,000,000 that is not adjacent to a county with a population of at least 3,000,000 inhabitants, the retailer agrees to purchase at least $50 of wine or spirits from the distributor every 2 weeks.
    (b) On January 1, 2002 and every 2 years thereafter, the dollar amounts in items (i) and (ii) of subsection (a) shall be increased or decreased by a percentage equal to the percentage increase or decrease in the Consumer Price Index during the previous 2 years according to the most recent available data.
(Source: P.A. 91-482, eff. 1-1-00.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-10) (from Ch. 43, par. 126a)
    Sec. 6-10. Books and records available for investigation and control; maintenance. It shall be the duty of every retail licensee to make books and records available upon reasonable notice for the purpose of investigation and control by the Illinois Liquor Control Commission or any local liquor control commission having jurisdiction over the licensee. Such books and records need not be maintained on the licensed premises, but must be maintained in the State of Illinois; however, if access is available electronically, the books and records may be maintained out of state. However, all original invoices or copies thereof covering purchases of alcoholic liquor must be retained on the licensed premises for a period of 90 days after such purchase, unless the Commission has granted a waiver in response to a written request in cases where records are kept at a central business location within the State of Illinois or in cases where books and records that are available electronically are maintained out of state.
(Source: P.A. 89-250, eff. 1-1-96.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-11)
    Sec. 6-11. Sale near churches, schools, and hospitals.
    (a) No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within 100 feet of any church, school other than an institution of higher learning, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their spouses or children or any military or naval station, provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops or other places where sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business carried on if the place of business so exempted is not located in a municipality of more than 500,000 persons, unless required by local ordinance; nor to the renewal of a license for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on premises within 100 feet of any church or school where the church or school has been established within such 100 feet since the issuance of the original license. In the case of a church, the distance of 100 feet shall be measured to the nearest part of any building used for worship services or educational programs and not to property boundaries.
    (a-5) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, a local liquor control commissioner may grant an exemption to the prohibition in subsection (a) of this Section if a local rule or ordinance authorizes the local liquor control commissioner to grant that exemption.
    (b) Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance of a retail license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor to a restaurant, the primary business of which is the sale of goods baked on the premises if (i) the restaurant is newly constructed and located on a lot of not less than 10,000 square feet, (ii) the restaurant costs at least $1,000,000 to construct, (iii) the licensee is the titleholder to the premises and resides on the premises, and (iv) the construction of the restaurant is completed within 18 months of July 10, 1998 (the effective date of Public Act 90-617).
    (c) Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance of a retail license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor incidental to a restaurant if (1) the primary business of the restaurant consists of the sale of food where the sale of liquor is incidental to the sale of food and the applicant is a completely new owner of the restaurant, (2) the immediately prior owner or operator of the premises where the restaurant is located operated the premises as a restaurant and held a valid retail license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at the restaurant for at least part of the 24 months before the change of ownership, and (3) the restaurant is located 75 or more feet from a school.
    (d) In the interest of further developing Illinois' economy in the area of commerce, tourism, convention, and banquet business, nothing in this Section shall prohibit issuance of a retail license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages to a restaurant, banquet facility, grocery store, or hotel having not fewer than 150 guest room accommodations located in a municipality of more than 500,000 persons, notwithstanding the proximity of such hotel, restaurant, banquet facility, or grocery store to any church or school, if the licensed premises described on the license are located within an enclosed mall or building of a height of at least 6 stories, or 60 feet in the case of a building that has been registered as a national landmark, or in a grocery store having a minimum of 56,010 square feet of floor space in a single story building in an open mall of at least 3.96 acres that is adjacent to a public school that opened as a boys technical high school in 1934, or in a grocery store having a minimum of 31,000 square feet of floor space in a single story building located a distance of more than 90 feet but less than 100 feet from a high school that opened in 1928 as a junior high school and became a senior high school in 1933, and in each of these cases if the sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business carried on by the licensee.
    For purposes of this Section, a "banquet facility" is any part of a building that caters to private parties and where the sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business.
    (e) Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance of a license to a church or private school to sell at retail alcoholic liquor if any such sales are limited to periods when groups are assembled on the premises solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors.
    (f) Nothing in this Section shall prohibit a church or church affiliated school located in a home rule municipality or in a municipality with 75,000 or more inhabitants from locating within 100 feet of a property for which there is a preexisting license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail. In these instances, the local zoning authority may, by ordinance adopted simultaneously with the granting of an initial special use zoning permit for the church or church affiliated school, provide that the 100-foot restriction in this Section shall not apply to that church or church affiliated school and future retail liquor licenses.
    (g) Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance of a retail license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at premises within 100 feet, but not less than 90 feet, of a public school if (1) the premises have been continuously licensed to sell alcoholic liquor for a period of at least 50 years, (2) the premises are located in a municipality having a population of over 500,000 inhabitants, (3) the licensee is an individual who is a member of a family that has held the previous 3 licenses for that location for more than 25 years, (4) the principal of the school and the alderperson of the ward in which the school is located have delivered a written statement to the local liquor control commissioner stating that they do not object to the issuance of a license under this subsection (g), and (5) the local liquor control commissioner has received the written consent of a majority of the registered voters who live within 200 feet of the premises.
    (h) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor within premises and at an outdoor patio area attached to premises that are located in a municipality with a population in excess of 300,000 inhabitants and that are within 100 feet of a church if:
        (1) the sale of alcoholic liquor at the premises is
    	
incidental to the sale of food,
        (2) the sale of liquor is not the principal business
    	
carried on by the licensee at the premises,
        (3) the premises are less than 1,000 square feet,
        (4) the premises are owned by the University of
    	
Illinois,
        (5) the premises are immediately adjacent to property
    	
owned by a church and are not less than 20 nor more than 40 feet from the church space used for worship services, and
        (6) the principal religious leader at the place of
    	
worship has indicated his or her support for the issuance of the license in writing.
    (i) Notwithstanding any provision in this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license to sell alcoholic liquor at a premises that is located within a municipality with a population in excess of 300,000 inhabitants and is within 100 feet of a church, synagogue, or other place of worship if:
        (1) the primary entrance of the premises and the
    	
primary entrance of the church, synagogue, or other place of worship are at least 100 feet apart, on parallel streets, and separated by an alley; and
        (2) the principal religious leader at the place of
    	
worship has not indicated his or her opposition to the issuance or renewal of the license in writing.
    (j) Notwithstanding any provision in this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance of a retail license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at a theater that is within 100 feet of a church if (1) the church owns the theater, (2) the church leases the theater to one or more entities, and (3) the theater is used by at least 5 different not-for-profit theater groups.
    (k) Notwithstanding any provision in this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at a premises that is located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and is within 100 feet of a school if:
        (1) the primary entrance of the premises and the
    	
primary entrance of the school are parallel, on different streets, and separated by an alley;
        (2) the southeast corner of the premises are at least
    	
350 feet from the southwest corner of the school;
        (3) the school was built in 1978;
        (4) the sale of alcoholic liquor at the premises is
    	
incidental to the sale of food;
        (5) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried on by the licensee at the premises;
        (6) the applicant is the owner of the restaurant and
    	
has held a valid license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor for the business to be conducted on the premises at a different location for more than 7 years; and
        (7) the premises is at least 2,300 square feet and
    	
sits on a lot that is between 6,100 and 6,150 square feet.
    (l) Notwithstanding any provision in this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at a premises that is located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and is within 100 feet of a church or school if:
        (1) the primary entrance of the premises and the
    	
closest entrance of the church or school is at least 90 feet apart and no greater than 95 feet apart;
        (2) the shortest distance between the premises and
    	
the church or school is at least 80 feet apart and no greater than 85 feet apart;
        (3) the applicant is the owner of the restaurant and
    	
on November 15, 2006 held a valid license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor for the business to be conducted on the premises for at least 14 different locations;
        (4) the sale of alcoholic liquor at the premises is
    	
incidental to the sale of food;
        (5) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried on by the licensee at the premises;
        (6) the premises is at least 3,200 square feet and
    	
sits on a lot that is between 7,150 and 7,200 square feet; and
        (7) the principal religious leader at the place of
    	
worship has not indicated his or her opposition to the issuance or renewal of the license in writing.
    (m) Notwithstanding any provision in this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at a premises that is located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and is within 100 feet of a church if:
        (1) the premises and the church are perpendicular,
    	
and the primary entrance of the premises faces South while the primary entrance of the church faces West and the distance between the two entrances is more than 100 feet;
        (2) the shortest distance between the premises lot
    	
line and the exterior wall of the church is at least 80 feet;
        (3) the church was established at the current
    	
location in 1916 and the present structure was erected in 1925;
        (4) the premises is a single story, single use
    	
building with at least 1,750 square feet and no more than 2,000 square feet;
        (5) the sale of alcoholic liquor at the premises is
    	
incidental to the sale of food;
        (6) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried on by the licensee at the premises; and
        (7) the principal religious leader at the place of
    	
worship has not indicated his or her opposition to the issuance or renewal of the license in writing.
    (n) Notwithstanding any provision in this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at a premises that is located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and is within 100 feet of a school if:
        (1) the school is a City of Chicago School District
    	
299 school;
        (2) the school is located within subarea E of City of
    	
Chicago Residential Business Planned Development Number 70;
        (3) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried on by the licensee on the premises;
        (4) the sale of alcoholic liquor at the premises is
    	
incidental to the sale of food; and
        (5) the administration of City of Chicago School
    	
District 299 has expressed, in writing, its support for the issuance of the license.
    (o) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a retail license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at a premises that is located within a municipality in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a church if:
        (1) the sale of alcoholic liquor at the premises is
    	
incidental to the sale of food;
        (2) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried on by the licensee at the premises;
        (3) the premises is located on a street that runs
    	
perpendicular to the street on which the church is located;
        (4) the primary entrance of the premises is at least
    	
100 feet from the primary entrance of the church;
        (5) the shortest distance between any part of the
    	
premises and any part of the church is at least 60 feet;
        (6) the premises is between 3,600 and 4,000 square
    	
feet and sits on a lot that is between 3,600 and 4,000 square feet; and
        (7) the premises was built in the year 1909.
    For purposes of this subsection (o), "premises" means a place of business together with a privately owned outdoor location that is adjacent to the place of business.
    (p) Notwithstanding any provision in this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at a premises that is located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a church if:
        (1) the shortest distance between the backdoor of the
    	
premises, which is used as an emergency exit, and the church is at least 80 feet;
        (2) the church was established at the current
    	
location in 1889; and
        (3) liquor has been sold on the premises since at
    	
least 1985.
    (q) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor within a premises that is located in a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a church-owned property if:
        (1) the premises is located within a larger building
    	
operated as a grocery store;
        (2) the area of the premises does not exceed 720
    	
square feet and the area of the larger building exceeds 18,000 square feet;
        (3) the larger building containing the premises is
    	
within 100 feet of the nearest property line of a church-owned property on which a church-affiliated school is located;
        (4) the sale of liquor is not the principal business
    	
carried on within the larger building;
        (5) the primary entrance of the larger building and
    	
the premises and the primary entrance of the church-affiliated school are on different, parallel streets, and the distance between the 2 primary entrances is more than 100 feet;
        (6) the larger building is separated from the
    	
church-owned property and church-affiliated school by an alley;
        (7) the larger building containing the premises and
    	
the church building front are on perpendicular streets and are separated by a street; and
        (8) (Blank).
    (r) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance, renewal, or maintenance of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor incidental to the sale of food within a restaurant established in a premises that is located in a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a church if:
        (1) the primary entrance of the church and the
    	
primary entrance of the restaurant are at least 100 feet apart;
        (2) the restaurant has operated on the ground floor
    	
and lower level of a multi-story, multi-use building for more than 40 years;
        (3) the primary business of the restaurant consists
    	
of the sale of food where the sale of liquor is incidental to the sale of food;
        (4) the sale of alcoholic liquor is conducted
    	
primarily in the below-grade level of the restaurant to which the only public access is by a staircase located inside the restaurant; and
        (5) the restaurant has held a license authorizing the
    	
sale of alcoholic liquor on the premises for more than 40 years.
    (s) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at a premises that is located within a municipality with a population more than 5,000 and less than 10,000 and is within 100 feet of a church if:
        (1) the church was established at the location within
    	
100 feet of the premises after a license for the sale of alcoholic liquor at the premises was first issued;
        (2) a license for sale of alcoholic liquor at the
    	
premises was first issued before January 1, 2007; and
        (3) a license for the sale of alcoholic liquor on
    	
the premises has been continuously in effect since January 1, 2007, except for interruptions between licenses of no more than 90 days.
    (t) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor incidental to the sale of food within a restaurant that is established in a premises that is located in a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a school and a church if:
        (1) the restaurant is located inside a five-story
    	
building with over 16,800 square feet of commercial space;
        (2) the area of the premises does not exceed 31,050
    	
square feet;
        (3) the area of the restaurant does not exceed 5,800
    	
square feet;
        (4) the building has no less than 78 condominium
    	
units;
        (5) the construction of the building in which the
    	
restaurant is located was completed in 2006;
        (6) the building has 10 storefront properties, 3 of
    	
which are used for the restaurant;
        (7) the restaurant will open for business in 2010;
        (8) the building is north of the school and separated
    	
by an alley; and
        (9) the principal religious leader of the church and
    	
either the alderperson of the ward in which the school is located or the principal of the school have delivered a written statement to the local liquor control commissioner stating that he or she does not object to the issuance of a license under this subsection (t).
    (u) Notwithstanding any provision in this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license to sell alcoholic liquor at a premises that is located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a school if:
        (1) the premises operates as a restaurant and has
    	
been in operation since February 2008;
        (2) the applicant is the owner of the premises;
        (3) the sale of alcoholic liquor is incidental to the
    	
sale of food;
        (4) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried on by the licensee on the premises;
        (5) the premises occupy the first floor of a 3-story
    	
building that is at least 90 years old;
        (6) the rear lot of the school and the rear corner of
    	
the building that the premises occupy are separated by an alley;
        (7) the distance from the southwest corner of the
    	
property line of the school and the northeast corner of the building that the premises occupy is at least 16 feet, 5 inches;
        (8) the distance from the rear door of the premises
    	
to the southwest corner of the property line of the school is at least 93 feet;
        (9) the school is a City of Chicago School District
    	
299 school;
        (10) the school's main structure was erected in 1902
    	
and an addition was built to the main structure in 1959; and
        (11) the principal of the school and the alderperson
    	
in whose district the premises are located have expressed, in writing, their support for the issuance of the license.
    (v) Notwithstanding any provision in this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at a premises that is located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and is within 100 feet of a school if:
        (1) the total land area of the premises for which the
    	
license or renewal is sought is more than 600,000 square feet;
        (2) the premises for which the license or renewal is
    	
sought has more than 600 parking stalls;
        (3) the total area of all buildings on the premises
    	
for which the license or renewal is sought exceeds 140,000 square feet;
        (4) the property line of the premises for which the
    	
license or renewal is sought is separated from the property line of the school by a street;
        (5) the distance from the school's property line to
    	
the property line of the premises for which the license or renewal is sought is at least 60 feet;
        (6) as of June 14, 2011 (the effective date of Public
    	
Act 97-9), the premises for which the license or renewal is sought is located in the Illinois Medical District.
    (w) Notwithstanding any provision in this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license to sell alcoholic liquor at a premises that is located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a church if:
        (1) the sale of alcoholic liquor at the premises is
    	
incidental to the sale of food;
        (2) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried on by the licensee at the premises;
        (3) the premises occupy the first floor and basement
    	
of a 2-story building that is 106 years old;
        (4) the premises is at least 7,000 square feet and
    	
located on a lot that is at least 11,000 square feet;
        (5) the premises is located directly west of the
    	
church, on perpendicular streets, and separated by an alley;
        (6) the distance between the property line of the
    	
premises and the property line of the church is at least 20 feet;
        (7) the distance between the primary entrance of the
    	
premises and the primary entrance of the church is at least 130 feet; and
        (8) the church has been at its location for at least
    	
40 years.
    (x) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at a premises that is located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a church if:
        (1) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried on by the licensee at the premises;
        (2) the church has been operating in its current
    	
location since 1973;
        (3) the premises has been operating in its current
    	
location since 1988;
        (4) the church and the premises are owned by the same
    	
parish;
        (5) the premises is used for cultural and educational
    	
purposes;
        (6) the primary entrance to the premises and the
    	
primary entrance to the church are located on the same street;
        (7) the principal religious leader of the church has
    	
indicated his support of the issuance of the license;
        (8) the premises is a 2-story building of
    	
approximately 23,000 square feet; and
        (9) the premises houses a ballroom on its ground
    	
floor of approximately 5,000 square feet.
    (y) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at a premises that is located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a school if:
        (1) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried on by the licensee at the premises;
        (2) the sale of alcoholic liquor at the premises is
    	
incidental to the sale of food;
        (3) according to the municipality, the distance
    	
between the east property line of the premises and the west property line of the school is 97.8 feet;
        (4) the school is a City of Chicago School District
    	
299 school;
        (5) the school has been operating since 1959;
        (6) the primary entrance to the premises and the
    	
primary entrance to the school are located on the same street;
        (7) the street on which the entrances of the premises
    	
and the school are located is a major diagonal thoroughfare;
        (8) the premises is a single-story building of
    	
approximately 2,900 square feet; and
        (9) the premises is used for commercial purposes only.
    (z) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at a premises that is located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a mosque if:
        (1) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried on by the licensee at the premises;
        (2) the licensee shall only sell packaged liquors at
    	
the premises;
        (3) the licensee is a national retail chain having
    	
over 100 locations within the municipality;
        (4) the licensee has over 8,000 locations nationwide;
        (5) the licensee has locations in all 50 states;
        (6) the premises is located in the North-East
    	
quadrant of the municipality;
        (7) the premises is a free-standing building that has
    	
"drive-through" pharmacy service;
        (8) the premises has approximately 14,490 square feet
    	
of retail space;
        (9) the premises has approximately 799 square feet of
    	
pharmacy space;
        (10) the premises is located on a major arterial
    	
street that runs east-west and accepts truck traffic; and
        (11) the alderperson of the ward in which the
    	
premises is located has expressed, in writing, his or her support for the issuance of the license.
    (aa) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at a premises that is located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a church if:
        (1) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried on by the licensee at the premises;
        (2) the licensee shall only sell packaged liquors at
    	
the premises;
        (3) the licensee is a national retail chain having
    	
over 100 locations within the municipality;
        (4) the licensee has over 8,000 locations nationwide;
        (5) the licensee has locations in all 50 states;
        (6) the premises is located in the North-East
    	
quadrant of the municipality;
        (7) the premises is located across the street from a
    	
national grocery chain outlet;
        (8) the premises has approximately 16,148 square feet
    	
of retail space;
        (9) the premises has approximately 992 square feet of
    	
pharmacy space;
        (10) the premises is located on a major arterial
    	
street that runs north-south and accepts truck traffic; and
        (11) the alderperson of the ward in which the
    	
premises is located has expressed, in writing, his or her support for the issuance of the license.
    (bb) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at a premises that is located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a church if:
        (1) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried on by the licensee at the premises;
        (2) the sale of alcoholic liquor at the premises is
    	
incidental to the sale of food;
        (3) the primary entrance to the premises and the
    	
primary entrance to the church are located on the same street;
        (4) the premises is across the street from the church;
        (5) the street on which the premises and the church
    	
are located is a major arterial street that runs east-west;
        (6) the church is an elder-led and Bible-based
    	
Assyrian church;
        (7) the premises and the church are both single-story
    	
buildings;
        (8) the storefront directly west of the church is
    	
being used as a restaurant; and
        (9) the distance between the northern-most property
    	
line of the premises and the southern-most property line of the church is 65 feet.
    (cc) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at a premises that is located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a school if:
        (1) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried on by the licensee at the premises;
        (2) the licensee shall only sell packaged liquors at
    	
the premises;
        (3) the licensee is a national retail chain;
        (4) as of October 25, 2011, the licensee has 1,767
    	
stores operating nationwide, 87 stores operating in the State, and 10 stores operating within the municipality;
        (5) the licensee shall occupy approximately 124,000
    	
square feet of space in the basement and first and second floors of a building located across the street from a school;
        (6) the school opened in August of 2009 and occupies
    	
approximately 67,000 square feet of space; and
        (7) the building in which the premises shall be
    	
located has been listed on the National Register of Historic Places since April 17, 1970.
    (dd) Notwithstanding any provision in this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor within a full-service grocery store at a premises that is located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and is within 100 feet of a school if:
        (1) the premises is constructed on land that was
    	
purchased from the municipality at a fair market price;
        (2) the premises is constructed on land that was
    	
previously used as a parking facility for public safety employees;
        (3) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried on by the licensee at the premises;
        (4) the main entrance to the store is more than 100
    	
feet from the main entrance to the school;
        (5) the premises is to be new construction;
        (6) the school is a private school;
        (7) the principal of the school has given written
    	
approval for the license;
        (8) the alderperson of the ward where the premises is
    	
located has given written approval of the issuance of the license;
        (9) the grocery store level of the premises is
    	
between 60,000 and 70,000 square feet; and
        (10) the owner and operator of the grocery store
    	
operates 2 other grocery stores that have alcoholic liquor licenses within the same municipality.
    (ee) Notwithstanding any provision in this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor within a full-service grocery store at a premises that is located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and is within 100 feet of a school if:
        (1) the premises is constructed on land that once
    	
contained an industrial steel facility;
        (2) the premises is located on land that has
    	
undergone environmental remediation;
        (3) the premises is located within a retail complex
    	
containing retail stores where some of the stores sell alcoholic beverages;
        (4) the principal activity of any restaurant in the
    	
retail complex is the sale of food, and the sale of alcoholic liquor is incidental to the sale of food;
        (5) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried on by the grocery store;
        (6) the entrance to any business that sells alcoholic
    	
liquor is more than 100 feet from the entrance to the school;
        (7) the alderperson of the ward where the premises
    	
is located has given written approval of the issuance of the license; and
        (8) the principal of the school has given written
    	
consent to the issuance of the license.
    (ff) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at a premises that is located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a school if:
        (1) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried on at the premises;
        (2) the sale of alcoholic liquor at the premises is
    	
incidental to the operation of a theater;
        (3) the premises is a one and one-half-story building
    	
of approximately 10,000 square feet;
        (4) the school is a City of Chicago School District
    	
299 school;
        (5) the primary entrance of the premises and the
    	
primary entrance of the school are at least 300 feet apart and no more than 400 feet apart;
        (6) the alderperson of the ward in which the premises
    	
is located has expressed, in writing, his support for the issuance of the license; and
        (7) the principal of the school has expressed, in
    	
writing, that there is no objection to the issuance of a license under this subsection (ff).
    (gg) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor incidental to the sale of food within a restaurant or banquet facility established in a premises that is located in a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a church if:
        (1) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried on by the licensee at the premises;
        (2) the property on which the church is located and
    	
the property on which the premises are located are both within a district originally listed on the National Register of Historic Places on February 14, 1979;
        (3) the property on which the premises are located
    	
contains one or more multi-story buildings that are at least 95 years old and have no more than three stories;
        (4) the building in which the church is located is at
    	
least 120 years old;
        (5) the property on which the church is located is
    	
immediately adjacent to and west of the property on which the premises are located;
        (6) the western boundary of the property on which the
    	
premises are located is no less than 118 feet in length and no more than 122 feet in length;
        (7) as of December 31, 2012, both the church property
    	
and the property on which the premises are located are within 250 feet of City of Chicago Business-Residential Planned Development Number 38;
        (8) the principal religious leader at the place of
    	
worship has indicated his or her support for the issuance of the license in writing; and
        (9) the alderperson in whose district the premises
    	
are located has expressed his or her support for the issuance of the license in writing.
    For the purposes of this subsection, "banquet facility" means the part of the building that is located on the floor above a restaurant and caters to private parties and where the sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business.
    (hh) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor within a hotel and at an outdoor patio area attached to the hotel that are located in a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and that are within 100 feet of a hospital if:
        (1) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried on by the licensee at the hotel;
        (2) the hotel is located within the City of Chicago
    	
Business Planned Development Number 468; and
        (3) the hospital is located within the City of
    	
Chicago Institutional Planned Development Number 3.
    (ii) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor within a restaurant and at an outdoor patio area attached to the restaurant that are located in a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and that are within 100 feet of a church if:
        (1) the sale of alcoholic liquor at the premises is
    	
not the principal business carried on by the licensee and is incidental to the sale of food;
        (2) the restaurant has been operated on the street
    	
level of a 2-story building located on a corner lot since 2008;
        (3) the restaurant is between 3,700 and 4,000 square
    	
feet and sits on a lot that is no more than 6,200 square feet;
        (4) the primary entrance to the restaurant and the
    	
primary entrance to the church are located on the same street;
        (5) the street on which the restaurant and the church
    	
are located is a major east-west street;
        (6) the restaurant and the church are separated by a
    	
one-way northbound street;
        (7) the church is located to the west of and no more
    	
than 65 feet from the restaurant; and
        (8) the principal religious leader at the place of
    	
worship has indicated his or her consent to the issuance of the license in writing.
    (jj) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a church if:
        (1) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried on by the licensee at the premises;
        (2) the sale of alcoholic liquor is incidental to the
    	
sale of food;
        (3) the premises are located east of the church, on
    	
perpendicular streets, and separated by an alley;
        (4) the distance between the primary entrance of the
    	
premises and the primary entrance of the church is at least 175 feet;
        (5) the distance between the property line of the
    	
premises and the property line of the church is at least 40 feet;
        (6) the licensee has been operating at the premises
    	
since 2012;
        (7) the church was constructed in 1904;
        (8) the alderperson of the ward in which the premises
    	
is located has expressed, in writing, his or her support for the issuance of the license; and
        (9) the principal religious leader of the church has
    	
delivered a written statement that he or she does not object to the issuance of a license under this subsection (jj).
    (kk) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at a premises that is located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a school if:
        (1) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried on by the licensee at the premises;
        (2) the licensee shall only sell packaged liquors on
    	
the premises;
        (3) the licensee is a national retail chain;
        (4) as of February 27, 2013, the licensee had 1,778
    	
stores operating nationwide, 89 operating in this State, and 11 stores operating within the municipality;
        (5) the licensee shall occupy approximately 169,048
    	
square feet of space within a building that is located across the street from a tuition-based preschool; and
        (6) the alderperson of the ward in which the premises
    	
is located has expressed, in writing, his or her support for the issuance of the license.
    (ll) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at a premises that is located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a school if:
        (1) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried on by the licensee at the premises;
        (2) the licensee shall only sell packaged liquors on
    	
the premises;
        (3) the licensee is a national retail chain;
        (4) as of February 27, 2013, the licensee had 1,778
    	
stores operating nationwide, 89 operating in this State, and 11 stores operating within the municipality;
        (5) the licensee shall occupy approximately 191,535
    	
square feet of space within a building that is located across the street from an elementary school; and
        (6) the alderperson of the ward in which the premises
    	
is located has expressed, in writing, his or her support for the issuance of the license.
    (mm) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor within premises and at an outdoor patio or sidewalk cafe, or both, attached to premises that are located in a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and that are within 100 feet of a hospital if:
        (1) the primary business of the restaurant consists
    	
of the sale of food where the sale of liquor is incidental to the sale of food;
        (2) as a restaurant, the premises may or may not
    	
offer catering as an incidental part of food service;
        (3) the primary business of the restaurant is
    	
conducted in space owned by a hospital or an entity owned or controlled by, under common control with, or that controls a hospital, and the chief hospital administrator has expressed his or her support for the issuance of the license in writing; and
        (4) the hospital is an adult acute care facility
    	
primarily located within the City of Chicago Institutional Planned Development Number 3.
    (nn) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at a premises that is located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a church if:
        (1) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried out on the premises;
        (2) the sale of alcoholic liquor at the premises is
    	
incidental to the operation of a theater;
        (3) the premises are a building that was constructed
    	
in 1913 and opened on May 24, 1915 as a vaudeville theater, and the premises were converted to a motion picture theater in 1935;
        (4) the church was constructed in 1889 with a stone
    	
exterior;
        (5) the primary entrance of the premises and the
    	
primary entrance of the church are at least 100 feet apart;
        (6) the principal religious leader at the place of
    	
worship has indicated his or her consent to the issuance of the license in writing; and
        (7) the alderperson in whose ward the premises are
    	
located has expressed his or her support for the issuance of the license in writing.
    (oo) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at a premises that is located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a mosque, church, or other place of worship if:
        (1) the primary entrance of the premises and the
    	
primary entrance of the mosque, church, or other place of worship are perpendicular and are on different streets;
        (2) the primary entrance to the premises faces West
    	
and the primary entrance to the mosque, church, or other place of worship faces South;
        (3) the distance between the 2 primary entrances is
    	
at least 100 feet;
        (4) the mosque, church, or other place of worship was
    	
established in a location within 100 feet of the premises after a license for the sale of alcohol at the premises was first issued;
        (5) the mosque, church, or other place of worship was
    	
established on or around January 1, 2011;
        (6) a license for the sale of alcohol at the premises
    	
was first issued on or before January 1, 1985;
        (7) a license for the sale of alcohol at the premises
    	
has been continuously in effect since January 1, 1985, except for interruptions between licenses of no more than 90 days; and
        (8) the premises are a single-story, single-use
    	
building of at least 3,000 square feet and no more than 3,380 square feet.
    (pp) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor incidental to the sale of food within a restaurant or banquet facility established on premises that are located in a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of at least one church if:
        (1) the sale of liquor shall not be the principal
    	
business carried on by the licensee at the premises;
        (2) the premises are at least 2,000 square feet and
    	
no more than 10,000 square feet and is located in a single-story building;
        (3) the property on which the premises are located is
    	
within an area that, as of 2009, was designated as a Renewal Community by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development;
        (4) the property on which the premises are located
    	
and the properties on which the churches are located are on the same street;
        (5) the property on which the premises are located is
    	
immediately adjacent to and east of the property on which at least one of the churches is located;
        (6) the property on which the premises are located is
    	
across the street and southwest of the property on which another church is located;
        (7) the principal religious leaders of the churches
    	
have indicated their support for the issuance of the license in writing; and
        (8) the alderperson in whose ward the premises are
    	
located has expressed his or her support for the issuance of the license in writing.
    For purposes of this subsection (pp), "banquet facility" means the part of the building that caters to private parties and where the sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business.
    (qq) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor on premises that are located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a church or school if:
        (1) the primary entrance of the premises and the
    	
closest entrance of the church or school are at least 200 feet apart and no greater than 300 feet apart;
        (2) the shortest distance between the premises and
    	
the church or school is at least 66 feet apart and no greater than 81 feet apart;
        (3) the premises are a single-story, steel-framed
    	
commercial building with at least 18,042 square feet, and was constructed in 1925 and 1997;
        (4) the owner of the business operated within the
    	
premises has been the general manager of a similar supermarket within one mile from the premises, which has had a valid license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor since 2002, and is in good standing with the City of Chicago;
        (5) the principal religious leader at the place of
    	
worship has indicated his or her support to the issuance or renewal of the license in writing;
        (6) the alderperson of the ward has indicated his or
    	
her support to the issuance or renewal of the license in writing; and
        (7) the principal of the school has indicated his or
    	
her support to the issuance or renewal of the license in writing.
    (rr) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a club that leases space to a school if:
        (1) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried out on the premises;
        (2) the sale of alcoholic liquor at the premises is
    	
incidental to the operation of a grocery store;
        (3) the premises are a building of approximately
    	
1,750 square feet and is rented by the owners of the grocery store from a family member;
        (4) the property line of the premises is
    	
approximately 68 feet from the property line of the club;
        (5) the primary entrance of the premises and the
    	
primary entrance of the club where the school leases space are at least 100 feet apart;
        (6) the director of the club renting space to the
    	
school has indicated his or her consent to the issuance of the license in writing; and
        (7) the alderperson in whose district the premises
    	
are located has expressed his or her support for the issuance of the license in writing.
    (ss) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a church if:
        (1) the premises are located within a 15 unit
    	
building with 13 residential apartments and 2 commercial spaces, and the licensee will occupy both commercial spaces;
        (2) a restaurant has been operated on the premises
    	
since June 2011;
        (3) the restaurant currently occupies 1,075 square
    	
feet, but will be expanding to include 975 additional square feet;
        (4) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried on by the licensee at the premises;
        (5) the premises are located south of the church and
    	
on the same street and are separated by a one-way westbound street;
        (6) the primary entrance of the premises is at least
    	
93 feet from the primary entrance of the church;
        (7) the shortest distance between any part of the
    	
premises and any part of the church is at least 72 feet;
        (8) the building in which the restaurant is located
    	
was built in 1910;
        (9) the alderperson of the ward in which the premises
    	
are located has expressed, in writing, his or her support for the issuance of the license; and
        (10) the principal religious leader of the church has
    	
delivered a written statement that he or she does not object to the issuance of a license under this subsection (ss).
    (tt) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a church if:
        (1) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried on by the licensee at the premises;
        (2) the sale of alcoholic liquor is incidental to the
    	
sale of food;
        (3) the sale of alcoholic liquor at the premises was
    	
previously authorized by a package goods liquor license;
        (4) the premises are at least 40,000 square feet with
    	
25 parking spaces in the contiguous surface lot to the north of the store and 93 parking spaces on the roof;
        (5) the shortest distance between the lot line of the
    	
parking lot of the premises and the exterior wall of the church is at least 80 feet;
        (6) the distance between the building in which the
    	
church is located and the building in which the premises are located is at least 180 feet;
        (7) the main entrance to the church faces west and is
    	
at least 257 feet from the main entrance of the premises; and
        (8) the applicant is the owner of 10 similar grocery
    	
stores within the City of Chicago and the surrounding area and has been in business for more than 30 years.
    (uu) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a church if:
        (1) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried on by the licensee at the premises;
        (2) the sale of alcoholic liquor is incidental to the
    	
operation of a grocery store;
        (3) the premises are located in a building that is
    	
approximately 68,000 square feet with 157 parking spaces on property that was previously vacant land;
        (4) the main entrance to the church faces west and is
    	
at least 500 feet from the entrance of the premises, which faces north;
        (5) the church and the premises are separated by an
    	
alley;
        (6) the applicant is the owner of 9 similar grocery
    	
stores in the City of Chicago and the surrounding area and has been in business for more than 40 years; and
        (7) the alderperson of the ward in which the premises
    	
are located has expressed, in writing, his or her support for the issuance of the license.
    (vv) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a church if:
        (1) the sale of alcoholic liquor is the principal
    	
business carried on by the licensee at the premises;
        (2) the sale of alcoholic liquor is primary to the
    	
sale of food;
        (3) the premises are located south of the church and
    	
on perpendicular streets and are separated by a driveway;
        (4) the primary entrance of the premises is at least
    	
100 feet from the primary entrance of the church;
        (5) the shortest distance between any part of the
    	
premises and any part of the church is at least 15 feet;
        (6) the premises are less than 100 feet from the
    	
church center, but greater than 100 feet from the area within the building where church services are held;
        (7) the premises are 25,830 square feet and sit on a
    	
lot that is 0.48 acres;
        (8) the premises were once designated as a Korean
    	
American Presbyterian Church and were once used as a Masonic Temple;
        (9) the premises were built in 1910;
        (10) the alderperson of the ward in which the
    	
premises are located has expressed, in writing, his or her support for the issuance of the license; and
        (11) the principal religious leader of the church has
    	
delivered a written statement that he or she does not object to the issuance of a license under this subsection (vv).
    For the purposes of this subsection (vv), "premises" means a place of business together with a privately owned outdoor location that is adjacent to the place of business.
    (ww) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a school if:
        (1) the school is located within Sub Area III of City
    	
of Chicago Residential-Business Planned Development Number 523, as amended; and
        (2) the premises are located within Sub Area I, Sub
    	
Area II, or Sub Area IV of City of Chicago Residential-Business Planned Development Number 523, as amended.
    (xx) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a church if:
        (1) the sale of wine or wine-related products is the
    	
exclusive business carried on by the licensee at the premises;
        (2) the primary entrance of the premises and the
    	
primary entrance of the church are at least 100 feet apart and are located on different streets;
        (3) the building in which the premises are located
    	
and the building in which the church is located are separated by an alley;
        (4) the premises consists of less than 2,000 square
    	
feet of floor area dedicated to the sale of wine or wine-related products;
        (5) the premises are located on the first floor of a
    	
2-story building that is at least 99 years old and has a residential unit on the second floor; and
        (6) the principal religious leader at the church has
    	
indicated his or her support for the issuance or renewal of the license in writing.
    (yy) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a church if:
        (1) the premises are a 27-story hotel containing 191
    	
guest rooms;
        (2) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried on by the licensee at the premises and is limited to a restaurant located on the first floor of the hotel;
        (3) the hotel is adjacent to the church;
        (4) the site is zoned as DX-16;
        (5) the principal religious leader of the church has
    	
delivered a written statement that he or she does not object to the issuance of a license under this subsection (yy); and
        (6) the alderperson of the ward in which the premises
    	
are located has expressed, in writing, his or her support for the issuance of the license.
    (zz) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a church if:
        (1) the premises are a 15-story hotel containing 143
    	
guest rooms;
        (2) the premises are approximately 85,691 square feet;
        (3) a restaurant is operated on the premises;
        (4) the restaurant is located in the first floor
    	
lobby of the hotel;
        (5) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the
    	
principal business carried on by the licensee at the premises;
        (6) the hotel is located approximately 50 feet from
    	
the church and is separated from the church by a public street on the ground level and by air space on the upper level, which is where the public entrances are located;
        (7) the site is zoned as DX-16;
        (8) the principal religious leader of the church has
    	
delivered a written statement that he or she does not object to the issuance of a license under this subsection (zz); and
        (9) the alderperson of the ward in which the premises
    	
are located has expressed, in writing, his or her support for the issuance of the license.
    (aaa) Notwithstanding any provision in this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor within a full-service grocery store at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a school if:
        (1) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the primary
    	
business activity of the grocery store;
        (2) the premises are newly constructed on land that
    	
was formerly used by the Young Men's Christian Association;
        (3) the grocery store is located within a planned
    	
development that was approved by the municipality in 2007;
        (4) the premises are located in a multi-building,
    	
mixed-use complex;
        (5) the entrance to the grocery store is located more
    	
than 200 feet from the entrance to the school;
        (6) the entrance to the grocery store is located
    	
across the street from the back of the school building, which is not used for student or public access;
        (7) the grocery store executed a binding lease for
    	
the property in 2008;
        (8) the premises consist of 2 levels and occupy more
    	
than 80,000 square feet;
        (9) the owner and operator of the grocery store
    	
operates at least 10 other grocery stores that have alcoholic liquor licenses within the same municipality; and
        (10) the director of the school has expressed, in
    	
writing, his or her support for the issuance of the license.
    (bbb) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a church if:
        (1) the sale of alcoholic liquor at the premises is
    	
incidental to the sale of food;
        (2) the premises are located in a single-story
    	
building of primarily brick construction containing at least 6 commercial units constructed before 1940;
        (3) the premises are located in a B3-2 zoning
    	
district;
        (4) the premises are less than 4,000 square feet;
        (5) the church established its congregation in 1891
    	
and completed construction of the church building in 1990;
        (6) the premises are located south of the church;
        (7) the premises and church are located on the same
    	
street and are separated by a one-way westbound street; and
        (8) the principal religious leader of the church has
    	
not indicated his or her opposition to the issuance or renewal of the license in writing.
    (ccc) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor within a full-service grocery store at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a church and school if:
        (1) as of March 14, 2007, the premises are located in
    	
a City of Chicago Residential-Business Planned Development No. 1052;
        (2) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried on by the licensee at the premises;
        (3) the sale of alcoholic liquor is incidental to the
    	
operation of a grocery store and comprises no more than 10% of the total in-store sales;
        (4) the owner and operator of the grocery store
    	
operates at least 10 other grocery stores that have alcoholic liquor licenses within the same municipality;
        (5) the premises are new construction when the
    	
license is first issued;
        (6) the constructed premises are to be no less than
    	
50,000 square feet;
        (7) the school is a private church-affiliated school;
        (8) the premises and the property containing the
    	
church and church-affiliated school are located on perpendicular streets and the school and church are adjacent to one another;
        (9) the pastor of the church and school has
    	
expressed, in writing, support for the issuance of the license; and
        (10) the alderperson of the ward in which the
    	
premises are located has expressed, in writing, his or her support for the issuance of the license.
    (ddd) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a church or school if:
        (1) the business has been issued a license from the
    	
municipality to allow the business to operate a theater on the premises;
        (2) the theater has less than 200 seats;
        (3) the premises are approximately 2,700 to 3,100
    	
square feet of space;
        (4) the premises are located to the north of the
    	
church;
        (5) the primary entrance of the premises and the
    	
primary entrance of any church within 100 feet of the premises are located either on a different street or across a right-of-way from the premises;
        (6) the primary entrance of the premises and the
    	
primary entrance of any school within 100 feet of the premises are located either on a different street or across a right-of-way from the premises;
        (7) the premises are located in a building that is at
    	
least 100 years old; and
        (8) any church or school located within 100 feet of
    	
the premises has indicated its support for the issuance or renewal of the license to the premises in writing.
    (eee) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a church and school if:
        (1) the sale of alcoholic liquor is incidental to the
    	
sale of food;
        (2) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried on by the applicant on the premises;
        (3) a family-owned restaurant has operated on the
    	
premises since 1957;
        (4) the premises occupy the first floor of a 3-story
    	
building that is at least 90 years old;
        (5) the distance between the property line of the
    	
premises and the property line of the church is at least 20 feet;
        (6) the church was established at its current
    	
location and the present structure was erected before 1900;
        (7) the primary entrance of the premises is at least
    	
75 feet from the primary entrance of the church;
        (8) the school is affiliated with the church;
        (9) the principal religious leader at the place of
    	
worship has indicated his or her support for the issuance of the license in writing;
        (10) the principal of the school has indicated in
    	
writing that he or she is not opposed to the issuance of the license; and
        (11) the alderperson of the ward in which the
    	
premises are located has expressed, in writing, his or her lack of an objection to the issuance of the license.
    (fff) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a church if:
        (1) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the
    	
principal business carried on by the licensee at the premises;
        (2) the sale of alcoholic liquor at the
    	
premises is incidental to the operation of a grocery store;
        (3) the premises are a one-story building
    	
containing approximately 10,000 square feet and are rented by the owners of the grocery store;
        (4) the sale of alcoholic liquor at the
    	
premises occurs in a retail area of the grocery store that is approximately 3,500 square feet;
        (5) the grocery store has operated at the
    	
location since 1984;
        (6) the grocery store is closed on Sundays;
        (7) the property on which the premises are
    	
located is a corner lot that is bound by 3 streets and an alley, where one street is a one-way street that runs north-south, one street runs east-west, and one street runs northwest-southeast;
        (8) the property line of the premises is
    	
approximately 16 feet from the property line of the building where the church is located;
        (9) the premises are separated from the
    	
building containing the church by a public alley;
        (10) the primary entrance of the premises and
    	
the primary entrance of the church are at least 100 feet apart;
        (11) representatives of the church have
    	
delivered a written statement that the church does not object to the issuance of a license under this subsection (fff); and
        (12) the alderperson of the ward in which the
    	
grocery store is located has expressed, in writing, his or her support for the issuance of the license.
    (ggg) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of licenses authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor within a restaurant or lobby coffee house at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a church and school if:
        (1) a residential retirement home formerly operated
    	
on the premises and the premises are being converted into a new apartment living complex containing studio and one-bedroom apartments with ground floor retail space;
        (2) the restaurant and lobby coffee house are located
    	
within a Community Shopping District within the municipality;
        (3) the premises are located in a single-building,
    	
mixed-use complex that, in addition to the restaurant and lobby coffee house, contains apartment residences, a fitness center for the residents of the apartment building, a lobby designed as a social center for the residents, a rooftop deck, and a patio with a dog run for the exclusive use of the residents;
        (4) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the primary
    	
business activity of the apartment complex, restaurant, or lobby coffee house;
        (5) the entrance to the apartment residence is more
    	
than 310 feet from the entrance to the school and church;
        (6) the entrance to the apartment residence is
    	
located at the end of the block around the corner from the south side of the school building;
        (7) the school is affiliated with the church;
        (8) the pastor of the parish, principal of the
    	
school, and the titleholder to the church and school have given written consent to the issuance of the license;
        (9) the alderperson of the ward in which the premises
    	
are located has given written consent to the issuance of the license; and
        (10) the neighborhood block club has given
    	
written consent to the issuance of the license.
    (hhh) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license to sell alcoholic liquor at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a home for indigent persons or a church if:
        (1) a restaurant operates on the premises and has
    	
been in operation since January of 2014;
        (2) the sale of alcoholic liquor is incidental to the
    	
sale of food;
        (3) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried on by the licensee on the premises;
        (4) the premises occupy the first floor of a 3-story
    	
building that is at least 100 years old;
        (5) the primary entrance to the premises is more than
    	
100 feet from the primary entrance to the home for indigent persons, which opened in 1989 and is operated to address homelessness and provide shelter;
        (6) the primary entrance to the premises and the
    	
primary entrance to the home for indigent persons are located on different streets;
        (7) the executive director of the home for indigent
    	
persons has given written consent to the issuance of the license;
        (8) the entrance to the premises is located within
    	
100 feet of a Buddhist temple;
        (9) the entrance to the premises is more than 100
    	
feet from where any worship or educational programming is conducted by the Buddhist temple and is located in an area used only for other purposes; and
        (10) the president and the board of directors of the
    	
Buddhist temple have given written consent to the issuance of the license.
    (iii) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at premises located within a municipality in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a home for the aged if:
        (1) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried on by the licensee on the premises;
        (2) the sale of alcoholic liquor at the premises is
    	
incidental to the operation of a restaurant;
        (3) the premises are on the ground floor of a
    	
multi-floor, university-affiliated housing facility;
        (4) the premises occupy 1,916 square feet of space,
    	
with the total square footage from which liquor will be sold, served, and consumed to be 900 square feet;
        (5) the premises are separated from the home for the
    	
aged by an alley;
        (6) the primary entrance to the premises and the
    	
primary entrance to the home for the aged are at least 500 feet apart and located on different streets;
        (7) representatives of the home for the aged have
    	
expressed, in writing, that the home does not object to the issuance of a license under this subsection; and
        (8) the alderperson of the ward in which the
    	
restaurant is located has expressed, in writing, his or her support for the issuance of the license.
    (jjj) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a school if:
        (1) as of January 1, 2016, the premises were used for
    	
the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises and were authorized to do so pursuant to a retail tavern license held by an individual as the sole proprietor of the premises;
        (2) the primary entrance to the school and the
    	
primary entrance to the premises are on the same street;
        (3) the school was founded in 1949;
        (4) the building in which the premises are situated
    	
was constructed before 1930;
        (5) the building in which the premises are situated
    	
is immediately across the street from the school; and
        (6) the school has not indicated its opposition to
    	
the issuance or renewal of the license in writing.
    (kkk) (Blank).
    (lll) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a synagogue or school if:
        (1) the sale of alcoholic liquor at the premises is
    	
incidental to the sale of food;
        (2) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried on by the licensee at the premises;
        (3) the premises are located on the same street on
    	
which the synagogue or school is located;
        (4) the primary entrance to the premises and the
    	
closest entrance to the synagogue or school is at least 100 feet apart;
        (5) the shortest distance between the premises and
    	
the synagogue or school is at least 65 feet apart and no greater than 70 feet apart;
        (6) the premises are between 1,800 and 2,000 square
    	
feet;
        (7) the synagogue was founded in 1861; and
        (8) the leader of the synagogue has indicated, in
    	
writing, the synagogue's support for the issuance or renewal of the license.
    (mmm) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of licenses authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor within a restaurant or lobby coffee house at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a church if:
        (1) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried on by the licensee at the premises;
        (2) the sale of alcoholic liquor at the premises is
    	
incidental to the sale of food in a restaurant;
        (3) the restaurant has been run by the same family
    	
for at least 19 consecutive years;
        (4) the premises are located in a 3-story building in
    	
the most easterly part of the first floor;
        (5) the building in which the premises are located
    	
has residential housing on the second and third floors;
        (6) the primary entrance to the premises is on a
    	
north-south street around the corner and across an alley from the primary entrance to the church, which is on an east-west street;
        (7) the primary entrance to the church and the
    	
primary entrance to the premises are more than 160 feet apart; and
        (8) the church has expressed, in writing, its support
    	
for the issuance of a license under this subsection.
    (nnn) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of licenses authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor within a restaurant or lobby coffee house at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a school and church or synagogue if:
        (1) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried on by the licensee at the premises;
        (2) the sale of alcoholic liquor at the premises is
    	
incidental to the sale of food in a restaurant;
        (3) the front door of the synagogue faces east on the
    	
next north-south street east of and parallel to the north-south street on which the restaurant is located where the restaurant's front door faces west;
        (4) the closest exterior pedestrian entrance that
    	
leads to the school or the synagogue is across an east-west street and at least 300 feet from the primary entrance to the restaurant;
        (5) the nearest church-related or school-related
    	
building is a community center building;
        (6) the restaurant is on the ground floor of a
    	
3-story building constructed in 1896 with a brick facade;
        (7) the restaurant shares the ground floor with a
    	
theater, and the second and third floors of the building in which the restaurant is located consists of residential housing;
        (8) the leader of the synagogue and school has
    	
expressed, in writing, that the synagogue does not object to the issuance of a license under this subsection; and
        (9) the alderperson of the ward in which the premises
    	
is located has expressed, in writing, his or her support for the issuance of the license.
    (ooo) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 2,000 but less than 5,000 inhabitants in a county with a population in excess of 3,000,000 and within 100 feet of a home for the aged if:
        (1) as of March 1, 2016, the premises were used to
    	
sell alcohol pursuant to a retail tavern and packaged goods license issued by the municipality and held by a limited liability company as the proprietor of the premises;
        (2) the home for the aged was completed in 2015;
        (3) the home for the aged is a 5-story structure;
        (4) the building in which the premises are situated
    	
is directly adjacent to the home for the aged;
        (5) the building in which the premises are situated
    	
was constructed before 1950;
        (6) the home for the aged has not indicated its
    	
opposition to the issuance or renewal of the license; and
        (7) the president of the municipality has expressed
    	
in writing that he or she does not object to the issuance or renewal of the license.
    (ppp) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a church or churches if:
        (1) the shortest distance between the premises and a
    	
church is at least 78 feet apart and no greater than 95 feet apart;
        (2) the premises are a single-story, brick commercial
    	
building and between 3,600 to 4,000 square feet and the original building was built before 1922;
        (3) the premises are located in a B3-2 zoning
    	
district;
        (4) the premises are separated from the buildings
    	
containing the churches by a street;
        (5) the previous owners of the business located on
    	
the premises held a liquor license for at least 10 years;
        (6) the new owner of the business located on the
    	
premises has managed 2 other food and liquor stores since 1997;
        (7) the principal religious leaders at the places of
    	
worship have indicated their support for the issuance or renewal of the license in writing; and
        (8) the alderperson of the ward in which the premises
    	
are located has indicated his or her support for the issuance or renewal of the license in writing.
    (qqq) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a church if:
        (1) the sale of alcoholic liquor at the premises is
    	
incidental to the sale of food;
        (2) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried on by the licensee at the premises;
        (3) the premises are located on the opposite side of
    	
the same street on which the church is located;
        (4) the church is located on a corner lot;
        (5) the shortest distance between the premises and
    	
the church is at least 90 feet apart and no greater than 95 feet apart;
        (6) the premises are at least 3,000 but no more than
    	
5,000 square feet;
        (7) the church's original chapel was built in 1858;
        (8) the church's first congregation was organized in
    	
1860; and
        (9) the leaders of the church and the alderperson of
    	
the ward in which the premises are located has expressed, in writing, their support for the issuance of the license.
    (rrr) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at a restaurant or banquet facility established within premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a church or school if:
        (1) the sale of alcoholic liquor at the premises is
    	
incidental to the sale of food;
        (2) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
    	
business carried on by the licensee at the premises;
        (3) the immediately prior owner or the operator of
    	
the restaurant or banquet facility held a valid retail license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at the premises for at least part of the 24 months before a change of ownership;
        (4) the premises are located immediately east and
    	
across the street from an elementary school;
        (5) the premises and elementary school are part of an
    	
approximately 100-acre campus owned by the church;
        (6) the school opened in 1999 and was named after the
    	
founder of the church; and
        (7) the alderperson of the ward in which the premises
    	
are located has expressed, in writing, his or her support for the issuance of the license.
    (sss) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a church or school if:
        (1) the premises are at least 5,300 square feet and
    	
located in a building that was built prior to 1940;
        (2) the shortest distance between the property line
    	
of the premises and the exterior wall of the building in which the church is located is at least 109 feet;
        (3) the distance between the building in which the
    	
church is located and the building in which the premises are located is at least 118 feet;
        (4) the main entrance to the church faces west and is
    	
at least 602 feet from the main entrance of the premises;
        (5) the shortest distance between the property line
    	
of the premises and the property line of the school is at least 177 feet;
        (6) the applicant has been in business for more than
    	
10 years;
        (7) the principal religious leader of the church has
    	
indicated his or her support for the issuance or renewal of the license in writing;
        (8) the principal of the school has indicated in
    	
writing that he or she is not opposed to the issuance of the license; and
        (9) the alderperson of the ward in which the premises
    	
are located has expressed, in writing, his or her support for the issuance of the license.
    (ttt) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a church or school if:
        (1) the premises are at least 59,000 square feet and
    	
located in a building that was built prior to 1940;
        (2) the shortest distance between the west property
    	
line of the premises and the exterior wall of the church is at least 99 feet;
        (3) the distance between the building in which the
    	
church is located and the building in which the premises are located is at least 102 feet;
        (4) the main entrance to the church faces west and is
    	
at least 457 feet from the main entrance of the premises;
        (5) the shortest distance between the property line
    	
of the premises and the property line of the school is at least 66 feet;
        (6) the applicant has been in business for more than
    	
10 years;
        (7) the principal religious leader of the church has
    	
indicated his or her support for the issuance or renewal of the license in writing;
        (8) the principal of the school has indicated in
    	
writing that he or she is not opposed to the issuance of the license; and
        (9) the alderperson of the ward in which the premises
    	
are located has expressed, in writing, his or her support for the issuance of the license.
    (uuu) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a place of worship if:
        (1) the sale of liquor is incidental to the sale of
    	
food;
        (2) the premises are at least 7,100 square feet;
        (3) the shortest distance between the north property
    	
line of the premises and the nearest exterior wall of the place of worship is at least 86 feet;
        (4) the main entrance to the place of worship faces
    	
north and is more than 150 feet from the main entrance of the premises;
        (5) the applicant has been in business for more than
    	
20 years at the location;
        (6) the principal religious leader of the place of
    	
worship has indicated his or her support for the issuance or renewal of the license in writing; and
        (7) the alderperson of the ward in which the premises
    	
are located has expressed, in writing, his or her support for the issuance of the license.
    (vvv) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of 2 churches if:
        (1) as of January 1, 2015, the premises were used for
    	
the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises and the sale was authorized pursuant to a retail tavern license held by an individual as the sole proprietor of the premises;
        (2) a primary entrance of the church situated to the
    	
south of the premises is located on a street running perpendicular to the street upon which a primary entrance of the premises is situated;
        (3) the church located to the south of the premises
    	
is a 3-story structure that was constructed in 2006;
        (4) a parking lot separates the premises from the
    	
church located to the south of the premises;
        (5) the building in which the premises are situated
    	
was constructed before 1930;
        (6) the building in which the premises are situated
    	
is a 2-story, mixed-use commercial and residential structure containing more than 20,000 total square feet and containing at least 7 residential units on the second floor and 3 commercial units on the first floor;
        (7) the building in which the premises are situated
    	
is immediately adjacent to the church located to the north of the premises;
        (8) the primary entrance of the church located to the
    	
north of the premises and the primary entrance of the premises are located on the same street;
        (9) the churches have not indicated their opposition
    	
to the issuance or renewal of the license in writing; and
        (10) the alderperson of the ward in which the
    	
premises are located has expressed, in writing, his or her support for the issuance of the license.
    (www) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of licenses authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor within a restaurant at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a school if:
        (1) the sale of alcoholic liquor is incidental to
    	
the sale of food and is not the principal business of the restaurant;
        (2) the building in which the restaurant is located
    	
was constructed in 1909 and is a 2-story structure;
        (3) the restaurant has been operating
    	
continuously since 1962, has been located at the existing premises since 1989, and has been owned and operated by the same family, which also operates a deli in a building located immediately to the east and adjacent and connected to the restaurant;
        (4) the entrance to the restaurant is more than 200
    	
feet from the entrance to the school;
        (5) the building in which the restaurant is
    	
located and the building in which the school is located are separated by a traffic-congested major street;
        (6) the building in which the restaurant is
    	
located faces a public park located to the east of the school, cannot be seen from the windows of the school, and is not directly across the street from the school;
        (7) the school building is located 2 blocks from a
    	
major private university;
        (8) the school is a public school that has
    	
pre-kindergarten through eighth grade classes, is an open enrollment school, and has a preschool program that has earned a Gold Circle of Quality award;
        (9) the local school council has given written
    	
consent for the issuance of the liquor license; and
        (10) the alderperson of the ward in which the
    	
premises are located has given written consent for the issuance of the liquor license.
    (xxx) (Blank).
    (yyy) Notwithstanding any provision in this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at a store that is located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a church if:
        (1) the premises are primarily used for the sale of
    	
alcoholic liquor;
        (2) on January 1, 2017, the store was authorized to
    	
sell alcoholic liquor pursuant to a package goods liquor license;
        (3) on January 1, 2017, the store occupied
    	
approximately 5,560 square feet and will be expanded to include 440 additional square feet for the purpose of storage;
        (4) the store was in existence before the church;
        (5) the building in which the store is located was
    	
built in 1956 and is immediately south of the church;
        (6) the store and church are separated by an
    	
east-west street;
        (7) the owner of the store received his first liquor
    	
license in 1986;
        (8) the church has not indicated its opposition to
    	
the issuance or renewal of the license in writing; and
        (9) the alderperson of the ward in which the store
    	
is located has expressed his or her support for the issuance or renewal of the license.
    (zzz) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a church if:
        (1) the premises are approximately 2,800 square feet
    	
with east frontage on South Allport Street and north frontage on West 18th Street in the City of Chicago;
        (2) the shortest distance between the north property
    	
line of the premises and the nearest exterior wall of the church is 95 feet;
        (3) the main entrance to the church is on West 18th
    	
Street, faces south, and is more than 100 feet from the main entrance to the premises;
        (4) the sale of alcoholic liquor is incidental to the
    	
sale of food in a restaurant;
        (5) the principal religious leader of the church has
    	
not indicated his or her opposition to the issuance or renewal of the license in writing; and
        (6) the alderperson of the ward in which the premises
    	
are located has indicated his or her support for the issuance or renewal of the license in writing.
    (aaaa) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a church if:
        (1) the shortest distance between the premises and
    	
the church is at least 65 feet apart and no greater than 70 feet apart;
        (2) the premises are located on the ground floor of
    	
a freestanding, 3-story building of brick construction with 2 stories of residential apartments above the premises;
        (3) the premises are approximately 2,557 square
    	
feet;
        (4) the premises and the church are located on
    	
opposite corners and are separated by sidewalks and a street;
        (5) the sale of alcohol is not the principal
    	
business carried on by the licensee at the premises;
        (6) the pastor of the church has not indicated his
    	
or her opposition to the issuance or renewal of the license in writing; and
        (7) the alderperson of the ward in which the
    	
premises are located has not indicated his or her opposition to the issuance or renewal of the license in writing.
    (bbbb) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at premises or an outdoor location at the premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and that are within 100 feet of a church or school if:
        (1) the church was a Catholic cathedral on January 1,
    	
2018;
        (2) the church has been in existence for at least 150
    	
years;
        (3) the school is affiliated with the church;
        (4) the premises are bordered by State Street on the
    	
east, Superior Street on the south, Dearborn Street on the west, and Chicago Avenue on the north;
        (5) the premises are located within 2 miles of Lake
    	
Michigan and the Chicago River;
        (6) the premises are located in and adjacent to a
    	
building for which construction commenced after January 1, 2018;
        (7) the alderperson who represents the district in
    	
which the premises are located has written a letter of support for the issuance of a license; and
        (8) the principal religious leader of the church and
    	
the principal of the school have both signed a letter of support for the issuance of a license.
    (cccc) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor within a restaurant at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a school if:
        (1) the sale of alcoholic liquor is incidental to the
    	
sale of food and is not the principal business of the restaurant;
        (2) the building in which the restaurant is located
    	
was constructed in 1912 and is a 3-story structure;
        (3) the restaurant has been in operation since 2015
    	
and its entrance faces North Western Avenue;
        (4) the entrance to the school faces West Augusta
    	
Boulevard;
        (5) the entrance to the restaurant is more than 100
    	
feet from the entrance to the school;
        (6) the school is a Catholic school affiliated with
    	
the nearby Catholic Parish church;
        (7) the building in which the restaurant is located
    	
and the building in which the school is located are separated by an alley;
        (8) the principal of the school has not indicated his
    	
or her opposition to the issuance or renewal of the license in writing; and
        (9) the alderperson of the ward in which the
    	
restaurant is located has expressed his or her support for the issuance or renewal of the license.
    (dddd) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a school if:
        (1) the premises are approximately 6,250 square feet
    	
with south frontage on Bryn Mawr Avenue and north frontage on the alley 125 feet north of Bryn Mawr Avenue in the City of Chicago;
        (2) the shortest distance between the south property
    	
line of the premises and the nearest exterior wall of the school is 248 feet;
        (3) the main entrance to the school is on Christiana
    	
Avenue, faces east, and is more than 100 feet from the main entrance to the premises;
        (4) the sale of alcoholic liquor is incidental to the
    	
sale of food in a restaurant;
        (5) the principal of the school has not indicated his
    	
or her opposition to the issuance or renewal of the license in writing; and
        (6) the alderperson of the ward in which the premises
    	
are located has indicated his or her support for the issuance or renewal of the license in writing.
    (eeee) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance or renewal of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at premises located within a municipality with a population in excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants and within 100 feet of a school if:
        (1) the premises are approximately 2,300 square feet
    	
with south frontage on 53rd Street in the City of Chicago and the eastern property line of the premises abuts a private alleyway;
        (2) the shortest distance between the south property
    	
line of the premises and the nearest exterior wall of the school is approximately 187 feet;
        (3) the main entrance to the school is on Cornell
    	
Avenue, faces west, and is more than 100 feet from the main entrance to the premises;
        (4) the sale of alcoholic liquor is incidental to the
    	
sale of food in a restaurant;
        (5) the principal of the school has not indicated his
    	
or her opposition to the issuance or renewal of the license in writing; and
        (6) the alderperson of the ward in which the premises
    	
are located has indicated his or her support for the issuance or renewal of the license in writing.
(Source: P.A. 101-81, eff. 7-12-19; 102-15, eff. 6-17-21.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-12) (from Ch. 43, par. 127a)
    Sec. 6-12. No license shall be issued to any person for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor at any store or other place of business where the majority of customers are minors of school age or where the principal business transacted consists of school books, school supplies, food, lunches or drinks for such minors.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-13) (from Ch. 43, par. 128)
    Sec. 6-13. Except in the case of wineries that have bed and breakfast facilities, hotels, and clubs, no alcoholic liquor shall be sold at retail upon any premises which has any access which leads from such premises to any other portion of the same building or structure used for dwelling or lodging purpose and which is permitted to be used or kept accessible for use by the public. This provision shall not prevent any connection between such premises and such other portion of the building or structure which is used only by the licensee, his family and personal guests.
(Source: P.A. 88-295.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-14)
    Sec. 6-14. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 82-783. Repealed by P.A. 99-46, eff. 7-15-15.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-15) (from Ch. 43, par. 130)
    Sec. 6-15. No alcoholic liquors shall be sold or delivered in any building belonging to or under the control of the State or any political subdivision thereof except as provided in this Act. The corporate authorities of any city, village, incorporated town, township, or county may provide by ordinance, however, that alcoholic liquor may be sold or delivered in any specifically designated building belonging to or under the control of the municipality, township, or county, or in any building located on land under the control of the municipality, township, or county; provided that such township or county complies with all applicable local ordinances in any incorporated area of the township or county. Alcoholic liquor may be delivered to and sold under the authority of a special use permit on any property owned by a conservation district organized under the Conservation District Act, provided that (i) the alcoholic liquor is sold only at an event authorized by the governing board of the conservation district, (ii) the issuance of the special use permit is authorized by the local liquor control commissioner of the territory in which the property is located, and (iii) the special use permit authorizes the sale of alcoholic liquor for one day or less. Alcoholic liquors may be delivered to and sold at any airport belonging to or under the control of a municipality of more than 25,000 inhabitants, or in any building or on any golf course owned by a park district organized under the Park District Code, subject to the approval of the governing board of the district, or in any building or on any golf course owned by a forest preserve district organized under the Downstate Forest Preserve District Act, subject to the approval of the governing board of the district, or on the grounds within 500 feet of any building owned by a forest preserve district organized under the Downstate Forest Preserve District Act during times when food is dispensed for consumption within 500 feet of the building from which the food is dispensed, subject to the approval of the governing board of the district, or in a building owned by a Local Mass Transit District organized under the Local Mass Transit District Act, subject to the approval of the governing Board of the District, or in Bicentennial Park, or on the premises of the City of Mendota Lake Park located adjacent to Route 51 in Mendota, Illinois, or on the premises of Camden Park in Milan, Illinois, or in the community center owned by the City of Loves Park that is located at 1000 River Park Drive in Loves Park, Illinois, or, in connection with the operation of an established food serving facility during times when food is dispensed for consumption on the premises, and at the following aquarium and museums located in public parks: Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago Academy of Sciences, Chicago Historical Society, Field Museum of Natural History, Museum of Science and Industry, DuSable Museum of African American History, John G. Shedd Aquarium and Adler Planetarium, or at Lakeview Museum of Arts and Sciences in Peoria, or in connection with the operation of the facilities of the Chicago Zoological Society or the Chicago Horticultural Society on land owned by the Forest Preserve District of Cook County, or on any land used for a golf course or for recreational purposes owned by the Forest Preserve District of Cook County, subject to the control of the Forest Preserve District Board of Commissioners and applicable local law, provided that dram shop liability insurance is provided at maximum coverage limits so as to hold the District harmless from all financial loss, damage, and harm, or in any building located on land owned by the Chicago Park District if approved by the Park District Commissioners, or on any land used for a golf course or for recreational purposes and owned by the Illinois International Port District if approved by the District's governing board, or at any airport, golf course, faculty center, or facility in which conference and convention type activities take place belonging to or under control of any State university or public community college district, provided that with respect to a facility for conference and convention type activities alcoholic liquors shall be limited to the use of the convention or conference participants or participants in cultural, political or educational activities held in such facilities, and provided further that the faculty or staff of the State university or a public community college district, or members of an organization of students, alumni, faculty or staff of the State university or a public community college district are active participants in the conference or convention, or in Memorial Stadium on the campus of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign during games in which the Chicago Bears professional football team is playing in that stadium during the renovation of Soldier Field, not more than one and a half hours before the start of the game and not after the end of the third quarter of the game, or in the Pavilion Facility on the campus of the University of Illinois at Chicago during games in which the Chicago Storm professional soccer team is playing in that facility, not more than one and a half hours before the start of the game and not after the end of the third quarter of the game, or in the Pavilion Facility on the campus of the University of Illinois at Chicago during games in which the WNBA professional women's basketball team is playing in that facility, not more than one and a half hours before the start of the game and not after the 10-minute mark of the second half of the game, or by a catering establishment which has rented facilities from a board of trustees of a public community college district, or in a restaurant that is operated by a commercial tenant in the North Campus Parking Deck building that (1) is located at 1201 West University Avenue, Urbana, Illinois and (2) is owned by the Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois, or, if approved by the District board, on land owned by the Metropolitan Sanitary District of Greater Chicago and leased to others for a term of at least 20 years. Nothing in this Section precludes the sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor in the form of original packaged goods in premises located at 500 S. Racine in Chicago belonging to the University of Illinois and used primarily as a grocery store by a commercial tenant during the term of a lease that predates the University's acquisition of the premises; but the University shall have no power or authority to renew, transfer, or extend the lease with terms allowing the sale of alcoholic liquor; and the sale of alcoholic liquor shall be subject to all local laws and regulations. After the acquisition by Winnebago County of the property located at 404 Elm Street in Rockford, a commercial tenant who sold alcoholic liquor at retail on a portion of the property under a valid license at the time of the acquisition may continue to do so for so long as the tenant and the County may agree under existing or future leases, subject to all local laws and regulations regarding the sale of alcoholic liquor. Alcoholic liquors may be delivered to and sold at Memorial Hall, located at 211 North Main Street, Rockford, under conditions approved by Winnebago County and subject to all local laws and regulations regarding the sale of alcoholic liquor. Each facility shall provide dram shop liability in maximum insurance coverage limits so as to save harmless the State, municipality, State university, airport, golf course, faculty center, facility in which conference and convention type activities take place, park district, Forest Preserve District, public community college district, aquarium, museum, or sanitary district from all financial loss, damage or harm. Alcoholic liquors may be sold at retail in buildings of golf courses owned by municipalities or Illinois State University in connection with the operation of an established food serving facility during times when food is dispensed for consumption upon the premises. Alcoholic liquors may be delivered to and sold at retail in any building owned by a fire protection district organized under the Fire Protection District Act, provided that such delivery and sale is approved by the board of trustees of the district, and provided further that such delivery and sale is limited to fundraising events and to a maximum of 6 events per year. However, the limitation to fundraising events and to a maximum of 6 events per year does not apply to the delivery, sale, or manufacture of alcoholic liquors at the building located at 59 Main Street in Oswego, Illinois, owned by the Oswego Fire Protection District if the alcoholic liquor is sold or dispensed as approved by the Oswego Fire Protection District and the property is no longer being utilized for fire protection purposes.
    Alcoholic liquors may be served or sold in buildings under the control of the Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois for events that the Board may determine are public events and not related student activities. The Board of Trustees shall issue a written policy within 6 months of August 15, 2008 (the effective date of Public Act 95-847) concerning the types of events that would be eligible for an exemption. Thereafter, the Board of Trustees may issue revised, updated, new, or amended policies as it deems necessary and appropriate. In preparing its written policy, the Board of Trustees shall, among other factors it considers relevant and important, give consideration to the following: (i) whether the event is a student activity or student related activity; (ii) whether the physical setting of the event is conducive to control of liquor sales and distribution; (iii) the ability of the event operator to ensure that the sale or serving of alcoholic liquors and the demeanor of the participants are in accordance with State law and University policies; (iv) regarding the anticipated attendees at the event, the relative proportion of individuals under the age of 21 to individuals age 21 or older; (v) the ability of the venue operator to prevent the sale or distribution of alcoholic liquors to individuals under the age of 21; (vi) whether the event prohibits participants from removing alcoholic beverages from the venue; and (vii) whether the event prohibits participants from providing their own alcoholic liquors to the venue. In addition, any policy submitted by the Board of Trustees to the Illinois Liquor Control Commission must require that any event at which alcoholic liquors are served or sold in buildings under the control of the Board of Trustees shall require the prior written approval of the Office of the Chancellor for the University campus where the event is located. The Board of Trustees shall submit its policy, and any subsequently revised, updated, new, or amended policies, to the Illinois Liquor Control Commission, and any University event, or location for an event, exempted under such policies shall apply for a license under the applicable Sections of this Act.
    Alcoholic liquors may be served or sold in buildings under the control of the Board of Trustees of Northern Illinois University for events that the Board may determine are public events and not student-related activities. The Board of Trustees shall issue a written policy within 6 months after June 28, 2011 (the effective date of Public Act 97-45) concerning the types of events that would be eligible for an exemption. Thereafter, the Board of Trustees may issue revised, updated, new, or amended policies as it deems necessary and appropriate. In preparing its written policy, the Board of Trustees shall, in addition to other factors it considers relevant and important, give consideration to the following: (i) whether the event is a student activity or student-related activity; (ii) whether the physical setting of the event is conducive to control of liquor sales and distribution; (iii) the ability of the event operator to ensure that the sale or serving of alcoholic liquors and the demeanor of the participants are in accordance with State law and University policies; (iv) the anticipated attendees at the event and the relative proportion of individuals under the age of 21 to individuals age 21 or older; (v) the ability of the venue operator to prevent the sale or distribution of alcoholic liquors to individuals under the age of 21; (vi) whether the event prohibits participants from removing alcoholic beverages from the venue; and (vii) whether the event prohibits participants from providing their own alcoholic liquors to the venue.
    Alcoholic liquors may be served or sold in buildings under the control of the Board of Trustees of Chicago State University for events that the Board may determine are public events and not student-related activities. The Board of Trustees shall issue a written policy within 6 months after August 2, 2013 (the effective date of Public Act 98-132) concerning the types of events that would be eligible for an exemption. Thereafter, the Board of Trustees may issue revised, updated, new, or amended policies as it deems necessary and appropriate. In preparing its written policy, the Board of Trustees shall, in addition to other factors it considers relevant and important, give consideration to the following: (i) whether the event is a student activity or student-related activity; (ii) whether the physical setting of the event is conducive to control of liquor sales and distribution; (iii) the ability of the event operator to ensure that the sale or serving of alcoholic liquors and the demeanor of the participants are in accordance with State law and University policies; (iv) the anticipated attendees at the event and the relative proportion of individuals under the age of 21 to individuals age 21 or older; (v) the ability of the venue operator to prevent the sale or distribution of alcoholic liquors to individuals under the age of 21; (vi) whether the event prohibits participants from removing alcoholic beverages from the venue; and (vii) whether the event prohibits participants from providing their own alcoholic liquors to the venue.
    Alcoholic liquors may be served or sold in buildings under the control of the Board of Trustees of Illinois State University for events that the Board may determine are public events and not student-related activities. The Board of Trustees shall issue a written policy within 6 months after March 1, 2013 (the effective date of Public Act 97-1166) concerning the types of events that would be eligible for an exemption. Thereafter, the Board of Trustees may issue revised, updated, new, or amended policies as it deems necessary and appropriate. In preparing its written policy, the Board of Trustees shall, in addition to other factors it considers relevant and important, give consideration to the following: (i) whether the event is a student activity or student-related activity; (ii) whether the physical setting of the event is conducive to control of liquor sales and distribution; (iii) the ability of the event operator to ensure that the sale or serving of alcoholic liquors and the demeanor of the participants are in accordance with State law and University policies; (iv) the anticipated attendees at the event and the relative proportion of individuals under the age of 21 to individuals age 21 or older; (v) the ability of the venue operator to prevent the sale or distribution of alcoholic liquors to individuals under the age of 21; (vi) whether the event prohibits participants from removing alcoholic beverages from the venue; and (vii) whether the event prohibits participants from providing their own alcoholic liquors to the venue.
    Alcoholic liquors may be served or sold in buildings under the control of the Board of Trustees of Southern Illinois University for events that the Board may determine are public events and not student-related activities. The Board of Trustees shall issue a written policy within 6 months after August 12, 2016 (the effective date of Public Act 99-795) concerning the types of events that would be eligible for an exemption. Thereafter, the Board of Trustees may issue revised, updated, new, or amended policies as it deems necessary and appropriate. In preparing its written policy, the Board of Trustees shall, in addition to other factors it considers relevant and important, give consideration to the following: (i) whether the event is a student activity or student-related activity; (ii) whether the physical setting of the event is conducive to control of liquor sales and distribution; (iii) the ability of the event operator to ensure that the sale or serving of alcoholic liquors and the demeanor of the participants are in accordance with State law and University policies; (iv) the anticipated attendees at the event and the relative proportion of individuals under the age of 21 to individuals age 21 or older; (v) the ability of the venue operator to prevent the sale or distribution of alcoholic liquors to individuals under the age of 21; (vi) whether the event prohibits participants from removing alcoholic beverages from the venue; and (vii) whether the event prohibits participants from providing their own alcoholic liquors to the venue.
    Alcoholic liquors may be served or sold in buildings under the control of the Board of Trustees of a public university for events that the Board of Trustees of that public university may determine are public events and not student-related activities. If the Board of Trustees of a public university has not issued a written policy pursuant to an exemption under this Section on or before July 15, 2016 (the effective date of Public Act 99-550), then that Board of Trustees shall issue a written policy within 6 months after July 15, 2016 (the effective date of Public Act 99-550) concerning the types of events that would be eligible for an exemption. Thereafter, the Board of Trustees may issue revised, updated, new, or amended policies as it deems necessary and appropriate. In preparing its written policy, the Board of Trustees shall, in addition to other factors it considers relevant and important, give consideration to the following: (i) whether the event is a student activity or student-related activity; (ii) whether the physical setting of the event is conducive to control of liquor sales and distribution; (iii) the ability of the event operator to ensure that the sale or serving of alcoholic liquors and the demeanor of the participants are in accordance with State law and University policies; (iv) the anticipated attendees at the event and the relative proportion of individuals under the age of 21 to individuals age 21 or older; (v) the ability of the venue operator to prevent the sale or distribution of alcoholic liquors to individuals under the age of 21; (vi) whether the event prohibits participants from removing alcoholic beverages from the venue; and (vii) whether the event prohibits participants from providing their own alcoholic liquors to the venue. As used in this paragraph, "public university" means the University of Illinois, Illinois State University, Chicago State University, Governors State University, Southern Illinois University, Northern Illinois University, Eastern Illinois University, Western Illinois University, and Northeastern Illinois University.
    Alcoholic liquors may be served or sold in buildings under the control of the Board of Trustees of a community college district for events that the Board of Trustees of that community college district may determine are public events and not student-related activities. The Board of Trustees shall issue a written policy within 6 months after July 15, 2016 (the effective date of Public Act 99-550) concerning the types of events that would be eligible for an exemption. Thereafter, the Board of Trustees may issue revised, updated, new, or amended policies as it deems necessary and appropriate. In preparing its written policy, the Board of Trustees shall, in addition to other factors it considers relevant and important, give consideration to the following: (i) whether the event is a student activity or student-related activity; (ii) whether the physical setting of the event is conducive to control of liquor sales and distribution; (iii) the ability of the event operator to ensure that the sale or serving of alcoholic liquors and the demeanor of the participants are in accordance with State law and community college district policies; (iv) the anticipated attendees at the event and the relative proportion of individuals under the age of 21 to individuals age 21 or older; (v) the ability of the venue operator to prevent the sale or distribution of alcoholic liquors to individuals under the age of 21; (vi) whether the event prohibits participants from removing alcoholic beverages from the venue; and (vii) whether the event prohibits participants from providing their own alcoholic liquors to the venue. This paragraph does not apply to any community college district authorized to sell or serve alcoholic liquor under any other provision of this Section.
    Alcoholic liquor may be delivered to and sold at retail in the Dorchester Senior Business Center owned by the Village of Dolton if the alcoholic liquor is sold or dispensed only in connection with organized functions for which the planned attendance is 20 or more persons, and if the person or facility selling or dispensing the alcoholic liquor has provided dram shop liability insurance in maximum limits so as to hold harmless the Village of Dolton and the State from all financial loss, damage and harm.
    Alcoholic liquors may be delivered to and sold at retail in any building used as an Illinois State Armory provided:
        (i) the Adjutant General's written consent to the
    	
issuance of a license to sell alcoholic liquor in such building is filed with the Commission;
        (ii) the alcoholic liquor is sold or dispensed only
    	
in connection with organized functions held on special occasions;
        (iii) the organized function is one for which the
    	
planned attendance is 25 or more persons; and
        (iv) the facility selling or dispensing the alcoholic
    	
liquors has provided dram shop liability insurance in maximum limits so as to save harmless the facility and the State from all financial loss, damage or harm.
    Alcoholic liquors may be delivered to and sold at retail in the Chicago Civic Center, provided that:
        (i) the written consent of the Public Building
    	
Commission which administers the Chicago Civic Center is filed with the Commission;
        (ii) the alcoholic liquor is sold or dispensed only
    	
in connection with organized functions held on special occasions;
        (iii) the organized function is one for which the
    	
planned attendance is 25 or more persons;
        (iv) the facility selling or dispensing the alcoholic
    	
liquors has provided dram shop liability insurance in maximum limits so as to hold harmless the Civic Center, the City of Chicago and the State from all financial loss, damage or harm; and
        (v) all applicable local ordinances are complied with.
    Alcoholic liquors may be delivered or sold in any building belonging to or under the control of any city, village or incorporated town where more than 75% of the physical properties of the building is used for commercial or recreational purposes, and the building is located upon a pier extending into or over the waters of a navigable lake or stream or on the shore of a navigable lake or stream. In accordance with a license issued under this Act, alcoholic liquor may be sold, served, or delivered in buildings and facilities under the control of the Department of Natural Resources during events or activities lasting no more than 7 continuous days upon the written approval of the Director of Natural Resources acting as the controlling government authority. The Director of Natural Resources may specify conditions on that approval, including but not limited to requirements for insurance and hours of operation. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, alcoholic liquor sold by a United States Army Corps of Engineers or Department of Natural Resources concessionaire who was operating on June 1, 1991 for on-premises consumption only is not subject to the provisions of Articles IV and IX. Beer and wine may be sold on the premises of the Joliet Park District Stadium owned by the Joliet Park District when written consent to the issuance of a license to sell beer and wine in such premises is filed with the local liquor commissioner by the Joliet Park District. Beer and wine may be sold in buildings on the grounds of State veterans' homes when written consent to the issuance of a license to sell beer and wine in such buildings is filed with the Commission by the Department of Veterans' Affairs, and the facility shall provide dram shop liability in maximum insurance coverage limits so as to save the facility harmless from all financial loss, damage or harm. Such liquors may be delivered to and sold at any property owned or held under lease by a Metropolitan Pier and Exposition Authority or Metropolitan Exposition and Auditorium Authority.
    Beer and wine may be sold and dispensed at professional sporting events and at professional concerts and other entertainment events conducted on premises owned by the Forest Preserve District of Kane County, subject to the control of the District Commissioners and applicable local law, provided that dram shop liability insurance is provided at maximum coverage limits so as to hold the District harmless from all financial loss, damage and harm.
    Nothing in this Section shall preclude the sale or delivery of beer and wine at a State or county fair or the sale or delivery of beer or wine at a city fair in any otherwise lawful manner.
    Alcoholic liquors may be sold at retail in buildings in State parks under the control of the Department of Natural Resources, provided:
        a. the State park has overnight lodging facilities
    	
with some restaurant facilities or, not having overnight lodging facilities, has restaurant facilities which serve complete luncheon and dinner or supper meals,
        b. (blank), and
        c. the alcoholic liquors are sold by the State park
    	
lodge or restaurant concessionaire only during the hours from 11 o'clock a.m. until 12 o'clock midnight. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, alcoholic liquor sold by the State park or restaurant concessionaire is not subject to the provisions of Articles IV and IX.
    Alcoholic liquors may be sold at retail in buildings on properties under the control of the Division of Historic Preservation of the Department of Natural Resources or the Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum provided:
        a. the property has overnight lodging facilities with
    	
some restaurant facilities or, not having overnight lodging facilities, has restaurant facilities which serve complete luncheon and dinner or supper meals,
        b. consent to the issuance of a license to sell
    	
alcoholic liquors in the buildings has been filed with the commission by the Division of Historic Preservation of the Department of Natural Resources or the Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum, and
        c. the alcoholic liquors are sold by the lodge or
    	
restaurant concessionaire only during the hours from 11 o'clock a.m. until 12 o'clock midnight.
    The sale of alcoholic liquors pursuant to this Section does not authorize the establishment and operation of facilities commonly called taverns, saloons, bars, cocktail lounges, and the like except as a part of lodge and restaurant facilities in State parks or golf courses owned by Forest Preserve Districts with a population of less than 3,000,000 or municipalities or park districts.
    Alcoholic liquors may be sold at retail in the Springfield Administration Building of the Department of Transportation and the Illinois State Armory in Springfield; provided, that the controlling government authority may consent to such sales only if
        a. the request is from a not-for-profit organization;
        b. such sales would not impede normal operations of
    	
the departments involved;
        c. the not-for-profit organization provides dram shop
    	
liability in maximum insurance coverage limits and agrees to defend, save harmless and indemnify the State of Illinois from all financial loss, damage or harm;
        d. no such sale shall be made during normal working
    	
hours of the State of Illinois; and
        e. the consent is in writing.
    Alcoholic liquors may be sold at retail in buildings in recreational areas of river conservancy districts under the control of, or leased from, the river conservancy districts. Such sales are subject to reasonable local regulations as provided in Article IV; however, no such regulations may prohibit or substantially impair the sale of alcoholic liquors on Sundays or Holidays.
    Alcoholic liquors may be provided in long term care facilities owned or operated by a county under Division 5-21 or 5-22 of the Counties Code, when approved by the facility operator and not in conflict with the regulations of the Illinois Department of Public Health, to residents of the facility who have had their consumption of the alcoholic liquors provided approved in writing by a physician licensed to practice medicine in all its branches.
    Alcoholic liquors may be delivered to and dispensed in State housing assigned to employees of the Department of Corrections. No person shall furnish or allow to be furnished any alcoholic liquors to any prisoner confined in any jail, reformatory, prison or house of correction except upon a physician's prescription for medicinal purposes.
    Alcoholic liquors may be sold at retail or dispensed at the Willard Ice Building in Springfield, at the State Library in Springfield, and at Illinois State Museum facilities by (1) an agency of the State, whether legislative, judicial or executive, provided that such agency first obtains written permission to sell or dispense alcoholic liquors from the controlling government authority, or by (2) a not-for-profit organization, provided that such organization:
        a. Obtains written consent from the controlling
    	
government authority;
        b. Sells or dispenses the alcoholic liquors in a
    	
manner that does not impair normal operations of State offices located in the building;
        c. Sells or dispenses alcoholic liquors only in
    	
connection with an official activity in the building;
        d. Provides, or its catering service provides, dram
    	
shop liability insurance in maximum coverage limits and in which the carrier agrees to defend, save harmless and indemnify the State of Illinois from all financial loss, damage or harm arising out of the selling or dispensing of alcoholic liquors.
    Nothing in this Act shall prevent a not-for-profit organization or agency of the State from employing the services of a catering establishment for the selling or dispensing of alcoholic liquors at authorized functions.
    The controlling government authority for the Willard Ice Building in Springfield shall be the Director of the Department of Revenue. The controlling government authority for Illinois State Museum facilities shall be the Director of the Illinois State Museum. The controlling government authority for the State Library in Springfield shall be the Secretary of State.
    Alcoholic liquors may be delivered to and sold at retail or dispensed at any facility, property or building under the jurisdiction of the Division of Historic Preservation of the Department of Natural Resources or the Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum where the delivery, sale or dispensing is by (1) an agency of the State, whether legislative, judicial or executive, provided that such agency first obtains written permission to sell or dispense alcoholic liquors from a controlling government authority, or by (2) an individual or organization provided that such individual or organization:
        a. Obtains written consent from the controlling
    	
government authority;
        b. Sells or dispenses the alcoholic liquors in a
    	
manner that does not impair normal workings of State offices or operations located at the facility, property or building;
        c. Sells or dispenses alcoholic liquors only in
    	
connection with an official activity of the individual or organization in the facility, property or building;
        d. Provides, or its catering service provides, dram
    	
shop liability insurance in maximum coverage limits and in which the carrier agrees to defend, save harmless and indemnify the State of Illinois from all financial loss, damage or harm arising out of the selling or dispensing of alcoholic liquors.
    The controlling government authority for the Division of Historic Preservation of the Department of Natural Resources shall be the Director of Natural Resources, and the controlling government authority for the Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum shall be the Executive Director of the Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum.
    Alcoholic liquors may be delivered to and sold at retail or dispensed for consumption at the Michael Bilandic Building at 160 North LaSalle Street, Chicago IL 60601, after the normal business hours of any day care or child care facility located in the building, by (1) a commercial tenant or subtenant conducting business on the premises under a lease made pursuant to Section 405-315 of the Department of Central Management Services Law (20 ILCS 405/405-315), provided that such tenant or subtenant who accepts delivery of, sells, or dispenses alcoholic liquors shall procure and maintain dram shop liability insurance in maximum coverage limits and in which the carrier agrees to defend, indemnify, and save harmless the State of Illinois from all financial loss, damage, or harm arising out of the delivery, sale, or dispensing of alcoholic liquors, or by (2) an agency of the State, whether legislative, judicial, or executive, provided that such agency first obtains written permission to accept delivery of and sell or dispense alcoholic liquors from the Director of Central Management Services, or by (3) a not-for-profit organization, provided that such organization:
        a. obtains written consent from the Department of
    	
Central Management Services;
        b. accepts delivery of and sells or dispenses the
    	
alcoholic liquors in a manner that does not impair normal operations of State offices located in the building;
        c. accepts delivery of and sells or dispenses
    	
alcoholic liquors only in connection with an official activity in the building; and
        d. provides, or its catering service provides, dram
    	
shop liability insurance in maximum coverage limits and in which the carrier agrees to defend, save harmless, and indemnify the State of Illinois from all financial loss, damage, or harm arising out of the selling or dispensing of alcoholic liquors.
    Nothing in this Act shall prevent a not-for-profit organization or agency of the State from employing the services of a catering establishment for the selling or dispensing of alcoholic liquors at functions authorized by the Director of Central Management Services.
    Alcoholic liquors may be sold at retail or dispensed at the James R. Thompson Center in Chicago, subject to the provisions of Section 7.4 of the State Property Control Act, and 222 South College Street in Springfield, Illinois by (1) a commercial tenant or subtenant conducting business on the premises under a lease or sublease made pursuant to Section 405-315 of the Department of Central Management Services Law (20 ILCS 405/405-315), provided that such tenant or subtenant who sells or dispenses alcoholic liquors shall procure and maintain dram shop liability insurance in maximum coverage limits and in which the carrier agrees to defend, indemnify and save harmless the State of Illinois from all financial loss, damage or harm arising out of the sale or dispensing of alcoholic liquors, or by (2) an agency of the State, whether legislative, judicial or executive, provided that such agency first obtains written permission to sell or dispense alcoholic liquors from the Director of Central Management Services, or by (3) a not-for-profit organization, provided that such organization:
        a. Obtains written consent from the Department of
    	
Central Management Services;
        b. Sells or dispenses the alcoholic liquors in a
    	
manner that does not impair normal operations of State offices located in the building;
        c. Sells or dispenses alcoholic liquors only in
    	
connection with an official activity in the building;
        d. Provides, or its catering service provides, dram
    	
shop liability insurance in maximum coverage limits and in which the carrier agrees to defend, save harmless and indemnify the State of Illinois from all financial loss, damage or harm arising out of the selling or dispensing of alcoholic liquors.
    Nothing in this Act shall prevent a not-for-profit organization or agency of the State from employing the services of a catering establishment for the selling or dispensing of alcoholic liquors at functions authorized by the Director of Central Management Services.
    Alcoholic liquors may be sold or delivered at any facility owned by the Illinois Sports Facilities Authority provided that dram shop liability insurance has been made available in a form, with such coverage and in such amounts as the Authority reasonably determines is necessary.
    Alcoholic liquors may be sold at retail or dispensed at the Rockford State Office Building by (1) an agency of the State, whether legislative, judicial or executive, provided that such agency first obtains written permission to sell or dispense alcoholic liquors from the Department of Central Management Services, or by (2) a not-for-profit organization, provided that such organization:
        a. Obtains written consent from the Department of
    	
Central Management Services;
        b. Sells or dispenses the alcoholic liquors in a
    	
manner that does not impair normal operations of State offices located in the building;
        c. Sells or dispenses alcoholic liquors only in
    	
connection with an official activity in the building;
        d. Provides, or its catering service provides, dram
    	
shop liability insurance in maximum coverage limits and in which the carrier agrees to defend, save harmless and indemnify the State of Illinois from all financial loss, damage or harm arising out of the selling or dispensing of alcoholic liquors.
    Nothing in this Act shall prevent a not-for-profit organization or agency of the State from employing the services of a catering establishment for the selling or dispensing of alcoholic liquors at functions authorized by the Department of Central Management Services.
    Alcoholic liquors may be sold or delivered in a building that is owned by McLean County, situated on land owned by the county in the City of Bloomington, and used by the McLean County Historical Society if the sale or delivery is approved by an ordinance adopted by the county board, and the municipality in which the building is located may not prohibit that sale or delivery, notwithstanding any other provision of this Section. The regulation of the sale and delivery of alcoholic liquor in a building that is owned by McLean County, situated on land owned by the county, and used by the McLean County Historical Society as provided in this paragraph is an exclusive power and function of the State and is a denial and limitation under Article VII, Section 6, subsection (h) of the Illinois Constitution of the power of a home rule municipality to regulate that sale and delivery.
    Alcoholic liquors may be sold or delivered in any building situated on land held in trust for any school district organized under Article 34 of the School Code, if the building is not used for school purposes and if the sale or delivery is approved by the board of education.
    Alcoholic liquors may be delivered to and sold at retail in any building owned by a public library district, provided that the delivery and sale is approved by the board of trustees of that public library district and is limited to library fundraising events or programs of a cultural or educational nature. Before the board of trustees of a public library district may approve the delivery and sale of alcoholic liquors, the board of trustees of the public library district must have a written policy that has been approved by the board of trustees of the public library district governing when and under what circumstances alcoholic liquors may be delivered to and sold at retail on property owned by that public library district. The written policy must (i) provide that no alcoholic liquor may be sold, distributed, or consumed in any area of the library accessible to the general public during the event or program, (ii) prohibit the removal of alcoholic liquor from the venue during the event, and (iii) require that steps be taken to prevent the sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor to persons under the age of 21. Any public library district that has alcoholic liquor delivered to or sold at retail on property owned by the public library district shall provide dram shop liability insurance in maximum insurance coverage limits so as to save harmless the public library districts from all financial loss, damage, or harm.
    Alcoholic liquors may be sold or delivered in buildings owned by the Community Building Complex Committee of Boone County, Illinois if the person or facility selling or dispensing the alcoholic liquor has provided dram shop liability insurance with coverage and in amounts that the Committee reasonably determines are necessary.
    Alcoholic liquors may be sold or delivered in the building located at 1200 Centerville Avenue in Belleville, Illinois and occupied by either the Belleville Area Special Education District or the Belleville Area Special Services Cooperative.
    Alcoholic liquors may be delivered to and sold at the Louis Joliet Renaissance Center, City Center Campus, located at 214 N. Ottawa Street, Joliet, and the Food Services/Culinary Arts Department facilities, Main Campus, located at 1215 Houbolt Road, Joliet, owned by or under the control of Joliet Junior College, Illinois Community College District No. 525.
    Alcoholic liquors may be delivered to and sold at Triton College, Illinois Community College District No. 504.
    Alcoholic liquors may be delivered to and sold at the College of DuPage, Illinois Community College District No. 502.
    Alcoholic liquors may be delivered to and sold on any property owned, operated, or controlled by Lewis and Clark Community College, Illinois Community College District No. 536.
    Alcoholic liquors may be delivered to and sold at the building located at 446 East Hickory Avenue in Apple River, Illinois, owned by the Apple River Fire Protection District, and occupied by the Apple River Community Association if the alcoholic liquor is sold or dispensed only in connection with organized functions approved by the Apple River Community Association for which the planned attendance is 20 or more persons and if the person or facility selling or dispensing the alcoholic liquor has provided dram shop liability insurance in maximum limits so as to hold harmless the Apple River Fire Protection District, the Village of Apple River, and the Apple River Community Association from all financial loss, damage, and harm.
    Alcoholic liquors may be delivered to and sold at the Sikia Restaurant, Kennedy King College Campus, located at 740 West 63rd Street, Chicago, and at the Food Services in the Great Hall/Washburne Culinary Institute Department facility, Kennedy King College Campus, located at 740 West 63rd Street, Chicago, owned by or under the control of City Colleges of Chicago, Illinois Community College District No. 508.
(Source: P.A. 99-78, eff. 7-20-15; 99-484, eff. 10-30-15; 99-550, eff. 7-15-16; 99-559, eff. 7-15-16; 99-795, eff. 8-12-16; 100-120, eff. 8-18-17; 100-201, eff. 8-18-17; 100-695, eff. 8-3-18.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-16) (from Ch. 43, par. 131)
    Sec. 6-16. Prohibited sales and possession.
    (a) (i) No licensee nor any officer, associate, member, representative, agent, or employee of such licensee shall sell, give, or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of 21 years or to any intoxicated person, except as provided in Section 6-16.1. (ii) No express company, common carrier, or contract carrier nor any representative, agent, or employee on behalf of an express company, common carrier, or contract carrier that carries or transports alcoholic liquor for delivery within this State shall knowingly give or knowingly deliver to a residential address any shipping container clearly labeled as containing alcoholic liquor and labeled as requiring signature of an adult of at least 21 years of age to any person in this State under the age of 21 years. An express company, common carrier, or contract carrier that carries or transports such alcoholic liquor for delivery within this State shall obtain a signature at the time of delivery acknowledging receipt of the alcoholic liquor by an adult who is at least 21 years of age. At no time while delivering alcoholic beverages within this State may any representative, agent, or employee of an express company, common carrier, or contract carrier that carries or transports alcoholic liquor for delivery within this State deliver the alcoholic liquor to a residential address without the acknowledgment of the consignee and without first obtaining a signature at the time of the delivery by an adult who is at least 21 years of age. A signature of a person on file with the express company, common carrier, or contract carrier does not constitute acknowledgement of the consignee. Any express company, common carrier, or contract carrier that transports alcoholic liquor for delivery within this State that violates this item (ii) of this subsection (a) by delivering alcoholic liquor without the acknowledgement of the consignee and without first obtaining a signature at the time of the delivery by an adult who is at least 21 years of age is guilty of a business offense for which the express company, common carrier, or contract carrier that transports alcoholic liquor within this State shall be fined not more than $1,001 for a first offense, not more than $5,000 for a second offense, and not more than $10,000 for a third or subsequent offense. An express company, common carrier, or contract carrier shall be held vicariously liable for the actions of its representatives, agents, or employees. For purposes of this Act, in addition to other methods authorized by law, an express company, common carrier, or contract carrier shall be considered served with process when a representative, agent, or employee alleged to have violated this Act is personally served. Each shipment of alcoholic liquor delivered in violation of this item (ii) of this subsection (a) constitutes a separate offense. (iii) No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, shall sell, give, or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of 21 years, except in the performance of a religious ceremony or service. Except as otherwise provided in item (ii), any express company, common carrier, or contract carrier that transports alcoholic liquor within this State that violates the provisions of item (i), (ii), or (iii) of this paragraph of this subsection (a) is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor and the sentence shall include, but shall not be limited to, a fine of not less than $500. Any person who violates the provisions of item (iii) of this paragraph of this subsection (a) is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor and the sentence shall include, but shall not be limited to a fine of not less than $500 for a first offense and not less than $2,000 for a second or subsequent offense. Any person who knowingly violates the provisions of item (iii) of this paragraph of this subsection (a) is guilty of a Class 4 felony if a death occurs as the result of the violation.
    If a licensee or officer, associate, member, representative, agent, or employee of the licensee, or a representative, agent, or employee of an express company, common carrier, or contract carrier that carries or transports alcoholic liquor for delivery within this State, is prosecuted under this paragraph of this subsection (a) for selling, giving, or delivering alcoholic liquor to a person under the age of 21 years, the person under 21 years of age who attempted to buy or receive the alcoholic liquor may be prosecuted pursuant to Section 6-20 of this Act, unless the person under 21 years of age was acting under the authority of a law enforcement agency, the Illinois Liquor Control Commission, or a local liquor control commissioner pursuant to a plan or action to investigate, patrol, or conduct any similar enforcement action.
    For the purpose of preventing the violation of this Section, any licensee, or his agent or employee, or a representative, agent, or employee of an express company, common carrier, or contract carrier that carries or transports alcoholic liquor for delivery within this State, shall refuse to sell, deliver, or serve alcoholic beverages to any person who is unable to produce adequate written evidence of identity and of the fact that he or she is over the age of 21 years, if requested by the licensee, agent, employee, or representative.
    Adequate written evidence of age and identity of the person is a document issued by a federal, state, county, or municipal government, or subdivision or agency thereof, including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle operator's license, a registration certificate issued under the Federal Selective Service Act, or an identification card issued to a member of the Armed Forces. Proof that the defendant-licensee, or his employee or agent, or the representative, agent, or employee of the express company, common carrier, or contract carrier that carries or transports alcoholic liquor for delivery within this State demanded, was shown and reasonably relied upon such written evidence in any transaction forbidden by this Section is an affirmative defense in any criminal prosecution therefor or to any proceedings for the suspension or revocation of any license based thereon. It shall not, however, be an affirmative defense if the agent or employee accepted the written evidence knowing it to be false or fraudulent. If a false or fraudulent Illinois driver's license or Illinois identification card is presented by a person less than 21 years of age to a licensee or the licensee's agent or employee for the purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to purchase, or otherwise obtaining or attempting to obtain the serving of any alcoholic beverage, the law enforcement officer or agency investigating the incident shall, upon the conviction of the person who presented the fraudulent license or identification, make a report of the matter to the Secretary of State on a form provided by the Secretary of State.
    However, no agent or employee of the licensee or employee of an express company, common carrier, or contract carrier that carries or transports alcoholic liquor for delivery within this State shall be disciplined or discharged for selling or furnishing liquor to a person under 21 years of age if the agent or employee demanded and was shown, before furnishing liquor to a person under 21 years of age, adequate written evidence of age and identity of the person issued by a federal, state, county or municipal government, or subdivision or agency thereof, including but not limited to a motor vehicle operator's license, a registration certificate issued under the Federal Selective Service Act, or an identification card issued to a member of the Armed Forces. This paragraph, however, shall not apply if the agent or employee accepted the written evidence knowing it to be false or fraudulent.
    Any person who sells, gives, or furnishes to any person under the age of 21 years any false or fraudulent written, printed, or photostatic evidence of the age and identity of such person or who sells, gives or furnishes to any person under the age of 21 years evidence of age and identification of any other person is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor and the person's sentence shall include, but shall not be limited to, a fine of not less than $500.
    Any person under the age of 21 years who presents or offers to any licensee, his agent or employee, any written, printed or photostatic evidence of age and identity that is false, fraudulent, or not actually his or her own for the purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to purchase or otherwise procuring or attempting to procure, the serving of any alcoholic beverage, who falsely states in writing that he or she is at least 21 years of age when receiving alcoholic liquor from a representative, agent, or employee of an express company, common carrier, or contract carrier, or who has in his or her possession any false or fraudulent written, printed, or photostatic evidence of age and identity, is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor and the person's sentence shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: a fine of not less than $500 and at least 25 hours of community service. If possible, any community service shall be performed for an alcohol abuse prevention program.
    Any person under the age of 21 years who has any alcoholic beverage in his or her possession on any street or highway or in any public place or in any place open to the public is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor. This Section does not apply to possession by a person under the age of 21 years making a delivery of an alcoholic beverage in pursuance of the order of his or her parent or in pursuance of his or her employment.
    (a-1) It is unlawful for any parent or guardian to knowingly permit his or her residence, any other private property under his or her control, or any vehicle, conveyance, or watercraft under his or her control to be used by an invitee of the parent's child or the guardian's ward, if the invitee is under the age of 21, in a manner that constitutes a violation of this Section. A parent or guardian is deemed to have knowingly permitted his or her residence, any other private property under his or her control, or any vehicle, conveyance, or watercraft under his or her control to be used in violation of this Section if he or she knowingly authorizes or permits consumption of alcoholic liquor by underage invitees. Any person who violates this subsection (a-1) is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor and the person's sentence shall include, but shall not be limited to, a fine of not less than $500. Where a violation of this subsection (a-1) directly or indirectly results in great bodily harm or death to any person, the person violating this subsection shall be guilty of a Class 4 felony. Nothing in this subsection (a-1) shall be construed to prohibit the giving of alcoholic liquor to a person under the age of 21 years in the performance of a religious ceremony or service in observation of a religious holiday.
    For the purposes of this subsection (a-1) where the residence or other property has an owner and a tenant or lessee, the trier of fact may infer that the residence or other property is occupied only by the tenant or lessee.
    (b) Except as otherwise provided in this Section whoever violates this Section shall, in addition to other penalties provided for in this Act, be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
    (c) Any person shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor where he or she knowingly authorizes or permits a residence which he or she occupies to be used by an invitee under 21 years of age and:
        (1) the person occupying the residence knows that any
    	
such person under the age of 21 is in possession of or is consuming any alcoholic beverage; and
        (2) the possession or consumption of the alcohol by
    	
the person under 21 is not otherwise permitted by this Act.
    For the purposes of this subsection (c) where the residence has an owner and a tenant or lessee, the trier of fact may infer that the residence is occupied only by the tenant or lessee. The sentence of any person who violates this subsection (c) shall include, but shall not be limited to, a fine of not less than $500. Where a violation of this subsection (c) directly or indirectly results in great bodily harm or death to any person, the person violating this subsection (c) shall be guilty of a Class 4 felony. Nothing in this subsection (c) shall be construed to prohibit the giving of alcoholic liquor to a person under the age of 21 years in the performance of a religious ceremony or service in observation of a religious holiday.
    A person shall not be in violation of this subsection (c) if (A) he or she requests assistance from the police department or other law enforcement agency to either (i) remove any person who refuses to abide by the person's performance of the duties imposed by this subsection (c) or (ii) terminate the activity because the person has been unable to prevent a person under the age of 21 years from consuming alcohol despite having taken all reasonable steps to do so and (B) this assistance is requested before any other person makes a formal complaint to the police department or other law enforcement agency about the activity.
    (d) Any person who rents a hotel or motel room from the proprietor or agent thereof for the purpose of or with the knowledge that such room shall be used for the consumption of alcoholic liquor by persons under the age of 21 years shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
    (e) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, any person who has alcoholic liquor in his or her possession on public school district property on school days or at events on public school district property when children are present is guilty of a petty offense, unless the alcoholic liquor (i) is in the original container with the seal unbroken and is in the possession of a person who is not otherwise legally prohibited from possessing the alcoholic liquor or (ii) is in the possession of a person in or for the performance of a religious service or ceremony authorized by the school board.
(Source: P.A. 97-1049, eff. 1-1-13; 98-1017, eff. 1-1-15.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-16.1)
    Sec. 6-16.1. Enforcement actions.
    (a) A licensee or an officer, associate, member, representative, agent, or employee of a licensee may sell, give, or deliver alcoholic liquor to a person under the age of 21 years or authorize the sale, gift, or delivery of alcoholic liquor to a person under the age of 21 years pursuant to a plan or action to investigate, patrol, or otherwise conduct a "sting operation" or enforcement action against a person employed by the licensee or on any licensed premises if the licensee or officer, associate, member, representative, agent, or employee of the licensee provides written notice, at least 14 days before the "sting operation" or enforcement action, unless governing body of the municipality or county having jurisdiction sets a shorter period by ordinance, to the law enforcement agency having jurisdiction, the local liquor control commissioner, or both. Notice provided under this Section shall be valid for a "sting operation" or enforcement action conducted within 60 days of the provision of that notice, unless the governing body of the municipality or county having jurisdiction sets a shorter period by ordinance.
    (b) A local liquor control commission or unit of local government that conducts alcohol and tobacco compliance operations shall establish a policy and standards for alcohol and tobacco compliance operations to investigate whether a licensee is furnishing (1) alcoholic liquor to persons under 21 years of age in violation of this Act or (2) tobacco to persons in violation of the Prevention of Tobacco Use by Persons under 21 Years of Age and Sale and Distribution of Tobacco Products Act.
    (c) The Illinois Law Enforcement Training Standards Board shall develop a model policy and guidelines for the operation of alcohol and tobacco compliance checks by local law enforcement officers. The Illinois Law Enforcement Training Standards Board shall also require the supervising officers of such compliance checks to have met a minimum training standard as determined by the Board. The Board shall have the right to waive any training based on current written policies and procedures for alcohol and tobacco compliance check operations and in-service training already administered by the local law enforcement agency, department, or office.
    (d) The provisions of subsections (b) and (c) do not apply to a home rule unit with more than 2,000,000 inhabitants.
    (e) A home rule unit, other than a home rule unit with more than 2,000,000 inhabitants, may not regulate enforcement actions in a manner inconsistent with the regulation of enforcement actions under this Section. This subsection (e) is a limitation under subsection (i) of Section 6 of Article VII of the Illinois Constitution on the concurrent exercise by home rule units of powers and functions exercised by the State.
    (f) A licensee who is the subject of an enforcement action or "sting operation" under this Section and is found, pursuant to the enforcement action, to be in compliance with this Act shall be notified by the enforcement agency action that no violation was found within 30 days after the finding.
(Source: P.A. 101-2, eff. 7-1-19.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-16.2)
    Sec. 6-16.2. Prohibited entry to a licensed premises. A municipality or county may prohibit a licensee or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent, or employee of a licensee from permitting a person under the age of 21 years to enter and remain in that portion of a licensed premises that sells, gives, or delivers alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises. No prohibition under this Section, however, shall apply to any licensed premises, such as without limitation a restaurant or food shop, where selling, giving, or delivering alcoholic liquor is not the principal business of the licensee at those premises.
    In those instances where a person under the age of 21 years is prohibited from entering and remaining on the premises, proof that the defendant-licensee, or his employee or agent, demanded, was shown, and reasonably relied upon adequate written evidence for purposes of entering and remaining on the licensed premises is an affirmative defense in any criminal prosecution therefor or to any proceedings for the suspension or revocation of any license based thereon. It shall not, however, be an affirmative defense if the defendant-licensee, or his agent or employee, accepted the written evidence knowing it to be false or fraudulent.
    Adequate written evidence of age and identity of the person is a document issued by a federal, state, county, or municipal government, or subdivision or agency thereof, including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle operator's license, a registration certificate issued under the Federal Selective Service Act, or an identification card issued to a member of the armed forces.
    If a false or fraudulent Illinois driver's license or Illinois identification card is presented by a person less than 21 years of age to a licensee or the licensee's agent or employee for the purpose of obtaining entry and remaining on a licensed premises, the law enforcement officer or agency investigating the incident shall, upon the conviction of the person who presented the fraudulent license or identification, make a report of the matter to the Secretary of State on a form provided by the Secretary of State.
(Source: P.A. 95-331, eff. 8-21-07.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-17) (from Ch. 43, par. 133)
    Sec. 6-17. (a) No licensee licensed under the provisions of this Act shall deny or permit his agents and employees to deny any person the full and equal enjoyment of the accommodations, advantages, facilities and privileges of any premises in which alcoholic liquors are authorized to be sold subject only to the conditions and limitations established by law and applicable alike to all citizens.
    (b) A distributor or an importing distributor may refuse to sell beer, brew, or similar beverages containing 0.5% or less of alcohol by volume to a non-licensee.
(Source: P.A. 86-1469.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-17.1)
    Sec. 6-17.1. Distributors; sales to retailers. The General Assembly hereby finds and declares that for the purposes of ensuring that all retail licensees have the opportunity to receive alcoholic liquor, reducing the amount of spoiled and overaged alcoholic liquor sold to customers, and maintaining the distribution system and the State's ability to regulate against illegal importation of alcoholic liquor, it is necessary to prevent discrimination among retail licensees as provided in this Section.
    A distributor or importing distributor designated as a distributor or importing distributor for alcoholic liquor within a designated geographic area or areas under Section 6-9 of this Act shall use its best efforts to make available for sale to retail licensees, in its designated geographic area or areas, each brand of alcoholic liquor which the distributor or the importing distributor has been authorized to distribute. Nothing in this Section prohibits a distributor or importing distributor from establishing purchase requirements unless the requirements have the effect of excluding a majority of the retail licensees in the designated geographic area or areas from purchasing the alcoholic liquor.
(Source: P.A. 91-186, eff. 1-1-00.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-17.2)
    Sec. 6-17.2. Importation of alcoholic liquor into this State. A person who imports into this State from any point in the United States outside this State, whether for himself or for another, any alcoholic liquor for sale or resale is required to hold a license issued by the Commission in accordance with this Act, except as otherwise expressly authorized by this Act.
(Source: P.A. 90-739, eff. 8-13-98.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-18) (from Ch. 43, par. 133a)
    Sec. 6-18. No home rule unit, as defined in Article VII of the Illinois Constitution, may amend or alter or in any way change the legal age at which persons may purchase, consume or possess alcoholic liquors as provided in this Act, and it is declared to be the law of this State, pursuant to paragraphs (h) and (i) of Section 6 of Article VII of the Constitution, that the establishment of such legal age is an exercise of exclusive State power which may not be exercised concurrently by a home rule unit.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-19) (from Ch. 43, par. 134)
    Sec. 6-19. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 82-783. Repealed by P.A. 90-432, eff. 1-1-98.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-20) (from Ch. 43, par. 134a)
    Sec. 6-20. Transfer, possession, and consumption of alcoholic liquor; restrictions.
    (a) Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of age shall not purchase, or accept a gift of such alcoholic liquor or have such alcoholic liquor in his possession.
    (b) If a licensee or his or her agents or employees believes or has reason to believe that a sale or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of the non-age of the prospective recipient, he or she shall, before making such sale or delivery demand presentation of some form of positive identification, containing proof of age, issued by a public officer in the performance of his or her official duties.
    (c) No person shall transfer, alter, or deface such an identification card; use the identification card of another; carry or use a false or forged identification card; or obtain an identification card by means of false information.
    (d) No person shall purchase, accept delivery or have possession of alcoholic liquor in violation of this Section.
    (e) The consumption of alcoholic liquor by any person under 21 years of age is forbidden.
    (f) Whoever violates any provisions of this Section shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
    (g) The possession and dispensing, or consumption by a person under 21 years of age of alcoholic liquor in the performance of a religious service or ceremony, or the consumption by a person under 21 years of age under the direct supervision and approval of the parents or parent or those persons standing in loco parentis of such person under 21 years of age in the privacy of a home, is not prohibited by this Act.
    (h) The provisions of this Act prohibiting the possession of alcoholic liquor by a person under 21 years of age and dispensing of alcoholic liquor to a person under 21 years of age do not apply in the case of a student under 21 years of age, but 18 years of age or older, who:
        (1) tastes, but does not imbibe, alcoholic liquor
    	
only during times of a regularly scheduled course while under the direct supervision of an instructor who is at least 21 years of age and employed by an educational institution described in subdivision (2);
        (2) is enrolled as a student in a college,
    	
university, or post-secondary educational institution that is accredited or certified by an agency recognized by the United States Department of Education or a nationally recognized accrediting agency or association, or that has a permit of approval issued by the Board of Higher Education pursuant to the Private Business and Vocational Schools Act of 2012;
        (3) is participating in a culinary arts, fermentation
    	
science, food service, or restaurant management degree program of which a portion of the program includes instruction on responsible alcoholic beverage serving methods modeled after the Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Server Education and Training (BASSET) curriculum; and
        (4) tastes, but does not imbibe, alcoholic liquor for
    	
instructional purposes up to, but not exceeding, 6 times per class as a part of a required course in which the student temporarily possesses alcoholic liquor for tasting, not imbibing, purposes only in a class setting on the campus and, thereafter, the alcoholic liquor is possessed and remains under the control of the instructor.
    (i) A law enforcement officer may not charge or otherwise take a person into custody based solely on the commission of an offense that involves alcohol and violates subsection (d) or (e) of this Section if the law enforcement officer, after making a reasonable determination and considering the facts and surrounding circumstances, reasonably believes that all of the following apply:
        (1) The law enforcement officer has contact with the
    	
person because that person either:
            (A) requested emergency medical assistance for an
        	
individual who reasonably appeared to be in need of medical assistance due to alcohol consumption; or
            (B) acted in concert with another person who
        	
requested emergency medical assistance for an individual who reasonably appeared to be in need of medical assistance due to alcohol consumption; however, the provisions of this subparagraph (B) shall not apply to more than 3 persons acting in concert for any one occurrence.
        (2) The person described in subparagraph (A) or (B)
    	
of paragraph (1) of this subsection (i):
            (A) provided his or her full name and any other
        	
relevant information requested by the law enforcement officer;
            (B) remained at the scene with the individual who
        	
reasonably appeared to be in need of medical assistance due to alcohol consumption until emergency medical assistance personnel arrived; and
            (C) cooperated with emergency medical assistance
        	
personnel and law enforcement officers at the scene.
    (i-5) (1) In this subsection (i-5):
    "Medical forensic services" has the meaning defined in Section 1a of the Sexual Assault Survivors Emergency Treatment Act.
    "Sexual assault" means an act of sexual conduct or sexual penetration, defined in Section 11-0.1 of the Criminal Code of 2012, including, without limitation, acts prohibited under Sections 11-1.20 through 11-1.60 of the Criminal Code of 2012.
    (2) A law enforcement officer may not charge or otherwise take a person into custody based solely on the commission of an offense that involves alcohol and violates subsection (d) or (e) of this Section if the law enforcement officer, after making a reasonable determination and considering the facts and surrounding circumstances, reasonably believes that all of the following apply:
        (A) The law enforcement officer has contact with the
    	
person because the person:
            (i) reported that he or she was sexually
        	
assaulted;
            (ii) reported a sexual assault of another person
        	
or requested emergency medical assistance or medical forensic services for another person who had been sexually assaulted; or
            (iii) acted in concert with another person who
        	
reported a sexual assault of another person or requested emergency medical assistance or medical forensic services for another person who had been sexually assaulted; however, the provisions of this item (iii) shall not apply to more than 3 persons acting in concert for any one occurrence.
        The report of a sexual assault may have been made to
    	
a health care provider, to law enforcement, including the campus police or security department of an institution of higher education, or to the Title IX coordinator of an institution of higher education or another employee of the institution responsible for responding to reports of sexual assault under State or federal law.
        (B) The person who reports the sexual assault:
            (i) provided his or her full name;
            (ii) remained at the scene until emergency
        	
medical assistance personnel arrived, if emergency medical assistance was summoned for the person who was sexually assaulted and he or she cooperated with emergency medical assistance personnel; and
            (iii) cooperated with the agency or person to
        	
whom the sexual assault was reported if he or she witnessed or reported the sexual assault of another person.
    (j) A person who meets the criteria of paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (i) of this Section or a person who meets the criteria of paragraph (2) of subsection (i-5) of this Section shall be immune from criminal liability for an offense under subsection (d) or (e) of this Section.
    (k) A person may not initiate an action against a law enforcement officer based on the officer's compliance or failure to comply with subsection (i) or (i-5) of this Section, except for willful or wanton misconduct.
(Source: P.A. 99-447, eff. 6-1-16; 99-795, eff. 8-12-16; 100-1087, eff. 1-1-19.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-21) (from Ch. 43, par. 135)
    Sec. 6-21. (a) Every person who is injured within this State, in person or property, by any intoxicated person has a right of action in his or her own name, severally or jointly, against any person, licensed under the laws of this State or of any other state to sell alcoholic liquor, who, by selling or giving alcoholic liquor, within or without the territorial limits of this State, causes the intoxication of such person. Any person at least 21 years of age who pays for a hotel or motel room or facility knowing that the room or facility is to be used by any person under 21 years of age for the unlawful consumption of alcoholic liquors and such consumption causes the intoxication of the person under 21 years of age, shall be liable to any person who is injured in person or property by the intoxicated person under 21 years of age. Any person owning, renting, leasing or permitting the occupation of any building or premises with knowledge that alcoholic liquors are to be sold therein, or who having leased the same for other purposes, shall knowingly permit therein the sale of any alcoholic liquors that have caused the intoxication of any person, shall be liable, severally or jointly, with the person selling or giving the liquors. However, if such building or premises belong to a minor or other person under guardianship the guardian of such person shall be held liable instead of the ward. A married woman has the same right to bring the action and to control it and the amount recovered as an unmarried woman. All damages recovered by a minor under this Act shall be paid either to the minor, or to his or her parent, guardian or next friend as the court shall direct. The unlawful sale or gift of alcoholic liquor works a forfeiture of all rights of the lessee or tenant under any lease or contract of rent upon the premises where the unlawful sale or gift takes place. All actions for damages under this Act may be by any appropriate action in the circuit court. An action shall lie for injuries to either means of support or loss of society, but not both, caused by an intoxicated person or in consequence of the intoxication of any person resulting as hereinabove set out. "Loss of society" means the mutual benefits that each family member receives from the other's continued existence, including love, affection, care, attention, companionship, comfort, guidance, and protection. "Family" includes spouse, children, parents, brothers, and sisters. The action, if the person from whom support or society was furnished is living, shall be brought by any person injured in means of support or society in his or her name for his or her benefit and the benefit of all other persons injured in means of support or society. However, any person claiming to be injured in means of support or society and not included in any action brought hereunder may join by motion made within the times herein provided for bringing such action or the personal representative of the deceased person from whom such support or society was furnished may so join. In every such action the jury shall determine the amount of damages to be recovered without regard to and with no special instructions as to the dollar limits on recovery imposed by this Section. The amount recovered in every such action is for the exclusive benefit of the person injured in loss of support or society and shall be distributed to such persons in the proportions determined by the verdict rendered or judgment entered in the action. If the right of action is settled by agreement with the personal representative of a deceased person from whom support or society was furnished, the court having jurisdiction of the estate of the deceased person shall distribute the amount of the settlement to the person injured in loss of support or society in the proportion, as determined by the court, that the percentage of dependency of each such person upon the deceased person bears to the sum of the percentages of dependency of all such persons upon the deceased person. For all causes of action involving persons injured, killed, or incurring property damage before September 12, 1985, in no event shall the judgment or recovery under this Act for injury to the person or to the property of any person as hereinabove set out exceed $15,000, and recovery under this Act for loss of means of support resulting from the death or injury of any person, as hereinabove set out, shall not exceed $20,000. For all causes of action involving persons injured, killed, or incurring property damage after September 12, 1985 but before July 1, 1998, in no event shall the judgment or recovery for injury to the person or property of any person exceed $30,000 for each person incurring damages, and recovery under this Act for loss of means of support resulting from the death or injury of any person shall not exceed $40,000. For all causes of action involving persons injured, killed, or incurring property damage on or after July 1, 1998, in no event shall the judgment or recovery for injury to the person or property of any person exceed $45,000 for each person incurring damages, and recovery under this Act for either loss of means of support or loss of society resulting from the death or injury of any person shall not exceed $55,000. Beginning in 1999, every January 20, these liability limits shall automatically be increased or decreased, as applicable, by a percentage equal to the percentage change in the consumer price index-u during the preceding 12-month calendar year. "Consumer price index-u" means the index published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor that measures the average change in prices of goods and services purchased by all urban consumers, United States city average, all items, 1982-84 = 100. The new amount resulting from each annual adjustment shall be determined by the Comptroller and made available via the Comptroller's official website by January 31 of every year and to the chief judge of each judicial circuit. The liability limits at the time at which damages subject to such limits are awarded by final judgment or settlement shall be utilized by the courts. Nothing in this Section bars any person from making separate claims which, in the aggregate, exceed any one limit where such person incurs more than one type of compensable damage, including personal injury, property damage, and loss to means of support or society. However, all persons claiming loss to means of support or society shall be limited to an aggregate recovery not to exceed the single limitation set forth herein for the death or injury of each person from whom support or society is claimed.
    Nothing in this Act shall be construed to confer a cause of action for injuries to the person or property of the intoxicated person himself, nor shall anything in this Act be construed to confer a cause of action for loss of means of support or society on the intoxicated person himself or on any person claiming to be supported by such intoxicated person or claiming the society of such person. In conformance with the rule of statutory construction enunciated in the general Illinois saving provision in Section 4 of "An Act to revise the law in relation to the construction of the statutes", approved March 5, 1874, as amended, no amendment of this Section purporting to abolish or having the effect of abolishing a cause of action shall be applied to invalidate a cause of action accruing before its effective date, irrespective of whether the amendment was passed before or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1986.
    Each action hereunder shall be barred unless commenced within one year next after the cause of action accrued.
    However, a licensed distributor or brewer whose only connection with the furnishing of alcoholic liquor which is alleged to have caused intoxication was the furnishing or maintaining of any apparatus for the dispensing or cooling of beer is not liable under this Section, and if such licensee is named as a defendant, a proper motion to dismiss shall be granted.
    (b) Any person licensed under any state or local law to sell alcoholic liquor, whether or not a citizen or resident of this State, who in person or through an agent causes the intoxication, by the sale or gift of alcoholic liquor, of any person who, while intoxicated, causes injury to any person or property in the State of Illinois thereby submits such licensed person, and, if an individual, his or her personal representative, to the jurisdiction of the courts of this State for a cause of action arising under subsection (a) above.
    Service of process upon any person who is subject to the jurisdiction of the courts of this State, as provided in this subsection, may be made by personally serving the summons upon the defendant outside this State, as provided in the Code of Civil Procedure, as now or hereafter amended, with the same force and effect as though summons had been personally served within this State.
    Only causes of action arising under subsection (a) above may be asserted against a defendant in an action in which jurisdiction over him or her is based upon this subsection.
    Nothing herein contained limits or affects the right to serve any process in any other manner now or hereafter provided by law.
(Source: P.A. 94-982, eff. 6-30-06.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-22) (from Ch. 43, par. 137)
    Sec. 6-22. No person except a manufacturer or distributor, or importing distributor, shall fill or refill, in whole or in part, any original package of alcoholic liquor with the same or any other kind or quality of alcoholic liquor, and it shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession for sale at retail any bottles, casks or other containers containing alcoholic liquor, except in original packages.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-22.5)
    Sec. 6-22.5. Infusions.
    (a) For purposes of this Section, "infusion" means a spirit where ingredients, including, but not limited to, fruits, spices, or nuts, are added to naturally infuse flavor into the spirit.
    (b) A retail licensee that is preparing an infusion for consumption on the premises shall comply with the following requirements:
        (1) the infusion shall be mixed and stored on the
    	
premises of the licensee;
        (2) the container that the infusion is stored in must
    	
have a lid and be in sanitary condition;
        (3) the infusion shall not be aged for more than 14
    	
days;
        (4) the infusion must be used or destroyed within 21
    	
days after the end of the aging process;
        (5) cleaning records for the container that the
    	
infusion is stored in must be available for inspection by agents of the State Commission; and
        (6) the container that the infusion is stored in must
    	
have a label affixed to the container that provides the production date of the infusion, the base spirit of the infusion, the date the infusion will finish the aging process, and the date by which the infusion must be destroyed.
(Source: P.A. 99-46, eff. 7-15-15.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-23) (from Ch. 43, par. 138)
    Sec. 6-23. No manufacturer or distributor or importing distributor or foreign importer shall enter into any contract with any person licensed to sell at retail whereby such licensee agrees not to sell any alcoholic liquors manufactured or distributed by any other manufacturer or distributor or importing distributor or foreign importer, and any provision in any contract violative of this Section shall render the whole of such contract void and no action shall be brought thereon in any court. However, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the Department of Agriculture from entering into contracts for exclusive facilities upon the State Fair Grounds on an equal basis.
(Source: P.A. 85-142.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-24) (from Ch. 43, par. 139)
    Sec. 6-24. Every licensee shall cause his license or licenses to be framed and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. An airplane license shall be maintained at the licensee's business premises in Illinois.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-24a) (from Ch. 43, par. 139a)
    Sec. 6-24a. Display of birth defects warning signs.
    (a) The General Assembly finds that there is a need for public information about the risk of birth defects (specifically Fetal Alcohol Syndrome) when women consume alcoholic liquor during pregnancy. The United States Surgeon General has recommended abstinence from alcohol during pregnancy. Since Fetal Alcohol Syndrome and fetal alcohol effects are preventable, the General Assembly finds that it is in the public interest to provide warning about the risk of alcohol-related birth defects at places where alcoholic liquors are sold.
    (b) Every holder of a retail license, whether the licensee sells or offers for sale alcoholic liquors for use or consumption on or off the retail license premises, shall cause a sign with the message "GOVERNMENT WARNING: ACCORDING TO THE SURGEON GENERAL, WOMEN SHOULD NOT DRINK ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES DURING PREGNANCY BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF BIRTH DEFECTS. IF YOU NEED ASSISTANCE FOR SUBSTANCE ABUSE, PLEASE CALL THE OFFICE OF ALCOHOLISM AND SUBSTANCE ABUSE (OASA) AT 1-800-843-6154." to be framed and hung in plain view. These signs shall be no larger than 8 1/2 inches by 11 inches.
    (c) In the event there is no warning sign posted on the retailer's premises, it shall be the responsibility of the Illinois Liquor Control Commission to furnish the retailer with a warning sign. The retailer shall have 30 days from receipt of the warning sign to post it on the licensed premises. Thereafter, a retailer who violates this Section is subject to a written warning for the first violation. For a second or subsequent violation, the retailer shall pay a fine of at least $20 but not more than $100 for each such violation. For the third and subsequent violations, each day the activity continues shall be a separate violation.
(Source: P.A. 96-387, eff. 1-1-10.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-25) (from Ch. 43, par. 142)
    Sec. 6-25. No person shall receive a local license to sell alcoholic liquor upon any premises as a restaurant nor as a club unless it has the qualifications respectively described in Sections 1-3.23 and 1-3.24. No restaurant, licensed as such, shall sell alcoholic liquor except with meals.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-26) (from Ch. 43, par. 144a)
    Sec. 6-26. Minimum size of container for spirits. No unmixed spirits shall be sold or offered for sale at retail for consumption on the premises, except in a container having a minimum capacity of at least one fluid ounce and which contains at the time of sale at least one fluid ounce of the beverage being sold. The provisions of this Section shall not prohibit the sale of unmixed spirits on boats or railroad cars licensed to sell liquor for consumption on the premises in containers regularly used and having a smaller fluid capacity.
(Source: P.A. 89-250, eff. 1-1-96.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-27) (from Ch. 43, par. 144c)
    Sec. 6-27. Licensing of seller and server education programs.
    (a) Any program designed to educate or train employees who sell or serve alcoholic beverages at retail to identify and address persons displaying problems with alcohol misuse or abuse shall be licensed by the State Commission.
    (b) A seller and server education program license in effect on the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 91st General Assembly shall remain in effect until June 30, 2000.
(Source: P.A. 91-922, eff. 7-7-00.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-27.1)
    Sec. 6-27.1. Responsible alcohol service server training.
    (a) Unless issued a valid server training certificate between July 1, 2012 and July 1, 2015 by a certified Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers Education and Training (BASSET) trainer, all alcohol servers in Cook County are required to obtain and complete training in basic responsible alcohol service as outlined in 77 Ill. Adm. Code 3500, as those provisions exist on July 1, 2015 (the effective date of Public Act 98-939), by July 1, 2015 or within 120 days after the alcohol server begins his or her employment, whichever is later. All alcohol servers in a county, other than Cook County, with a population of 200,000 inhabitants or more are required to obtain and complete training in basic responsible alcohol service as outlined in 77 Ill. Adm. Code 3500, as those provisions exist on July 1, 2015 (the effective date of Public Act 98-939), by July 1, 2016 or within 120 days after the alcohol server begins his or her employment, whichever is later. All alcohol servers in a county with a population of more than 30,000 inhabitants and less than 200,000 inhabitants are required to obtain and complete training in basic responsible alcohol service as outlined in 77 Ill. Adm. Code 3500, as those provisions exist on July 1, 2015 (the effective date of Public Act 98-939), by July 1, 2017 or within 120 days after the alcohol server begins his or her employment, whichever is later. All alcohol servers in counties with a population of 30,000 inhabitants or less are required to obtain and complete training in basic responsible alcohol service as outlined in 77 Ill. Adm. Code 3500, as those provisions exist on July 1, 2015 (the effective date of Public Act 98-939), by July 1, 2018 or within 120 days after the alcohol server begins his or her employment, whichever is later.
    There is no limit to the amount of times a server may take the training. A certificate of training belongs to the server, and a server may transfer a certificate of training to a different employer, but shall not transfer a certificate of training to another server. Proof that an alcohol server has been trained must be available upon reasonable request by State law enforcement officials. For the purpose of this Section, "alcohol servers" means persons who sell or serve open containers of alcoholic beverages at retail, anyone who delivers mixed drinks under Section 6-28.8, and anyone whose job description entails the checking of identification for the purchase of open containers of alcoholic beverages at retail or for entry into the licensed premises. The definition does not include (i) a distributor or importing distributor conducting product sampling as authorized in Section 6-31 of this Act or a registered tasting representative, as provided in 11 Ill. Adm. Code 100.40, conducting a tasting, as defined in 11 Ill. Adm. Code 100.10; (ii) a volunteer serving alcoholic beverages at a charitable function; or (iii) an instructor engaged in training or educating on the proper technique for using a system that dispenses alcoholic beverages.
    (b) Responsible alcohol service training must cover and assess knowledge of the topics noted in 77 Ill. Adm. Code 3500.155.
    (c) Beginning on the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 98th General Assembly, but no later than October 1, 2015, all existing BASSET trainers who are already BASSET certified as of the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 98th General Assembly shall be recertified by the State Commission and be required to comply with the conditions for server training set forth in this amendatory Act of the 98th General Assembly.
    (d) Training modules and certificate program plans must be approved by the State Commission. All documents, materials, or information related to responsible alcohol service training program approval that are submitted to the State Commission are confidential and shall not be open to public inspection or dissemination and are exempt from disclosure.
    The State Commission shall only approve programs that meet the following criteria:
        (1) the training course covers the content specified
    	
in 77 Ill. Adm. Code 3500.155;
        (2) if the training course is classroom-based, the
    	
classroom training is at least 4 hours, is available in English and Spanish, and includes a test;
        (3) if the training course is online or
    	
computer-based, the course is designed in a way that ensures that no content can be skipped, is interactive, has audio for content for servers that have a disability, and includes a test;
        (4) training and testing is based on a job task
    	
analysis that clearly identifies and focuses on the knowledge, skills, and abilities needed to responsibly serve alcoholic beverages and is developed using best practices in instructional design and exam development to ensure that the program is fair and legally defensible;
        (5) training and testing is conducted by any means
    	
available, including, but not limited to, online, computer, classroom, or live trainers; and
        (6) the program must provide access on a
    	
24-hour-per-day, 7-days-per-week basis for certificate verification for State Commission, State law enforcement officials, and employers to be able to verify certificate authenticity.
    (e) Nothing in subsection (d) of this Section shall be construed to require a program to use a test administrator or proctor.
    (f) A certificate issued from a BASSET-licensed training program shall be accepted as meeting the training requirements for all server license and permit laws and ordinances in the State.
    (g) A responsible alcohol service training certificate from a BASSET-licensed program shall be valid for 3 years.
    (h) The provisions of this Section shall apply beginning July 1, 2015. From July 1, 2015 through December 31, 2015, enforcement of the provisions of this Section shall be limited to education and notification of the requirements to encourage compliance.
    (i) The provisions of this Section do not apply to a special event retailer.
(Source: P.A. 101-631, eff. 6-2-20.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-27.5)
    Sec. 6-27.5. Mandatory schedule of prices. All retail licensees shall maintain a schedule of the prices charged for all drinks of alcoholic liquor to be served and consumed on the licensed premises or in any room or part thereof. Whenever a hotel or multi-use establishment which holds a valid retailer's license operates on its premises more than one establishment at which drinks of alcoholic liquor are sold at retail, the hotel or multi-use establishment shall maintain at each such establishment a separate schedule of the prices charged for such drinks at that establishment.
(Source: P.A. 99-46, eff. 7-15-15.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-28) (from Ch. 43, par. 144d)
    Sec. 6-28. Prohibited happy hours.
    (a) (Blank).
    (b) No retail licensee or employee or agent of such licensee shall:
        (1) sell more than one drink of alcoholic liquor for
    	
the price of one drink of alcoholic liquor;
        (2) sell, offer to sell or serve to any person an
    	
unlimited number of drinks of alcoholic liquor during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions not open to the general public or as provided in Section 6-28.5 of this Act;
        (3) (blank);
        (4) increase the volume of alcoholic liquor contained
    	
in a drink, or the size of a drink of alcoholic liquor, without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for the drink on that day;
        (5) encourage or permit, on the licensed premises,
    	
any game or contest which involves drinking alcoholic liquor or the awarding of drinks of alcoholic liquor as prizes for such game or contest on the licensed premises; or
        (6) advertise or promote in any way, whether on or
    	
off the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under paragraphs (1) through (5).
    (c) (Blank).
    (d) A violation of this Section shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the retailer's license as provided by this Act. The State Commission may not enforce any trade practice policy or other rule that was not adopted in accordance with the Illinois Administrative Procedure Act.
(Source: P.A. 98-571, eff. 8-27-13; 99-46, eff. 7-15-15.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-28.5)
    Sec. 6-28.5. Permitted happy hours and meal packages, party packages, and entertainment packages.
    (a) As used in this Section:
    "Dedicated event space" means a room or rooms or other clearly delineated space within a retail licensee's premises that is reserved for the exclusive use of party package invitees during the entirety of a party package. Furniture, stanchions and ropes, or other room dividers may be used to clearly delineate a dedicated event space.
    "Meal package" means a food and beverage package, which may or may not include entertainment, where the service of alcoholic liquor is an accompaniment to the food, including, but not limited to, a meal, tour, tasting, or any combination thereof for a fixed price by a retail licensee or any other licensee operating within a sports facility, restaurant, winery, brewery, or distillery.
    "Party package" means a private party, function, or event for a specific social or business occasion, either arranged by invitation or reservation for a defined number of individuals, that is not open to the general public and where attendees are served both food and alcohol for a fixed price in a dedicated event space.
    (b) A retail licensee may:
        (1) offer free food or entertainment at any time;
        (2) include drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a
    	
meal package;
        (3) sell or offer for sale a party package only if
    	
the retail licensee:
            (A) offers food in the dedicated event space;
            (B) limits the party package to no more than 3
        	
hours;
            (C) distributes wristbands, lanyards, shirts, or
        	
any other such wearable items to identify party package attendees so the attendees may be granted access to the dedicated event space; and
            (D) excludes individuals not participating in the
        	
party package from the dedicated event space;
        (4) include drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a
    	
hotel package;
        (5) negotiate drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a
    	
hotel package;
        (6) provide room service to persons renting rooms at
    	
a hotel;
        (7) sell pitchers (or the equivalent, including, but
    	
not limited to, buckets of bottled beer), carafes, or bottles of alcoholic liquor which are customarily sold in such manner, or sell bottles of spirits;
        (8) advertise events permitted under this Section;
        (9) include drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of an
    	
entertainment package where the licensee is separately licensed by a municipal ordinance that (A) restricts dates of operation to dates during which there is an event at an adjacent stadium, (B) restricts hours of serving alcoholic liquor to 2 hours before the event and one hour after the event, (C) restricts alcoholic liquor sales to beer and wine, (D) requires tickets for admission to the establishment, and (E) prohibits sale of admission tickets on the day of an event and permits the sale of admission tickets for single events only; and
        (10) discount any drink of alcoholic liquor during a
    	
specified time period only if:
            (A) the price of the drink of alcoholic liquor is
        	
not changed during the time that it is discounted;
            (B) the period of time during which any drink of
        	
alcoholic liquor is discounted does not exceed 4 hours per day and 15 hours per week; however, this period of time is not required to be consecutive and may be divided by the licensee in any manner;
            (C) the drink of alcoholic liquor is not
        	
discounted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and the licensed premises' closing hour; and
            (D) notice of the discount of the drink of
        	
alcoholic liquor during a specified time is posted on the licensed premises or on the licensee's publicly available website at least 7 days prior to the specified time.
    (c) A violation of this Section shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the retailer's license as provided by this Act. The State Commission may not enforce any trade practice policy or other rule that was not adopted in accordance with the Illinois Administrative Procedure Act.
    (d) All licensees affected by this Section must also comply with Sections 6-16, 6-21, and 6-27.1 of this Act.
(Source: P.A. 99-46, eff. 7-15-15; 100-201, eff. 8-18-17.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-28.8)
    (Section scheduled to be repealed on January 3, 2024)
    Sec. 6-28.8. Delivery and carry out of mixed drinks permitted.
    (a) In this Section:
    "Cocktail" or "mixed drink" means any beverage obtained by combining ingredients alcoholic in nature, whether brewed, fermented, or distilled, with ingredients non-alcoholic in nature, such as fruit juice, lemonade, cream, or a carbonated beverage.
    "Original container" means, for the purposes of this Section only, a container that is (i) filled, sealed, and secured by a retail licensee's employee at the retail licensee's location with a tamper-evident lid or cap or (ii) filled and labeled by the manufacturer and secured by the manufacturer's original unbroken seal.
    "Sealed container" means a rigid container that contains a mixed drink or a single serving of wine, is new, has never been used, has a secured lid or cap designed to prevent consumption without removal of the lid or cap, and is tamper-evident. "Sealed container" includes a manufacturer's original container as defined in this subsection. "Sealed container" does not include a container with a lid with sipping holes or openings for straws or a container made of plastic, paper, or polystyrene foam.
    "Tamper-evident" means a lid or cap that has been sealed with tamper-evident covers, including, but not limited to, wax dip or heat shrink wrap.
    (b) A cocktail, mixed drink, or single serving of wine placed in a sealed container by a retail licensee at the retail licensee's location or a manufacturer's original container may be transferred and sold for off-premises consumption if the following requirements are met:
        (1) the cocktail, mixed drink, or single serving of
    	
wine is transferred within the licensed premises, by a curbside pickup, or by delivery by an employee of the retail licensee who:
            (A) has been trained in accordance with Section
        	
6-27.1 at the time of the sale;
            (B) is at least 21 years of age; and
            (C) upon delivery, verifies the age of the person
        	
to whom the cocktail, mixed drink, or single serving of wine is being delivered;
        (2) if the employee delivering the cocktail, mixed
    	
drink, or single serving of wine is not able to safely verify a person's age or level of intoxication upon delivery, the employee shall cancel the sale of alcohol and return the product to the retail license holder;
        (3) the sealed container is placed in the trunk of
    	
the vehicle or if there is no trunk, in the vehicle's rear compartment that is not readily accessible to the passenger area;
        (4) except for a manufacturer's original container, a
    	
container filled and sealed at a retail licensee's location shall be affixed with a label or tag that contains the following information:
            (A) the cocktail or mixed drink ingredients,
        	
type, and name of the alcohol;
            (B) the name, license number, and address of the
        	
retail licensee that filled the original container and sold the product;
            (C) the volume of the cocktail, mixed drink, or
        	
single serving of wine in the sealed container; and
            (D) the sealed container was filled less than 7
        	
days before the date of sale; and
        (5) a manufacturer's original container shall be
    	
affixed with a label or tag that contains the name, license number, and address of the retail licensee that sold the product.
    (c) Third-party delivery services are not permitted to deliver cocktails and mixed drinks under this Section.
    (d) If there is an executive order of the Governor in effect during a disaster, the employee delivering the mixed drink, cocktail, or single serving of wine must comply with any requirements of that executive order, including, but not limited to, wearing gloves and a mask and maintaining distancing requirements when interacting with the public.
    (e) Delivery or carry out of a cocktail, mixed drink, or single serving of wine is prohibited if:
        (1) a third party delivers the cocktail or mixed
    	
drink;
        (2) a container of a mixed drink, cocktail, or single
    	
serving of wine is not tamper-evident and sealed;
        (3) a container of a mixed drink, cocktail, or single
    	
serving of wine is transported in the passenger area of a vehicle;
        (4) a mixed drink, cocktail, or single serving of
    	
wine is delivered by a person or to a person who is under the age of 21; or
        (5) the person delivering a mixed drink, cocktail, or
    	
single serving of wine fails to verify the age of the person to whom the mixed drink or cocktail is being delivered.
    (f) Violations of this Section shall be subject to any applicable penalties, including, but not limited to, the penalties specified under Section 11-502 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
    (f-5) This Section is not intended to prohibit or preempt the ability of a brew pub, tap room, or distilling pub to continue to temporarily deliver alcoholic liquor pursuant to guidance issued by the State Commission on March 19, 2020 entitled "Illinois Liquor Control Commission, COVID-19 Related Actions, Guidance on Temporary Delivery of Alcoholic Liquor". This Section shall only grant authorization to holders of State of Illinois retail liquor licenses but not to licensees that simultaneously hold any licensure or privilege to manufacture alcoholic liquors within or outside of the State of Illinois.
    (g) This Section is not a denial or limitation of home rule powers and functions under Section 6 of Article VII of the Illinois Constitution.
    (h) This Section is repealed on January 3, 2024.
(Source: P.A. 101-631, eff. 6-2-20; 102-8, eff. 6-2-21.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-29) (from Ch. 43, par. 144e)
    Sec. 6-29. Winery shipper's license.
    (a) The General Assembly declares that the following is the intent of this Section:
        (1) To authorize direct shipment of wine by an
    	
out-of-state maker of wine on the same basis permitted an in-state maker of wine pursuant to the authority of the State under the provisions of Section 2 of the Twenty-First Amendment to the United States Constitution and in conformance with the United States Supreme Court decision decided on May 16, 2005 in Granholm v. Heald.
        (2) To reaffirm that the General Assembly's findings
    	
and declarations that selling alcoholic liquor through various direct marketing means such as catalogs, newspapers, mailings, and the Internet directly to consumers of this State poses a serious threat to the State's efforts to further temperance and prevent youth from accessing alcoholic liquor and the expansion of youth access to additional types of alcoholic liquors.
        (3) To maintain the State's broad powers granted by
    	
Section 2 of the Twenty-First Amendment to the United States Constitution to control the importation or sale of alcoholic liquor and its right to structure its alcoholic liquor distribution system.
        (4) To ensure that the General Assembly, by
    	
authorizing limited direct shipment of wine to meet the directives of the United States Supreme Court, does not intend to impair or modify the State's distribution of wine through distributors or importing distributors, but only to permit limited shipment of wine for personal use.
        (5) To provide that, in the event that a court of
    	
competent jurisdiction declares or finds that this Section, which is enacted to conform Illinois law to the United States Supreme Court decision, is invalid or unconstitutional, the Illinois General Assembly at its earliest general session shall conduct hearings and study methods to conform to any directive or order of the court consistent with the temperance and revenue collection purposes of this Act.
    (b) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a wine shipper licensee may ship, for personal use and not for resale, not more than 12 cases of wine per year to any resident of this State who is 21 years of age or older.
    (b-3) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, sale and shipment by a winery shipper licensee pursuant to this Section shall be deemed to constitute a sale in this State.
    (b-5) The shipping container of any wine shipped under this Section shall be clearly labeled with the following words: "CONTAINS ALCOHOL. SIGNATURE OF A PERSON 21 YEARS OF AGE OR OLDER REQUIRED FOR DELIVERY. PROOF OF AGE AND IDENTITY MUST BE SHOWN BEFORE DELIVERY.". This warning must be prominently displayed on the packaging. A licensee shall require the transporter or common carrier that delivers the wine to obtain the signature of a person 21 years of age or older at the delivery address at the time of delivery. At the expense of the licensee, the licensee shall receive a delivery confirmation from the express company, common carrier, or contract carrier indicating the location of the delivery, time of delivery, and the name and signature of the individual 21 years of age or older who accepts delivery. The Commission shall design and create a label or approve a label that must be affixed to the shipping container by the licensee.
    (c) No broker within this State shall solicit consumers to engage in direct wine shipments under this Section.
    (d) It is not the intent of this Section to impair the distribution of wine through distributors or importing distributors, but only to permit shipments of wine for personal use.
(Source: P.A. 95-634, eff. 6-1-08.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-29.1)
    Sec. 6-29.1. Direct shipments of alcoholic liquor.
    (a) The General Assembly makes the following findings:
        (1) The General Assembly of Illinois, having reviewed
    	
this Act in light of the United States Supreme Court's 2005 decision in Granholm v. Heald, has determined to conform that law to the constitutional principles enunciated by the Court in a manner that best preserves the temperance, revenue, and orderly distribution values of this Act.
        (2) Minimizing automobile accidents and fatalities,
    	
domestic violence, health problems, loss of productivity, unemployment, and other social problems associated with dependency and improvident use of alcoholic beverages remains the policy of Illinois.
        (3) To the maximum extent constitutionally feasible,
    	
Illinois desires to collect sufficient revenue from excise and use taxes on alcoholic beverages for the purpose of responding to such social problems.
        (4) Combined with family education and individual
    	
discipline, retail validation of age, and assessment of the capacity of the consumer remains the best pre-sale social protection against the problems associated with the abuse of alcoholic liquor.
        (5) Therefore, the paramount purpose of this
    	
amendatory Act is to continue to carefully limit direct shipment sales of wine produced by makers of wine and to continue to prohibit such direct shipment sales for spirits and beer.
    For these reasons, the Commission shall establish a system to notify the out-of-state trade of this prohibition and to detect violations. The Commission shall request the Attorney General to extradite any offender.
    (b) Pursuant to the Twenty-First Amendment of the United States Constitution allowing states to regulate the distribution and sale of alcoholic liquor and pursuant to the federal Webb-Kenyon Act declaring that alcoholic liquor shipped in interstate commerce must comply with state laws, the General Assembly hereby finds and declares that selling alcoholic liquor from a point outside this State through various direct marketing means, such as catalogs, newspapers, mailers, and the Internet, directly to residents of this State poses a serious threat to the State's efforts to prevent youths from accessing alcoholic liquor; to State revenue collections; and to the economy of this State.
    Any person manufacturing, distributing, or selling alcoholic liquor who knowingly ships or transports or causes the shipping or transportation of any alcoholic liquor from a point outside this State to a person in this State who does not hold a manufacturer's, distributor's, importing distributor's, or non-resident dealer's license issued by the Liquor Control Commission, other than a shipment of sacramental wine to a bona fide religious organization, a shipment authorized by Section 6-29, subparagraph (17) of Section 3-12, or any other shipment authorized by this Act, is in violation of this Act.
    The Commission, upon determining, after investigation, that a person has violated this Section, shall give notice to the person by certified mail to cease and desist all shipments of alcoholic liquor into this State and to withdraw from this State within 5 working days after receipt of the notice all shipments of alcoholic liquor then in transit. A person who violates the cease and desist notice is subject to the applicable penalties in subsection (a) of Section 10-1 of this Act.
(Source: P.A. 99-904, eff. 1-1-17.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-30) (from Ch. 43, par. 144f)
    Sec. 6-30. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, the Illinois Gaming Board shall have exclusive authority to establish the hours for sale and consumption of alcoholic liquor on board a riverboat during riverboat gambling excursions and in a casino conducted in accordance with the Illinois Gambling Act.
(Source: P.A. 101-31, eff. 6-28-19.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-31)
    Sec. 6-31. Product sampling.
    (a) Retailer, distributor, importing distributor, manufacturer and nonresident dealer licensees may conduct product sampling for consumption at a licensed retail location. Up to 3 samples, consisting of no more than (i) 1/4 ounce of distilled spirits, (ii) one ounce of wine, or (iii) 2 ounces of beer may be served to a consumer in one day.
    (b) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), an on-premises retail licensee may offer for sale and serve more than one drink per person for sampling purposes. In any event, all provisions of Section 6-28 shall apply to an on-premises retail licensee that conducts product sampling.
    (c) A craft distiller tasting permit licensee may conduct product sampling of distilled spirits for consumption at the location specified in the craft distiller tasting permit license. Up to 3 samples, consisting of no more than 1/4 ounce of distilled spirits, may be served to a consumer in one day.
(Source: P.A. 99-46, eff. 7-15-15; 99-902, eff. 8-26-16.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-32)
    Sec. 6-32. Safety provisions.
    (a) A retailers on premise consumption licensee may not permit the use of any pyrotechnic device within its licensed premises without the prior authorization of the Illinois State Fire Marshal. A retailers on premise consumption licensee, or any agent or employee of that licensee, may not use mace, pepper spray, or any other toxic air-released compound within its licensed premises. Violation of this subsection (a) by any licensee or any employee or agent of a licensee is a Class 4 felony.
    (b) No person may impede any person who is attempting to exit the premises of a retailers on premise consumption licensee due to an emergency that constitutes a threat to the health or safety of persons within the licensed premises. For the purpose of this Section, the term "impede a person who is attempting to exit" includes physically restraining the person or blocking or locking an exit while the licensed premises is open to the public. Violation of this subsection (b) is a Class 4 felony.
    (c) A retailers on premise consumption licensee with an authorized capacity (i) of at least 250 persons, (ii) set by the State Fire Marshal, or (iii) set by local ordinance, whichever is lowest, must place a panic bar on each exit of its licensed premises. A retailers on premise consumption licensee with an authorized capacity of at least 500 persons that conducts live entertainment within its licensed premises must, before the commencement of the live entertainment, make an announcement to the patrons of the licensed premises that generally informs those patrons of the locations of exits and fire escapes at the licensed premises.
(Source: P.A. 93-551, eff. 8-19-03.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-33)
    Sec. 6-33. Sealing and removal of open wine bottles from a restaurant or winery. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, a restaurant licensed to sell alcoholic liquor in this State may permit a patron to remove one unsealed and partially consumed bottle of wine for off-premise consumption provided that the patron has purchased a meal and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine with the meal on the restaurant premises. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, a winery licensed to sell alcoholic liquor in this State may permit a patron to remove one unsealed and partially consumed bottle of wine for off-premise consumption. A partially consumed bottle of wine that is to be removed from the premises pursuant to this Section shall be securely sealed by the licensee or an agent of the licensee prior to removal from the premises and placed in a transparent one-time use tamper-proof bag. The licensee or agent of the licensee shall provide a dated receipt for the bottle of wine to the patron. Wine that is resealed in accordance with the provisions of this Section and not tampered with and transported in accordance with the restrictions of subsections (a) and (b) of Section 11-502 of the Illinois Vehicle Code shall not be deemed to violate Section 11-502 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
(Source: P.A. 98-145, eff. 1-1-14.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-34)
    Sec. 6-34. Alcohol without liquid machines.
    (a) No person shall bring into this State for use or sale any alcohol without liquid machine.
    (b) For the purposes of this Section, "alcohol without liquid machine" means a device designed or marketed for the purposes of mixing alcohol with oxygen or another gas to produce a mist for inhalation for recreational purposes.
(Source: P.A. 94-745, eff. 5-8-06; 95-331, eff. 8-21-07.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-34.5)
    Sec. 6-34.5. Powdered alcohol.
    (a) For the purposes of this Section, "powdered alcohol" means any powder or crystalline substance containing alcohol, as defined in Section 1-3.01 of this Act, produced for human consumption.
    (b) No person shall sell, offer for sale, or deliver, receive, or purchase for resale in this State any product consisting of or containing powdered alcohol.
    (c) Any person who knowingly violates this Section is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor for a first offense and a Class 4 felony for a second or subsequent offense.
(Source: P.A. 99-51, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-35)
    Sec. 6-35. Alcopops.
    (a) For purposes of this Section, "alcopop" means a flavored alcoholic beverage or flavored malt beverage that includes (i) a malt beverage containing a malt base or beer and added natural or artificial blending material, such as fruit juices, flavors, flavorings, colorings, or preservatives where such blending material constitutes .5% or more of the alcohol by volume contained in the finished beverage; (ii) a beverage containing wine and more than 15% added natural or artificial blending material, such as fruit juices, flavors, flavorings, or adjuncts, water (plain, carbonated, or sparkling), colorings, or preservatives; (iii) a beverage containing distilled alcohol and added natural or artificial blending material, such as fruit juices, flavors, flavorings, colorings, or preservatives; or (iv) an alcohol malt beverage containing caffeine, guarana, taurine, or ginseng, where the beverage constitutes 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.
    (b) No entity may advertise, promote, or market any alcopop beverages toward children. Advertise, promote, or market includes, but is not limited to the following:
        (1) the use of cartoons and youth-orientated photos
    	
in advertising, promotion, packaging, or labeling of alcohol products;
        (2) sponsorships of athletic events where the
    	
intended audience is primarily children;
        (3) billboards advertising alcopops, as defined in
    	
items (i), (ii), and (iii) of subsection (a) of this Section, placed within 500 feet of schools, public parks, amusement parks, and places of worship; and
        (4) the display of any alcopop beverage in any
    	
videogame, theater production, or other live performances where the intended audience is primarily children.
    (c) No entity shall sell for consumption an alcohol malt beverage containing caffeine, guarana, taurine, or ginseng, where the beverage constitutes 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume, unless individual containers of the beverage have imprinted on each individual container the following:
        (1) the words "contains alcohol"; and
        (2) the alcohol content of the beverage.
    (d) Any person who violates this Section is guilty of a business offense and shall be fined $500 for a first offense and $1,000 for a second or subsequent offense.
    (e) Nothing in this Section shall be construed to be inconsistent with any other provision of this Section or any other State or federal laws, rules, or regulations regarding the labeling of alcoholic beverages.
(Source: P.A. 95-618, eff. 6-1-08; 95-860, eff. 1-1-09.)

    (235 ILCS 5/6-36)
    Sec. 6-36. Homemade brewed beverages.
    (a) No license or permit is required under this Act for the making of homemade brewed beverages or for the possession, transportation, or storage of homemade brewed beverages by any person 21 years of age or older, if all of the following apply:
        (1) the person who makes the homemade brewed
    	
beverages receives no compensation;
        (2) the homemade brewed beverages are not sold or
    	
offered for sale; and
        (3) the total quantity of homemade brewed beverages
    	
made, in a calendar year, by the person does not exceed 100 gallons if the household has only one person 21 years of age or older or 200 gallons if the household has 2 or more persons 21 years of age or older.
    (b) A person who makes, possesses, transports, or stores homemade brewed beverages in compliance with the limitations specified in subsection (a) is not a brewer, class 1 brewer, class 2 brewer, wholesaler, retailer, or a manufacturer of beer for the purposes of this Act.
    (c) Homemade brewed beverages made in compliance with the limitations specified in subsection (a) may be consumed by the person who made it and his or her family, neighbors, and friends at any private residence or other private location where the possession and consumption of alcohol are permissible under this Act, local ordinances, and other applicable law, provided that the homemade brewed beverages are not made available for consumption by the general public.
    (d) Homemade brewed beverages made in compliance with the limitations specified in subsection (a) may be used for purposes of a public exhibition, demonstration, tasting, or sampling with sampling sizes as authorized by Section 6-31, if the event is held at a private residence or at a location other than a retail licensed premises. If the public event is not held at a private residence, the event organizer shall obtain a homebrewer special event permit for each location, and is subject to the provisions in subsection (a) of Section 6-21. Homemade brewed beverages used for purposes described in this subsection (d), including the submission or consumption of the homemade brewed beverages, are not considered sold or offered for sale under this Act. A public exhibition, demonstration, tasting, or sampling with sampling sizes as authorized by Section 6-31 held by a licensee on a location other than a retail licensed premises may require an admission charge to the event, but no separate or additional fee may be charged for the consumption of a person's homemade brewed beverages at the public exhibition, demonstration, tasting, or sampling with sampling sizes as authorized by Section 6-31. Event admission charges that are collected may be partially used to provide prizes to makers of homemade brewed beverages, but the admission charges may not be divided in any fashion among the makers of the homemade brewed beverages who participate in the event. Homemade brewed beverages used for purposes described in this subsection (d) are not considered sold or offered for sale under this Act if a maker of homemade brewed beverages receives free event admission or discounted event admission in return for the maker's donation of the homemade brewed beverages to an event specified in this subsection (d) that collects event admission charges; free admission or discounted admission to the event is not considered compensation under this Act. No admission fee and no charge for the consumption of a person's homemade brewed beverage may be collected if the public exhibition, demonstration, tasting, or sampling with sampling sizes as authorized by Section 6-31 is held at a private residence.
    (e) A person who is not a licensee under this Act may at a private residence, and a person who is a licensee under this Act may on the licensed premises, conduct, sponsor, or host a contest, competition, or other event for the exhibition, demonstration, judging, tasting, or sampling of homemade brewed beverages made in compliance with the limitations specified in subsection (a), if the person does not sell the homemade brewed beverages and, unless the person is the brewer of the homemade brewed beverages, does not acquire any ownership interest in the homemade brewed beverages. If the contest, competition, exhibition, demonstration, or judging is not held at a private residence, the consumption of the homemade brewed beverages is limited to qualified judges and stewards as defined by a national or international beer judging program, who are identified by the event organizer in advance of the contest, competition, exhibition, demonstration, or judging. Homemade brewed beverages used for the purposes described in this subsection (e), including the submission or consumption of the homemade brewed beverages, are not considered sold or offered for sale under this Act and any prize awarded at a contest or competition or as a result of an exhibition, demonstration, or judging is not considered compensation under this Act. An exhibition, demonstration, judging, contest, or competition held by a licensee on a licensed premises may require an admission charge to the event, but no separate or additional fee may be charged for the consumption of a person's homemade brewed beverage at the exhibition, demonstration, judging, contest, or competition. A portion of event admission charges that are collected may be used to provide prizes to makers of homemade brewed beverages, but the admission charges may not be divided in any fashion among the makers of the homemade brewed beverages who participate in the event. Homemade brewed beverages used for purposes described in this subsection (e) are not considered sold or offered for sale under this Act if a maker of homemade brewed beverages receives free event admission or discounted event admission in return for the maker's donation of the homemade brewed beverages to an event specified in this subsection (e) that collects event admission charges; free admission or discounted admission to the event is not considered compensation under this Act. No admission fee and no charge for the consumption of a person's homemade brewed beverage may be charged if the exhibition, demonstration, judging, contest, or competition is held at a private residence. The fact that a person is acting in a manner authorized by this Section is not, by itself, sufficient to constitute a public nuisance under Section 10-7 of this Act. If the contest, competition, or other event is held on licensed premises, the licensee may allow the homemade brewed beverages to be stored on the premises if the homemade brewed beverages are clearly identified and kept separate from any alcohol beverages owned by the licensee. If the contest, competition, or other event is held on licensed premises, other provisions of this Act not inconsistent with this Section apply.
    (f) A commercial enterprise engaged primarily in selling supplies and equipment to the public for use by homebrewers may manufacture homemade brewed beverages for the purpose of tasting the homemade brewed beverages at the location of the commercial enterprise, provided that the homemade brewed beverages are not sold or offered for sale. Homemade brewed beverages provided at a commercial enterprise for tasting under this subsection (f) shall be in compliance with Sections 6-16, 6-21, and 6-31 of this Act. A commercial enterprise engaged solely in selling supplies and equipment for use by homebrewers shall not be required to secure a license under this Act, however, such commercial enterprise shall secure liquor liability insurance coverage in an amount at least equal to the maximum liability amounts set forth in subsection (a) of Section 6-21 of this Act.
    (g) Homemade brewed beverages are not subject to Section 8-1 of this Act.
(Source: P.A. 98-55, eff. 7-5-13; 99-78, eff. 7-20-15; 99-448, eff. 8-24-15.)


 
    (235 ILCS 5/Art. VII heading)
ARTICLE VII. LICENSES

    (235 ILCS 5/7-1) (from Ch. 43, par. 145)
    Sec. 7-1. An applicant for a retail license from the State Commission shall submit to the State Commission an application in writing under oath stating:
        (1) The applicant's name and mailing address;
        (2) The name and address of the applicant's business;
        (3) If applicable, the date of the filing of the
    	
"assumed name" of the business with the County Clerk;
        (4) In case of a copartnership, the date of the
    	
formation of the partnership; in the case of an Illinois corporation, the date of its incorporation; or in the case of a foreign corporation, the State where it was incorporated and the date of its becoming qualified under the Business Corporation Act of 1983 to transact business in the State of Illinois;
        (5) The number, the date of issuance and the date of
    	
expiration of the applicant's current local retail liquor license;
        (6) The name of the city, village, or county that
    	
issued the local retail liquor license;
        (7) The name and address of the landlord if the
    	
premises are leased;
        (8) The date of the applicant's first request for a
    	
State liquor license and whether it was granted, denied or withdrawn;
        (9) The address of the applicant when the first
    	
application for a State liquor license was made;
        (10) The applicant's current State liquor license
    	
number;
        (11) The date the applicant began liquor sales at his
    	
place of business;
        (12) The address of the applicant's warehouse if he
    	
warehouses liquor;
        (13) The applicant's Retailers' Occupation Tax (ROT)
    	
Registration Number;
        (14) The applicant's document locator number on his
    	
Federal Special Tax Stamp;
        (15) Whether the applicant is delinquent in the
    	
payment of the Retailers' Occupation Tax (Sales Tax), and if so, the reasons therefor;
        (16) Whether the applicant is delinquent under the
    	
cash beer law, and if so, the reasons therefor;
        (17) In the case of a retailer, whether he is
    	
delinquent under the 30-day credit law, and if so, the reasons therefor;
        (18) In the case of a distributor, whether he is
    	
delinquent under the 15-day credit law, and if so, the reasons therefor;
        (19) Whether the applicant has made an application
    	
for a liquor license which has been denied, and if so, the reasons therefor;
        (20) Whether the applicant has ever had any previous
    	
liquor license suspended or revoked, and if so, the reasons therefor;
        (21) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of
    	
a gambling offense or felony, and if so, the particulars thereof;
        (22) Whether the applicant possesses a current
    	
Federal Wagering Stamp, and if so, the reasons therefor;
        (23) Whether the applicant, or any other person,
    	
directly in his place of business is a public official, and if so, the particulars thereof;
        (24) The applicant's name, sex, date of birth, social
    	
security number, position and percentage of ownership in the business; and the name, sex, date of birth, social security number, position and percentage of ownership in the business of every sole owner, partner, corporate officer, director, manager and any person who owns 5% or more of the shares of the applicant business entity or parent corporations of the applicant business entity; and
        (25) That he has not received or borrowed money or
    	
anything else of value, and that he will not receive or borrow money or anything else of value (other than merchandising credit in the ordinary course of business for a period not to exceed 90 days as herein expressly permitted under Section 6-5 hereof), directly or indirectly, from any manufacturer, importing distributor or distributor or from any representative of any such manufacturer, importing distributor or distributor, nor be a party in any way, directly or indirectly, to any violation by a manufacturer, distributor or importing distributor of Section 6-6 of this Act.
    In addition to any other requirement of this Section, an applicant for a special use permit license and a special event retailer's license shall also submit (A) proof satisfactory to the Commission that the applicant has a resale number issued under Section 2c of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act or that the applicant is registered under Section 2a of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act, (B) proof satisfactory to the Commission that the applicant has a current, valid exemption identification number issued under Section 1g of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act and a certification to the Commission that the purchase of alcoholic liquors will be a tax-exempt purchase, or (C) a statement that the applicant is not registered under Section 2a of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act, does not hold a resale number under Section 2c of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act, and does not hold an exemption number under Section 1g of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act. The applicant shall also submit proof of adequate dram shop insurance for the special event prior to being issued a license.
    In addition to the foregoing information, such application shall contain such other and further information as the State Commission and the local commission may, by rule or regulation not inconsistent with law, prescribe.
    If the applicant reports a felony conviction as required under paragraph (21) of this Section, such conviction may be considered by the Commission in accordance with Section 6-2.5 of this Act in determining qualifications for licensing, but shall not operate as a bar to licensing.
    If said application is made in behalf of a partnership, firm, association, club or corporation, then the same shall be signed by one member of such partnership or the president or secretary of such corporation or an authorized agent of said partnership or corporation.
    All other applications shall be on forms prescribed by the State Commission, and which may exclude any of the above requirements which the State Commission rules to be inapplicable.
(Source: P.A. 100-286, eff. 1-1-18.)

    (235 ILCS 5/7-2) (from Ch. 43, par. 146)
    Sec. 7-2. License fee payable with applications. All applications to the State Commission shall be accompanied by the deposit of a check or draft drawn on a bank or savings and loan association within this State or United States postal money order in the full amount of the license fee required to be paid for the kind of license applied for, which fee shall be returned to such applicant if such application is denied.
(Source: P.A. 89-250, eff. 1-1-96.)

    (235 ILCS 5/7-3) (from Ch. 43, par. 147)
    Sec. 7-3. If a licensee shall be convicted of the violation of any of the provisions of this Act, or his license shall be revoked and no appeal is taken from said order of revocation or any appeal taken therefrom is decided adversely to the licensee, said bond (if one is required) shall thereupon be forfeited.
(Source: P.A. 83-1254.)

    (235 ILCS 5/7-4) (from Ch. 43, par. 148)
    Sec. 7-4. At any time during the pendency of an application the State commission shall have the right to compel the applicant to submit to any examination and to produce any books and records which, in the judgment of the State commission, are material to the determination of whether the applicant is qualified to receive a license under the provisions of this Act, or whether the premises sought to be licensed are suitable for such purposes. The State commission shall also have the right to require the applicant to answer any charges made in any objection to the issuance of the license or made by the chief of police, prosecuting official, mayor or president of cities, towns, and villages or by the sheriff or prosecuting attorney of counties relative to the same. The failure of any applicant to appear at the time and place fixed by the State commission for his examination or to produce books and records requested, unless for good cause shown, shall be deemed to be an admission that the applicant is not qualified to receive a license.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/7-5) (from Ch. 43, par. 149)
    Sec. 7-5. The local liquor control commissioner may revoke or suspend any license issued by him if he determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this Act or of any valid ordinance or resolution enacted by the particular city council, president, or board of trustees or county board (as the case may be) or any applicable rule or regulations established by the local liquor control commissioner or the State commission which is not inconsistent with law. Upon notification by the Illinois Department of Revenue, the State Commission, in accordance with Section 3-12, may refuse the issuance or renewal of a license, fine a licensee, or suspend or revoke any license issued by the State Commission if the licensee or license applicant has violated the provisions of Section 3 of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act. In addition to the suspension, the local liquor control commissioner in any county or municipality may levy a fine on the licensee for such violations. The fine imposed shall not exceed $1000 for a first violation within a 12-month period, $1,500 for a second violation within a 12-month period, and $2,500 for a third or subsequent violation within a 12-month period. Each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. Not more than $15,000 in fines under this Section may be imposed against any licensee during the period of his license. Proceeds from such fines shall be paid into the general corporate fund of the county or municipal treasury, as the case may be.
    However, no such license shall be so revoked or suspended and no licensee shall be fined except after a public hearing by the local liquor control commissioner with a 3 day written notice to the licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend. All such hearings shall be open to the public and the local liquor control commissioner shall reduce all evidence to writing and shall maintain an official record of the proceedings. If the local liquor control commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation of a particular licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the community he may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason for such conclusion and without notice or hearing order the licensed premises closed for not more than 7 days, giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard during that period, except that if such licensee shall also be engaged in the conduct of another business or businesses on the licensed premises such order shall not be applicable to such other business or businesses.
    The local liquor control commissioner shall within 5 days after such hearing, if he determines after such hearing that the license should be revoked or suspended or that the licensee should be fined, state the reason or reasons for such determination in a written order, and either the amount of the fine, the period of suspension, or that the license has been revoked, and shall serve a copy of such order within the 5 days upon the licensee.
    If the premises for which the license was issued are located outside of a city, village or incorporated town having a population of 500,000 or more inhabitants, the licensee after the receipt of such order of suspension or revocation shall have the privilege within a period of 20 days after the receipt of such order of suspension or revocation of appealing the order to the State commission for a decision sustaining, reversing or modifying the order of the local liquor control commissioner. If the State commission affirms the local commissioner's order to suspend or revoke the license at the first hearing, the appellant shall cease to engage in the business for which the license was issued, until the local commissioner's order is terminated by its own provisions or reversed upon rehearing or by the courts.
    If the premises for which the license was issued are located within a city, village or incorporated town having a population of 500,000 or more inhabitants, the licensee shall have the privilege, within a period of 20 days after the receipt of such order of fine, suspension or revocation, of appealing the order to the local license appeal commission and upon the filing of such an appeal by the licensee the license appeal commission shall determine the appeal upon certified record of proceedings of the local liquor commissioner in accordance with the provisions of Section 7-9. Within 30 days after such appeal was heard the license appeal commission shall render a decision sustaining or reversing the order of the local liquor control commissioner.
    If the premises for which a license was issued are located within a city, village, or incorporated town having a population of 1,000,000 or more inhabitants and the local liquor control commissioner has evidence that the following criminal activity has occurred inside the licensed premises: the sale of or possession with intent to sell controlled substances or marijuana, the sale of or possession with intent to sell firearms, homicide, criminal sexual assault or criminal sexual abuse, aggravated assault or aggravated battery, then the local liquor control commissioner may, without notice or hearing, and upon the issuance of a written order stating that the continued operation of the licensed premises poses an immediate threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the community, order the licensed premises closed for a period of not more than 30 days, giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard during that period. Upon receipt of evidence of the criminal activity by the local liquor control commissioner, the name of the licensee and the address of the licensed premises where the criminal activity is alleged to have occurred may be submitted by the local liquor control commissioner to the State Commission. If such information is received by the State Commission, then the State Commission must post that information in each of its offices in places available for public inspection not later than the day following the State Commission's receipt of the information. If the licensee is granted a continuance during the period of time the licensed premises is ordered to be closed, the licensed premises shall remain closed until a judgment is entered. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the licensed premises will be allowed to remain open if the criminal activity is timely reported by the licensee, or its agents, pursuant to local ordinance, and the criminal activity shall not be used as a basis for suspension under this Act. A distributor may, in coordination with the local liquor control commissioner and the local police department, remove any product from the licensed premises for which the distributor has not received full payment from the licensee at the time of the closure of the premises. The distributor shall provide the local liquor control commissioner with a document outlining the products for which full payment has not been received.
(Source: P.A. 98-1054, eff. 8-26-14.)

    (235 ILCS 5/7-6) (from Ch. 43, par. 150)
    Sec. 7-6. All proceedings for the revocation or suspension of licenses of manufacturers, distributors, importing distributors, non-resident dealers, foreign importers, non-beverage users, railroads, airplanes and boats shall be before the State Commission. All such proceedings and all proceedings for the revocation or suspension of a retailer's license before the State commission shall be in accordance with rules and regulations established by it not inconsistent with law. However, no such license shall be so revoked or suspended except after a hearing by the State commission with reasonable notice to the licensee served by registered or certified mail with return receipt requested at least 10 days prior to the hearings at the last known place of business of the licensee and after an opportunity to appear and defend. Such notice shall specify the time and place of the hearing, the nature of the charges, the specific provisions of the Act and rules violated, and the specific facts supporting the charges or violation. The findings of the Commission shall be predicated upon competent evidence. The revocation of a local license shall automatically result in the revocation of a State license. Upon notification by the Illinois Department of Revenue, the State Commission, in accordance with Section 3-12, may refuse the issuance or renewal of a license, fine a licensee, or suspend or revoke any license issued by the State Commission if the licensee or license applicant has violated the provisions of Section 3 of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act. All procedures for the suspension or revocation of a license, as enumerated above, are applicable to the levying of fines for violations of this Act or any rule or regulation issued pursuant thereto.
(Source: P.A. 95-331, eff. 8-21-07.)

    (235 ILCS 5/7-7) (from Ch. 43, par. 151)
    Sec. 7-7. Any five residents of the city, village or county shall have the right to file a complaint with the local commission stating that any retailer licensee, subject to the jurisdiction of the local commission, has been or is violating the provisions of this Act or the rules or regulations issued pursuant hereto. Such complaint shall be in writing in the form prescribed by the local commission and shall be signed and sworn to by the parties complaining. The complaint shall state the particular provision, rule or regulation believed to have been violated and the facts in detail upon which belief is based. If the local commission is satisfied that the complaint substantially charges a violation and that from the facts alleged there is reasonable cause for such belief, it shall set the matter for hearing and shall serve notice upon the licensee of the time and place of such hearing and of the particular charge in the complaint.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/7-8) (from Ch. 43, par. 152)
    Sec. 7-8. For each city, village or incorporated town having a population of 500,000 or more inhabitants, there is established a license appeal commission consisting of the chairman of the Illinois Liquor Control Commission, the most senior member of the Illinois Liquor Control Commission who is not of the same political party as the chairman, and one person who is a resident of the particular city, village or incorporated town selected by the council or president and board of trustees, as the case may be, who shall serve for a term of 4 years and until his successor is selected and takes office. Neither the mayor, president of the board of trustees, nor any member of the council or board of trustees shall be eligible for membership on a license appeal commission. Each of the 2 members of the Illinois Liquor Control Commission shall receive a $200 per diem for their work on the license appeal commission, and the other member shall receive an annual salary which shall be paid by the particular city, village or incorporated town. The secretary of the Illinois Liquor Control Commission shall be ex-officio the secretary for each license appeal commission.
(Source: P.A. 91-798, eff. 7-9-00; 91-922, eff. 7-7-00.)

    (235 ILCS 5/7-9) (from Ch. 43, par. 153)
    Sec. 7-9. Except as provided in this Section, any order or action of a local liquor control commissioner levying a fine or refusing to levy a fine on a licensee, granting or refusing to grant a license, revoking or suspending or refusing to revoke or suspend a license or refusing for more than 30 days to grant a hearing upon a complaint to revoke or suspend a license may, within 20 days after notice of such order or action, be appealed by any resident of the political subdivision under the jurisdiction of the local liquor control commissioner or any person interested, to the State Commission.
    In any case where a licensee appeals to the State Commission from an order or action of the local liquor control commission having the effect of suspending or revoking a license, denying a renewal application, or refusing to grant a license, the licensee shall resume the operation of the licensed business pending the decision of the State Commission and the expiration of the time allowed for an application for rehearing. If an application for rehearing is filed, the licensee shall continue the operation of the licensed business until the denial of the application or, if the rehearing is granted, until the decision on rehearing.
    In any case in which a licensee appeals to the State Commission a suspension or revocation by a local liquor control commissioner that is the second or subsequent such suspension or revocation placed on that licensee within the preceding 12 month period, the licensee shall consider the suspension or revocation to be in effect until a reversal of the local liquor control commissioner's action has been issued by the State Commission and shall cease all activity otherwise authorized by the license. The State Commission shall expedite, to the greatest extent possible, its consideration of any appeal that is an appeal of a second or subsequent suspension or revocation within the past 12 month period.
    The appeal shall be limited to a review of the official record of the proceedings of such local liquor control commissioner if the county board, city council or board of trustees, as the case may be, has adopted a resolution requiring that such review be on the record. If such resolution is adopted, a certified official record of the proceedings taken and prepared by a certified court reporter or certified shorthand reporter shall be filed by the local liquor control commissioner within 5 days after notice of the filing of such appeal, if the appellant licensee pays for the cost of the transcript. The State Commission shall review the propriety of the order or action of the local liquor control commissioner and shall consider the following questions:
        (a) whether the local liquor control commissioner has
    	
proceeded in the manner provided by law;
        (b) whether the order is supported by the findings;
        (c) whether the findings are supported by substantial
    	
evidence in the light of the whole record.
    The only evidence which may be considered in the review, shall be the evidence found in the certified official record of the proceedings of the local liquor control commissioner. No new or additional evidence shall be admitted or considered. The State Commission shall render a decision affirming, reversing or modifying the order or action reviewed within 30 days after the appeal was heard.
    In the event such appeal is from an order of a local liquor control commissioner of a city, village or incorporated town of 500,000 or more inhabitants, granting or refusing to grant a license or refusing for more than 30 days to grant a hearing upon a complaint to revoke or suspend a license, the matter of the propriety of such order or action shall be tried de novo by the license appeal commission as expeditiously as circumstances permit.
    In the event such appeal is from an order or action of a local liquor control commissioner of a city, village or incorporated town of 500,000 or more inhabitants, imposing a fine or refusing to impose a fine on a licensee, revoking or suspending or refusing to revoke or suspend a license, the license appeal commission shall determine the appeal by a review of the official record of the proceedings of such local liquor control commissioner. A certified record of the proceedings shall be promptly filed with the license appeal commission by such local liquor control commissioner after notice of the filing of such appeal if the appellant licensee pays for the cost of the transcript and promptly delivers the transcript to the local liquor control commission or its attorney. The review by the license appeal commission shall be limited to the questions:
        (a) whether the local liquor control commissioner has
    	
proceeded in the manner provided by law;
        (b) whether the order is supported by the findings;
        (c) whether the findings are supported by substantial
    	
evidence in the light of the whole record.
No new or additional evidence in support of or in opposition to such order or action under appeal shall be received other than that contained in such record of the proceedings. Within 30 days after such appeal was heard, the license appeal commission shall render its decision in accordance with the provisions of Section 7-5.
    In cities, villages and incorporated towns having a population of 500,000 or more inhabitants, appeals from any order or action shall lie to the license appeal commission of such city, village or incorporated town. All of the provisions of this Section and Section 7-10 relative to proceedings upon appeals before the State Commission and relative to appeals from the decisions of the State Commission shall apply also to proceedings upon appeals before any license appeal commission and appeals from the decisions of license appeal commission.
    In any trial de novo hearing before the State Commission or license appeal commission, the local liquor control commissioner shall be entitled to 10 days notice and to be heard. All such trial de novo hearings shall be open to the public and the Illinois Liquor Control Commission and the license appeal commission shall reduce all evidence offered thereto to writing.
    If after trial de novo hearing or review as provided herein, the State Commission or the license appeal commission (as the case may be) shall decide that the license has been improperly issued, denied, revoked, suspended or refused to be revoked or suspended or a hearing to revoke or suspend has been improperly refused or that the licensee has been improperly fined or not fined, it shall enter an order in conformity with such findings, which order shall be in writing.
    A certified copy of the order shall be transmitted to the particular local liquor control commissioner and it shall be the duty of the local liquor control commissioner to take such action as may be necessary to conform with the order.
    In any trial de novo hearing before the State Commission or the license appeal commission, the licensee shall submit to examination and produce books and records material to the business conducted under the license in like manner as before the local liquor control commissioner, and the failure of the licensee to submit to such an examination or to produce such books and records, or to appear at the hearing on such appeal, shall constitute an admission that he has violated the provisions of this Act. In the event the appeal is from an order of the local liquor control commissioner denying a renewal application, the licensee shall have on deposit with the local liquor control commissioner an amount sufficient to cover the license fee for the renewal period and any bond that may be required.
(Source: P.A. 88-613, eff. 1-1-95.)

    (235 ILCS 5/7-10) (from Ch. 43, par. 154)
    Sec. 7-10. A copy of the rule, regulation, order or decision of the State commission or the license appeal commission, in any proceeding before it, certified under the seal of said commission, shall be served upon each party of record to the proceeding before the commission and service upon any attorney of record for any such party shall be deemed service upon such party. Each party appearing before said commission shall enter his appearance and indicate to the commission his address for the service of a copy of any rule, regulation, order, decision or notice and the mailing of a copy of any rule, regulation or order of said commission or of any notice by said commission, in said proceeding, to said party at such address shall be deemed service thereof upon such party.
    Within 20 days after the service of any rule, regulation, order or decision of said commission upon any party to the proceeding, such party may apply for a rehearing in respect to any matters determined by said commission. If a rehearing is granted, the commission shall hold the rehearing and render a decision within 20 days from the filing of the application for rehearing with the secretary of the commission. The time for holding such rehearing and rendering a decision may be extended for a period not to exceed 30 days, for good cause shown, and by notice in writing to all parties of interest. No action for the judicial review of any decision of said commission shall be allowed unless the party commencing such action has first filed an application for a rehearing and the commission has acted upon said application. Only one rehearing may be granted by the commission on application of any one party.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/7-11) (from Ch. 43, par. 154a)
    Sec. 7-11. Judicial review. All final administrative decisions of the State Commission under this Act shall be subject to judicial review pursuant to the provisions of the Administrative Review Law and the rules adopted pursuant thereto. Judicial review may be requested by any party in interest, including but not limited to the local liquor control commissioner. The term "administrative decision" is defined as in Section 3-101 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
(Source: P.A. 86-1279.)

    (235 ILCS 5/7-12) (from Ch. 43, par. 155)
    Sec. 7-12. Whenever any licensee shall have been convicted by any court of a wilful violation of any of the provisions of this Act, he shall, in addition to the penalties for such offense, incur a forfeiture of his state and local license and all moneys that have been paid therefor; the local commission shall thereupon revoke his license or the State commission shall revoke his license as the case may be.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/7-13) (from Ch. 43, par. 156)
    Sec. 7-13. Granting licenses after revocation; waiting period; discretion. When any license shall have been revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted to any person for the period of one year thereafter for the conduct of the business of manufacturing, distributing, or selling alcoholic liquor in the premises described in the revoked license unless the revocation order has been vacated or unless the revocation order was entered as to the licensee only.
    Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance of a retail license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor incidental to a restaurant if (1) the primary business of the restaurant consists of the sale of food where the sale of liquor is incidental to the sale of food and the applicant is a completely new owner of the restaurant, (2) the immediately prior owner or operator of the premises where the restaurant is located operated the premises as a restaurant and held a valid retail license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at the restaurant for at least part of the 24 months before the change of ownership, and (3) the restaurant is located 75 or more feet from a school.
(Source: P.A. 91-623, eff. 1-1-00.)

    (235 ILCS 5/7-14) (from Ch. 43, par. 157)
    Sec. 7-14. Separate license for each premise; transfer to other premises. Licenses issued hereunder apply only to the premises described in the application and in the license issued thereon, and only one location shall be so described in each license. After a license has been granted for particular premises, the State Commission or the local commissioner, as the case may be, upon proper showing, may endorse upon said license permission to abandon the premises therein described and remove therefrom to other premises approved by him or it, but in order to obtain such approval the licensee shall file with the State Commission and local commissioner a request in writing and a statement under oath which shall show that the premises to which removal is to be made comply in all respects with the requirements of this Act. A transfer may only be requested to a premise within the same jurisdiction that issued the original local liquor license.
(Source: P.A. 89-250, eff. 1-1-96.)


 
    (235 ILCS 5/Art. VIIA heading)
ARTICLE VIIA. WAREHOUSES

    (235 ILCS 5/7A-1) (from Ch. 43, par. 157a)
    Sec. 7A-1. For the purposes of this Article:
    "Warehouse" means any room, house, structure, building, place, yard or protected enclosure wherein personal property belonging to another is stored for a compensation.
    "Warehouseman" means any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation owning, controlling, operating, managing or leasing any warehouse within this State.
    "For compensation" means any direct or indirect charge for storage.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/7A-2) (from Ch. 43, par. 157b)
    Sec. 7A-2. On and after August 1, 1937, it shall be unlawful for any warehouseman to receive, hold, store or deliver any alcoholic liquors without a certificate of registration from the Department. Application for a certificate of registration shall be made to the Department and shall state: (1) The name of the applicant; (2) the address of his warehouse (if he operates more than one such warehouse, he shall state the address of each such warehouse). Upon the receipt of the application in proper form, the Department shall issue to such applicant a certificate of registration bearing a distinctive number which he shall conspicuously display on the premises for which it is issued. The applications shall be made on forms prepared and furnished by the Department and shall contain such other information as the Department may reasonably require to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/7A-3) (from Ch. 43, par. 157c)
    Sec. 7A-3. It shall be unlawful for any person to store any alcoholic liquors with or deliver any alcoholic liquors to any warehouseman who has not received a certificate of registration from the Department.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/7A-4) (from Ch. 43, par. 157d)
    Sec. 7A-4. On or before the fifteenth day of each calendar month, every warehouseman holding a certificate of registration under this Article shall file a return with the Department covering the preceding calendar month stating:
    1. The name of the warehouseman and the number of his certificate of registration;
    2. The address of the warehouse;
    3. The name and address of each person from whom any alcoholic liquors were actually or constructively received by him as a warehouseman, the date on which same were so received, the number and size of the containers in which any alcoholic liquors were so received, and the number and size of the containers to the credit of each such person at the end of the preceding calendar month; and
    4. The name and address of each person to whom any alcoholic liquors were actually or constructively delivered by him as a warehouseman, the date on which same were so delivered, the number and size of the containers in which any alcoholic liquors were so delivered and from whom any alcoholic liquors so delivered were actually or constructively received.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/7A-5) (from Ch. 43, par. 157e)
    Sec. 7A-5. Each warehouseman included in this Article shall keep or cause to be kept, at his registered address, a record showing all alcoholic liquors actually or constructively received by him as a warehouseman, held, stored or actually or constructively delivered by him as a warehouseman, the name and address of the person depositing same, the name and address of the person to whom delivered and any other information necessary to the proper conduct of such warehouse. Such records shall, at all times during business hours of the day, be subject to inspection by the Department or its duly authorized agents and employees. Such records shall be preserved for a period of two (2) years, unless the Department, in writing, authorizes their destruction or disposal at an earlier date. Such records, reflecting business done at any time after July 1, 1945, shall be preserved for a period of three (3) years, unless the Department, in writing, authorizes their destruction or disposal at an earlier date.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/7A-6) (from Ch. 43, par. 157f)
    Sec. 7A-6. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Article or any of the rules and regulations of the Department for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this Article is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. In case of a continuing violation each day's continuance thereof shall be a separate and distinct offense.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)


 
    (235 ILCS 5/Art. VIII heading)
ARTICLE VIII. TAXATION OF LIQUOR

    (235 ILCS 5/8-1)
    Sec. 8-1. A tax is imposed upon the privilege of engaging in business as a manufacturer or as an importing distributor of alcoholic liquor other than beer at the rate of $0.185 per gallon until September 1, 2009 and $0.231 per gallon beginning September 1, 2009 for cider containing not less than 0.5% alcohol by volume nor more than 7% alcohol by volume, $0.73 per gallon until September 1, 2009 and $1.39 per gallon beginning September 1, 2009 for wine other than cider containing less than 7% alcohol by volume, and $4.50 per gallon until September 1, 2009 and $8.55 per gallon beginning September 1, 2009 on alcohol and spirits manufactured and sold or used by such manufacturer, or as agent for any other person, or sold or used by such importing distributor, or as agent for any other person. A tax is imposed upon the privilege of engaging in business as a manufacturer of beer or as an importing distributor of beer at the rate of $0.185 per gallon until September 1, 2009 and $0.231 per gallon beginning September 1, 2009 on all beer, regardless of alcohol by volume, manufactured and sold or used by such manufacturer, or as agent for any other person, or sold or used by such importing distributor, or as agent for any other person. Any brewer manufacturing beer in this State shall be entitled to and given a credit or refund of 75% of the tax imposed on each gallon of beer up to 4.9 million gallons per year in any given calendar year for tax paid or payable on beer produced and sold in the State of Illinois.
    For purposes of this Section, "beer" means beer, ale, porter, stout, and other similar fermented beverages of any name or description containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume, brewed or produced from malt, wholly or in part, or from any substitute for malt.
    For the purpose of this Section, "cider" means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the alcohol fermentation of the juice of apples or pears including, but not limited to, flavored, sparkling, or carbonated cider.
    The credit or refund created by this Act shall apply to all beer taxes in the calendar years 1982 through 1986.
    The increases made by this amendatory Act of the 91st General Assembly in the rates of taxes imposed under this Section shall apply beginning on July 1, 1999.
    A tax at the rate of 1 per gallon on beer and 48 per gallon on alcohol and spirits is also imposed upon the privilege of engaging in business as a retailer or as a distributor who is not also an importing distributor with respect to all beer and all alcohol and spirits owned or possessed by such retailer or distributor when this amendatory Act of 1969 becomes effective, and with respect to which the additional tax imposed by this amendatory Act upon manufacturers and importing distributors does not apply. Retailers and distributors who are subject to the additional tax imposed by this paragraph of this Section shall be required to inventory such alcoholic liquor and to pay this additional tax in a manner prescribed by the Department.
    The provisions of this Section shall be construed to apply to any importing distributor engaging in business in this State, whether licensed or not.
    However, such tax is not imposed upon any such business as to any alcoholic liquor shipped outside Illinois by an Illinois licensed manufacturer or importing distributor, nor as to any alcoholic liquor delivered in Illinois by an Illinois licensed manufacturer or importing distributor to a purchaser for immediate transportation by the purchaser to another state into which the purchaser has a legal right, under the laws of such state, to import such alcoholic liquor, nor as to any alcoholic liquor other than beer sold by one Illinois licensed manufacturer or importing distributor to another Illinois licensed manufacturer or importing distributor to the extent to which the sale of alcoholic liquor other than beer by one Illinois licensed manufacturer or importing distributor to another Illinois licensed manufacturer or importing distributor is authorized by the licensing provisions of this Act, nor to alcoholic liquor whether manufactured in or imported into this State when sold to a "non-beverage user" licensed by the State for use in the manufacture of any of the following when they are unfit for beverage purposes:
    Patent and proprietary medicines and medicinal, antiseptic, culinary and toilet preparations;
    Flavoring extracts and syrups and food products;
    Scientific, industrial and chemical products, excepting denatured alcohol;
    Or for scientific, chemical, experimental or mechanical purposes;
    Nor is the tax imposed upon the privilege of engaging in any business in interstate commerce or otherwise, which business may not, under the Constitution and Statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by this State.
    The tax herein imposed shall be in addition to all other occupation or privilege taxes imposed by the State of Illinois or political subdivision thereof.
    If any alcoholic liquor manufactured in or imported into this State is sold to a licensed manufacturer or importing distributor by a licensed manufacturer or importing distributor to be used solely as an ingredient in the manufacture of any beverage for human consumption, the tax imposed upon such purchasing manufacturer or importing distributor shall be reduced by the amount of the taxes which have been paid by the selling manufacturer or importing distributor under this Act as to such alcoholic liquor so used to the Department of Revenue.
    If any person received any alcoholic liquors from a manufacturer or importing distributor, with respect to which alcoholic liquors no tax is imposed under this Article, and such alcoholic liquor shall thereafter be disposed of in such manner or under such circumstances as may cause the same to become the base for the tax imposed by this Article, such person shall make the same reports and returns, pay the same taxes and be subject to all other provisions of this Article relating to manufacturers and importing distributors.
    Nothing in this Article shall be construed to require the payment to the Department of the taxes imposed by this Article more than once with respect to any quantity of alcoholic liquor sold or used within this State.
    No tax is imposed by this Act on sales of alcoholic liquor by Illinois licensed foreign importers to Illinois licensed importing distributors.
    All of the proceeds of the additional tax imposed by Public Act 96-34 shall be deposited by the Department into the Capital Projects Fund. The remainder of the tax imposed by this Act shall be deposited by the Department into the General Revenue Fund.
    A manufacturer of beer that imports or transfers beer into this State must comply with the provisions of this Section with regard to the beer imported into this State.
    The provisions of this Section 8-1 are severable under Section 1.31 of the Statute on Statutes.
(Source: P.A. 100-885, eff. 8-14-18; 101-16, eff. 6-14-19.)

    (235 ILCS 5/8-2) (from Ch. 43, par. 159)
    Sec. 8-2. Payments; reports. It is the duty of each manufacturer with respect to alcoholic liquor produced or imported by such manufacturer, or purchased tax-free by such manufacturer from another manufacturer or importing distributor, and of each importing distributor as to alcoholic liquor purchased by such importing distributor from foreign importers or from anyone from any point in the United States outside of this State or purchased tax-free from another manufacturer or importing distributor, to pay the tax imposed by Section 8-1 to the Department of Revenue on or before the 15th day of the calendar month following the calendar month in which such alcoholic liquor is sold or used by such manufacturer or by such importing distributor other than in an authorized tax-free manner or to pay that tax electronically as provided in this Section.
    Each manufacturer and each importing distributor shall make payment under one of the following methods: (1) on or before the 15th day of each calendar month, file in person or by United States first-class mail, postage pre-paid, with the Department of Revenue, on forms prescribed and furnished by the Department, a report in writing in such form as may be required by the Department in order to compute, and assure the accuracy of, the tax due on all taxable sales and uses of alcoholic liquor occurring during the preceding month. Payment of the tax in the amount disclosed by the report shall accompany the report or, (2) on or before the 15th day of each calendar month, electronically file with the Department of Revenue, on forms prescribed and furnished by the Department, an electronic report in such form as may be required by the Department in order to compute, and assure the accuracy of, the tax due on all taxable sales and uses of alcoholic liquor occurring during the preceding month. An electronic payment of the tax in the amount disclosed by the report shall accompany the report. A manufacturer or distributor who files an electronic report and electronically pays the tax imposed pursuant to Section 8-1 to the Department of Revenue on or before the 15th day of the calendar month following the calendar month in which such alcoholic liquor is sold or used by that manufacturer or importing distributor other than in an authorized tax-free manner shall pay to the Department the amount of the tax imposed pursuant to Section 8-1, less a discount which is allowed to reimburse the manufacturer or importing distributor for the expenses incurred in keeping and maintaining records, preparing and filing the electronic returns, remitting the tax, and supplying data to the Department upon request.
    The discount shall be in an amount as follows:
        (1) For original returns due on or after January 1,
    	
2003 through September 30, 2003, the discount shall be 1.75% or $1,250 per return, whichever is less;
        (2) For original returns due on or after October 1,
    	
2003 through September 30, 2004, the discount shall be 2% or $3,000 per return, whichever is less; and
        (3) For original returns due on or after October 1,
    	
2004, the discount shall be 2% or $2,000 per return, whichever is less.
    The Department may, if it deems it necessary in order to insure the payment of the tax imposed by this Article, require returns to be made more frequently than and covering periods of less than a month. Such return shall contain such further information as the Department may reasonably require.
    It shall be presumed that all alcoholic liquors acquired or made by any importing distributor or manufacturer have been sold or used by him in this State and are the basis for the tax imposed by this Article unless proven, to the satisfaction of the Department, that such alcoholic liquors are (1) still in the possession of such importing distributor or manufacturer, or (2) prior to the termination of possession have been lost by theft or through unintentional destruction, or (3) that such alcoholic liquors are otherwise exempt from taxation under this Act.
    If any payment provided for in this Section exceeds the manufacturer's or importing distributor's liabilities under this Act, as shown on an original report, the manufacturer or importing distributor may credit such excess payment against liability subsequently to be remitted to the Department under this Act, in accordance with reasonable rules adopted by the Department. If the Department subsequently determines that all or any part of the credit taken was not actually due to the manufacturer or importing distributor, the manufacturer's or importing distributor's discount shall be reduced by an amount equal to the difference between the discount as applied to the credit taken and that actually due, and the manufacturer or importing distributor shall be liable for penalties and interest on such difference.
    The Department may require any foreign importer to file monthly information returns, by the 15th day of the month following the month which any such return covers, if the Department determines this to be necessary to the proper performance of the Department's functions and duties under this Act. Such return shall contain such information as the Department may reasonably require.
    Every manufacturer and importing distributor, except for a manufacturer or importing distributor that in the preceding year had less than $50,000 of tax liability under this Article, shall also file, with the Department, a bond in an amount not less than $1,000 and not to exceed $100,000 on a form to be approved by, and with a surety or sureties satisfactory to, the Department. Such bond shall be conditioned upon the manufacturer or importing distributor paying to the Department all monies becoming due from such manufacturer or importing distributor under this Article. The Department shall fix the penalty of such bond in each case, taking into consideration the amount of alcoholic liquor expected to be sold and used by such manufacturer or importing distributor, and the penalty fixed by the Department shall be sufficient, in the Department's opinion, to protect the State of Illinois against failure to pay any amount due under this Article, but the amount of the penalty fixed by the Department shall not exceed twice the amount of tax liability of a monthly return, nor shall the amount of such penalty be less than $1,000. The Department shall notify the State Commission of the Department's approval or disapproval of any such manufacturer's or importing distributor's bond, or of the termination or cancellation of any such bond, or of the Department's direction to a manufacturer or importing distributor that he must file additional bond in order to comply with this Section. The Commission shall not issue a license to any applicant for a manufacturer's or importing distributor's license unless the Commission has received a notification from the Department showing that such applicant has filed a satisfactory bond with the Department hereunder and that such bond has been approved by the Department. Failure by any licensed manufacturer or importing distributor to keep a satisfactory bond in effect with the Department or to furnish additional bond to the Department, when required hereunder by the Department to do so, shall be grounds for the revocation or suspension of such manufacturer's or importing distributor's license by the Commission. If a manufacturer or importing distributor fails to pay any amount due under this Article, his bond with the Department shall be deemed forfeited, and the Department may institute a suit in its own name on such bond.
    After notice and opportunity for a hearing the State Commission may revoke or suspend the license of any manufacturer or importing distributor who fails to comply with the provisions of this Section. Notice of such hearing and the time and place thereof shall be in writing and shall contain a statement of the charges against the licensee. Such notice may be given by United States registered or certified mail with return receipt requested, addressed to the person concerned at his last known address and shall be given not less than 7 days prior to the date fixed for the hearing. An order revoking or suspending a license under the provisions of this Section may be reviewed in the manner provided in Section 7-10 of this Act. No new license shall be granted to a person whose license has been revoked for a violation of this Section or, in case of suspension, shall such suspension be terminated until he has paid to the Department all taxes and penalties which he owes the State under the provisions of this Act.
    Every manufacturer or importing distributor who has, as verified by the Department, continuously complied with the conditions of the bond under this Act for a period of 2 years shall be considered to be a prior continuous compliance taxpayer. In determining the consecutive period of time for qualification as a prior continuous compliance taxpayer, any consecutive period of time of qualifying compliance immediately prior to the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1987 shall be credited to any manufacturer or importing distributor.
    A manufacturer or importing distributor that is a prior continuous compliance taxpayer under this Section and becomes a successor as the result of an acquisition, merger, or consolidation of a manufacturer or importing distributor shall be deemed to be a prior continuous compliance taxpayer with respect to the acquired, merged, or consolidated entity.
    Every prior continuous compliance taxpayer shall be exempt from the bond requirements of this Act until the Department has determined the taxpayer to be delinquent in the filing of any return or deficient in the payment of any tax under this Act. Any taxpayer who fails to pay an admitted or established liability under this Act may also be required to post bond or other acceptable security with the Department guaranteeing the payment of such admitted or established liability.
    The Department shall discharge any surety and shall release and return any bond or security deposit assigned, pledged or otherwise provided to it by a taxpayer under this Section within 30 days after: (1) such taxpayer becomes a prior continuous compliance taxpayer; or (2) such taxpayer has ceased to collect receipts on which he is required to remit tax to the Department, has filed a final tax return, and has paid to the Department an amount sufficient to discharge his remaining tax liability as determined by the Department under this Act.
(Source: P.A. 100-1171, eff. 1-4-19; 101-37, eff. 7-3-19.)

    (235 ILCS 5/8-3) (from Ch. 43, par. 159a)
    Sec. 8-3. If it appears, after claim therefor filed with the Department, that an amount of tax or penalty or interest has been paid which was not due under this Article, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, except as hereinafter provided, then the Department shall issue a credit memorandum or refund to the person who made the erroneous payment or, if that person died or became a person under legal disability, to his or her legal representative, as such.
    If it is determined that the Department should issue a credit or refund under this Article, the Department may first apply the amount thereof against any amount of tax or penalty or interest due hereunder from the person entitled to such credit or refund. For this purpose, if proceedings are pending to determine whether or not any tax or penalty or interest is due under this Article from such person, the Department may withhold issuance of the credit or refund pending the final disposition of such proceedings and may apply such credit or refund against any amount found to be due to the Department as a result of such proceedings. The balance, if any, of the credit or refund shall be issued to the person entitled thereto.
    If no tax or penalty or interest is due and no proceeding is pending to determine whether such taxpayer is indebted to the Department for tax or penalty or interest the credit memorandum or refund shall be issued to the claimant; or (in the case of a credit memorandum) the credit memorandum may be assigned and set over by the lawful holder thereof, subject to reasonable rules of the Department, to any other person who is subject to this Article, and the amount thereof shall be applied by the Department against any tax or penalty or interest due or to become due under this Article from such assignee.
    As to any claim filed hereunder with the Department on and after each January 1 and July 1, no amount of tax or penalty or interest, erroneously paid (either in total or partial liquidation of a tax or penalty or interest under this Article) more than 3 years prior to such January 1 and July 1, respectively, shall be credited or refunded.
    Any credit or refund that is allowed under this Act shall bear interest at the rate and in the manner specified in the Uniform Penalty and Interest Act.
    In case the Department determines that the claimant is entitled to a refund, such refund shall be made only from such appropriation as may be available for that purpose. If it appears unlikely that the amount appropriated would permit everyone having a claim allowed during the period covered by such appropriation to elect to receive a cash refund, the Department, by rule or regulation, shall provide for the payment of refunds in hardship cases and shall define what types of cases qualify as hardship cases.
(Source: P.A. 87-205.)

    (235 ILCS 5/8-4) (from Ch. 43, par. 163)
    Sec. 8-4. If a person fails to file a return as required by this Article, or having filed an incorrect or insufficient return, fails to file a corrected or sufficient return, as the case may require, within 10 days after the giving of notice to him by the Department that such corrected or sufficient return is required, the Department shall determine the amount of tax due at any time within 3 years after the making of the earliest disposition of alcoholic liquor included in such determination, and shall give written notice, by means of a notice of tax liability, of such determination to such person. Protest thereto and demand for a hearing may be made and final assessments arrived at in accordance with Section 8-5.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/8-5) (from Ch. 43, par. 163a)
    Sec. 8-5. As soon as practicable after any return is filed, the Department shall examine such return or amended return and shall correct such return according to its best judgment and information, which return so corrected by the Department shall be prima facie correct and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the amount of tax due, as shown therein. Instead of requiring the licensee to file an amended return, the Department may simply notify the licensee of the correction or corrections it has made. Proof of such correction by the Department, or of the determination of the amount of tax due as provided in Sections 8-4 and 8-10, may be made at any hearing before the Department or in any legal proceeding by a reproduced copy of the Department's record relating thereto in the name of the Department under the certificate of the Director of Revenue. Such reproduced copy shall, without further proof, be admitted into evidence before the Department or in any legal proceeding and shall be prima facie proof of the correctness of the amount of tax due, as shown therein. If the return so corrected by the Department discloses the sale or use, by a licensed manufacturer or importing distributor, of alcoholic liquors as to which the tax provided for in this Article should have been paid, but has not been paid, in excess of the alcoholic liquors reported as being taxable by the licensee, and as to which the proper tax was paid the Department shall notify the licensee that it shall issue the taxpayer a notice of tax liability for the amount of tax claimed by the Department to be due, together with penalties at the rates prescribed by Sections 3-3, 3-5 and 3-6 of the Uniform Penalty and Interest Act, which amount of tax shall be equivalent to the amount of tax which, at the prescribed rate per gallon, should have been paid with respect to the alcoholic liquors disposed of in excess of those reported as being taxable. No earlier than 90 days after the due date of the return, the Department may compare filed returns, or any amendments thereto, against reports of sales of alcoholic liquor submitted to the Department by other manufacturers and distributors. If a return or amended return is corrected by the Department because the return or amended return failed to disclose the purchase of alcoholic liquor from manufacturers or distributors on which the tax provided for in this Article should have been paid, but has not been paid, the Department shall issue the taxpayer a notice of tax liability for the amount of tax claimed by the Department to be due, together with penalties at the rates prescribed by Sections 3-3, 3-5, and 3-6 of the Uniform Penalty and Interest Act. In a case where no return has been filed, the Department shall determine the amount of tax due according to its best judgment and information and shall issue the taxpayer a notice of tax liability for the amount of tax claimed by the Department to be due as herein provided together with penalties at the rates prescribed by Sections 3-3, 3-5 and 3-6 of the Uniform Penalty and Interest Act. If, in administering the provisions of this Act, a comparison of a licensee's return or returns with the books, records and physical inventories of such licensee discloses a deficiency which cannot be allocated by the Department to a particular month or months, the Department shall issue the taxpayer a notice of tax liability for the amount of tax claimed by the Department to be due for a given period, but without any obligation upon the Department to allocate such deficiency to any particular month or months, together with penalties at the rates prescribed by Sections 3-3, 3-5 and 3-6 of the Uniform Penalty and Interest Act, which amount of tax shall be equivalent to the amount of tax which, at the prescribed rate per gallon, should have been paid with respect to the alcoholic liquors disposed of in excess of those reported being taxable, with the tax thereon having been paid under which circumstances the aforesaid notice of tax liability shall be prima facie correct and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the amount of tax due as shown therein; and proof of such correctness may be made in accordance with, and the admissibility of a reproduced copy of such notice of the Department's notice of tax liability shall be governed by, all the provisions of this Act applicable to corrected returns.
    If the licensee dies or becomes a person under legal disability at any time before the Department issues its notice of tax liability, such notice shall be issued to the administrator, executor or other legal representative, as such, of the deceased or licensee who is under legal disability.
    If such licensee or legal representative, within 60 days after such notice of tax liability, files a protest to such notice of tax liability and requests a hearing thereon, the Department shall give at least 7 days' notice to such licensee or legal representative, as the case may be, of the time and place fixed for such hearing and shall hold a hearing in conformity with the provisions of this Act, and pursuant thereto shall issue a final assessment to such licensee or legal representative for the amount found to be due as a result of such hearing.
    If a protest to the notice of tax liability and a request for a hearing thereon is not filed within 60 days after such notice of tax liability, such notice of tax liability shall become final without the necessity of a final assessment being issued and shall be deemed to be a final assessment.
    In case of failure to pay the tax, or any portion thereof, or any penalty provided for herein, when due, the Department may recover the amount of such tax, or portion thereof, or penalty in a civil action; or if the licensee dies or becomes a person under legal disability, by filing a claim therefor against his or her estate; provided that no such claim shall be filed against the estate of any deceased or of the licensee who is under legal disability for any tax or penalty or portion thereof except in the manner prescribed and within the time limited by the Probate Act of 1975, as amended.
    The collection of any such tax and penalty, or either, by any means provided for herein, shall not be a bar to any prosecution under this Act.
    In addition to any other penalty provided for in this Article, all provisions of the Uniform Penalty and Interest Act that are not inconsistent with this Act apply.
(Source: P.A. 100-1050, eff. 7-1-19; 101-16, eff. 6-14-19.)

    (235 ILCS 5/8-6) (from Ch. 43, par. 163b)
    Sec. 8-6. The Department, or any officer or employee designated in writing by the Director thereof, for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this Act, may hold investigations and hearings concerning any matters covered by this Act. In holding or conducting any hearing or investigation authorized under this Act, the Department or any officer or employee of the Department designated, in writing, by the Director thereof, may examine any books, papers, records or memoranda bearing upon the manufacture, importation, sale or use of alcoholic liquors by any licensee, and may require the attendance of such licensee or of any officer, agent or employee of such licensee, or of any person having knowledge of such facts, and may take testimony and require proof for its information. In the conduct of any investigation or hearing, neither the Department nor any officer or employee thereof shall be bound by the technical rules of evidence, and no informality in any proceeding, or in the manner of taking testimony, shall invalidate any assessment, order, decision, rule or regulation made or approved or confirmed by the Department. The Director of Revenue or any duly designated officer or employee of the Department shall have power to administer oaths to such persons; and the Department shall have the power to issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum, and the Department, or any other party to a proceeding pending before the Department, may apply to the circuit court to compel the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of books, papers, records and memoranda, by an attachment for contempt as provided for such purposes in civil cases.
    The Department or any officer or employee thereof, or any party in an investigation or hearing before the Department, may cause the depositions of witnesses within the State to be taken in the manner prescribed by law for like depositions in civil actions in courts of this State, and to that end compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers, records and memoranda.
    The books, papers, records and memoranda of the Department, or parts thereof, may be proved in any hearing, investigation or judicial proceeding by a reproduced copy thereof under the certificate of the Director of Revenue. Such reproduced copy shall, without further proof, be admitted into evidence before the Department or in any judicial proceeding.
(Source: P.A. 83-334.)

    (235 ILCS 5/8-7) (from Ch. 43, par. 163c)
    Sec. 8-7. All hearings provided for in Section 8-5 of this Act shall be held in the county wherein the licensee has his principal place of business; provided, that if the licensee does not have his or her principal place of business in this State, such hearing shall be held in Sangamon County.
    The Circuit Court of the county wherein any hearing is held by the Department shall have power to review all final administrative decisions of the Department in administering the provisions of this Act. If the administrative proceeding which is to be reviewed judicially is a claim for refund proceeding commenced in accordance with Section 8-3 of this Act and Section 2a of "An Act in relation to the payment and disposition of moneys received by officers and employees of the State of Illinois by virtue of their office or employment", approved June 9, 1911, as amended, the Circuit Court having jurisdiction of the proceeding for judicial review under this Section and under the Administrative Review Law, as amended, shall be the same court that entered the injunction which is provided for in Section 2a of "An Act in relation to the payment and disposition of moneys received by officers and employees of the State of Illinois by virtue of their office or employment", and which enables such claim proceeding to be processed and disposed of as a claim for refund proceeding rather than as a claim for credit proceeding.
    The provisions of the Administrative Review Law, and all amendments and modifications thereof, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto, shall apply to and govern all proceedings for the judicial review of final administrative decisions of the Department hereunder. The term "administrative decision" is defined as in Section 3-101 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
    Service of summons issued in such review proceeding upon the Director of Revenue or the Assistant Director of Revenue of the Department of Revenue shall be service upon the Department. The Department shall certify the record of its proceedings if the licensee shall pay to it the sum of 75 per page of testimony taken before the Department and 25 per page of all other matters contained in such record, except that these charges may be waived where the Department is satisfied that the aggrieved party is a poor person who cannot afford to pay such charges. Provided, however, before the delivery of such record to the person applying for same, the payment therefor shall be made as hereinabove provided, and in the event of nonpayment for the record as hereinabove provided within 30 days after notice that such record is available, the complaint may be dismissed by the court upon motion of the Department.
    No stay order shall be entered by the Circuit Court unless the plaintiff in the review proceedings shall file with the court a bond in an amount fixed and approved by the court to indemnify the State against all loss and injury which may be sustained by it on account of the review proceedings and to secure all costs which may be occasioned by such proceedings.
    Whenever notice is required by this Act, such notice may be given by United States registered or certified mail with return receipt requested, addressed to the person concerned at his or her last known address, and proof of such mailing shall be sufficient for the purposes of this Act.
    Whenever any proceeding provided by this Act is commenced before the Department, either by the Department or by a person subject to this Act, and such person thereafter dies or becomes a person under legal disability before such proceeding is concluded, the legal representative of the deceased or the guardian of the person under legal disability shall notify the Department of such death or legal disability. The legal representative, as such, shall then be substituted by the Department for such person. If the legal representative fails to notify the Department of his or her appointment as such legal representative, the Department may, upon its own motion, substitute such legal representative in the proceeding pending before the Department for the person who died or became a person under legal disability.
(Source: P.A. 83-345.)

    (235 ILCS 5/8-8) (from Ch. 43, par. 163d)
    Sec. 8-8. No person shall be excused from testifying or from producing any books, papers, records or memoranda in any investigation or upon any hearing, when ordered to do so by the Department or any officer or employee thereof, upon the ground that the testimony or evidence, documentary or otherwise, may tend to incriminate him or subject him to a criminal penalty, but no person shall be prosecuted or subjected to any criminal penalty for, or on account of, any transaction made or thing concerning which he may testify or produce evidence, documentary or otherwise, before the Department or an officer or employee thereof; provided, that such immunity shall extend only to a natural person who, in obedience to a subpoena, gives testimony under oath or produces evidence, documentary or otherwise, under oath. No person so testifying shall be exempt from prosecution and punishment for perjury committed in so testifying.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/8-9) (from Ch. 43, par. 163e)
    Sec. 8-9. Tax information; confidentiality. All information received by the Department from returns filed under this Act, or from any investigation conducted under this Act, shall be confidential, except for official purposes, and any person who divulges any such information in any manner, except in accordance with a proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law, shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
    Nothing in this Act prevents the Director of Revenue from publishing or making available to the public the names and addresses of persons filing returns under this Act, or reasonable statistics concerning the operation of the tax by grouping the contents of returns so that the information in any individual return is not disclosed.
    Nothing in this Act prevents the Director of Revenue from divulging to the United States Government or the government of any other state, or any officer or agency thereof, for exclusively official purposes, information received by the Department in administering this Act, provided that such other governmental agency agrees to divulge requested tax information to the Department.
    The furnishing upon request of information obtained by the Department from returns filed under this Act or investigations conducted under this Act to the Illinois Liquor Control Commission for official use is deemed to be an official purpose within the meaning of this Section.
    The furnishing upon request of the Auditor General, or his authorized agents, for official use, of returns filed and information related thereto under this Act is deemed to be an official purpose within the meaning of this Section.
    The furnishing of financial information to a home rule unit with a population in excess of 2,000,000 that has imposed a tax similar to that imposed by this Act under its home rule powers, upon request of the Chief Executive of the home rule unit, is an official purpose within the meaning of this Section, provided the home rule unit agrees in writing to the requirements of this Section. Information so provided is subject to all confidentiality provisions of this Section. The written agreement shall provide for reciprocity, limitations on access, disclosure, and procedures for requesting information.
    Nothing contained in this Act shall prevent the Director from divulging information to any person pursuant to a request or authorization made by the taxpayer or by an authorized representative of the taxpayer.
(Source: P.A. 94-1074, eff. 12-26-06.)

    (235 ILCS 5/8-10) (from Ch. 43, par. 164)
    Sec. 8-10. It is the duty of each manufacturer, importing distributor and foreign importer to keep, at his licensed address or place of business, complete and accurate records of all sales or other dispositions of alcoholic liquor, and complete and accurate records of all alcoholic liquor produced, manufactured, compounded or imported, whether for himself or for another, together with a physical inventory made as of the close of each period for which a return is required, covering all alcoholic liquors on hand. However, the Department of Revenue may grant an importing distributor a waiver to permit such records to be kept at a central business location within the State upon written request by the importing distributor. The central business location shall be located at a licensed importing distributor's premises. The Department of Revenue may in its discretion prescribe reasonable and uniform methods for keeping such records by manufacturers and importing distributors and foreign importers.
    In case of failure by manufacturers and importing distributors to keep such records or to make them available to the Department on demand, the Department shall determine the amount of tax due according to its best judgment and information, which amount so determined by the Department shall be prima facie correct, and the Department's notice of tax liability shall be given, and protest thereto and demand for a hearing may be made and final assessments arrived at, in accordance with the provisions of Section 8-5 hereof.
    It is the duty of each manufacturer, importing distributor and foreign importer, who imports alcoholic liquor into the State, and each non-resident dealer who ships alcoholic liquor into the State, to mail to the Department one duplicate invoice, together with a bill of lading, covering such shipment and stating the quantity and, except in the case of alcoholic liquor imported in bulk to be bottled by an authorized licensee in this State using his own label and brand, the invoice shall also state the brand, labels and size of containers.
    It is the duty of each manufacturer, importing distributor and foreign importer, who imports spirits into the State, and each non-resident dealer who ships spirits into the State, to mail to the State Commission monthly a report containing a compilation of the information required to be furnished to the Department by the preceding paragraph, except that information concerning spirits imported in bulk need not be included. The report shall include all information mailed to the Department during the preceding month.
    All books and records, which manufacturers, importing distributors, non-resident dealers and foreign importers are required by this Section to keep, shall be preserved for a period of 3 years, unless the Department, in writing, authorizes their destruction or disposal at an earlier date.
(Source: P.A. 98-394, eff. 8-16-13.)

    (235 ILCS 5/8-11) (from Ch. 43, par. 164 1/2)
    Sec. 8-11. Every person licensed as a non-beverage user hereunder shall keep books and records which shall be available to investigators and/or auditors of the Department during regular business hours, and shall retain such books and records at his place of business in Illinois for a period of not less than three years. Such books and records shall be so kept as correctly to disclose: (a) the quantity and kind of alcoholic liquors received, showing the name and address of the party from whom received and the permit number on which purchased; (b) the quantity and kind of alcoholic liquors used; (c) the quantity and kind of alcoholic liquors on hand at the close of each business day; and (d) the names of products or purposes for which alcoholic liquors are used.
    No non-beverage user shall sell, give away or otherwise dispose of any alcoholic liquor purchased under his license as such non-beverage user, in any form fit for beverage purposes. Any non-beverage user who shall violate the provisions of this section shall pay as a penalty to the Department of Revenue, the sum of $1.50 for each gallon of alcoholic liquor so diverted, and in addition thereto shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 10-1 of this Act.
(Source: P.A. 83-1428.)

    (235 ILCS 5/8-12) (from Ch. 43, par. 164 3/4)
    Sec. 8-12. It shall be the duty of every railroad company, express company, common or contract carrier, and of every person, firm or corporation that shall bring, carry or transport alcoholic liquors into the State of Illinois for delivery in said State or which are delivered in said State, to prepare and file with the Department of Revenue for each month, not later than the fifteenth day of the month following that for which it is made, a report stating therein the name of the company, carrier, person, firm or corporation making the report, the period of time covered by said report, the name and business address of each consignor of such alcoholic liquors, the name and business address of each consignee of such alcoholic liquors, the kind and quantity of alcoholic liquors delivered to each consignee, and the date or dates of delivery. Such report shall be made upon forms prescribed and made available by the Department and shall contain such other information as may reasonably be required by the Department. The Department may establish procedures for electronic transmissions of such information directly to the Department. Such reports or information received by the Department shall be made available by the Department to the Commission upon the Commission's request.
    In addition to any other reporting requirement imposed under this Section, reports shall be filed for shipments to end consumers in this State. In furtherance of this requirement, it shall be the duty of every railroad company, express company, common or contract carrier, person, firm, or corporation that brings, carries, or transports alcoholic liquor into Illinois for delivery in Illinois to prepare and file with the Department for each month, not later than the fifteenth day of the month following the month during which the delivery is made, a report containing the name of the company, carrier, person, firm, or corporation making the report, the period of time covered by the report, the name and business address of each consignor of the alcoholic liquor, the name and the address of each consignee, and the date of delivery. Such reports shall be made upon forms prescribed and made by the Department and shall contain any other information that the Department may reasonably require. Such reports or information received by the Department shall be made available by the Department to the State Commission upon the State Commission's request.
    Every railroad company, express company, common or contract carrier, person, firm, or corporation filing or required to file a report under this Section shall deliver and make available to the Department, upon the Department's request, the records supporting the report, within 30 days of the request. The books, records, supporting papers and documents containing information and data relating to such reports shall be kept and preserved for a period of three years, unless their destruction sooner is authorized, in writing, by the Director, and shall be open and available to inspection by the Director of Revenue or the Commission or any duly authorized officer, agent or employee of the Department or the Commission, at all times during business hours of the day.
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section or any of the rules and regulations of the Department for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this section is guilty of a Class C misdemeanor. In case of a continuing violation each day's continuance thereof shall be a separate and distinct offense.
(Source: P.A. 92-380, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (235 ILCS 5/8-13) (from Ch. 43, par. 165)
    Sec. 8-13. The Department of Revenue may make such reasonable rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary for the administration of the duties vested in it by the provisions of this Act.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/8-14) (from Ch. 43, par. 165a)
    Sec. 8-14. All of the provisions of Sections 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e, 5f, 5g, 5h, 5i and 5j of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act and Section 3-7 of the Uniform Penalty and Interest Act, are by reference incorporated in and made a part of this Article VIII as fully as though written herein; provided that wherever in those Sections of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act, reference is made to a "retailer" such reference shall, for the purposes of this Article, be deemed to refer to a licensee under this Act.
(Source: P.A. 87-205.)


 
    (235 ILCS 5/Art. IX heading)
ARTICLE IX. LOCAL REFERENDUM

    (235 ILCS 5/9-1) (from Ch. 43, par. 166)
    Sec. 9-1. The words and phrases defined in this section and used in this Article, unless inconsistent with the context, shall be construed as follows:
    "Precinct" means any part of a city, village or incorporated town of over 200,000 population which was a "voting precinct" or an "election precinct" for voting at the last general election.
    "Political subdivision" means a township, road district, city, village or incorporated town, as the case may be.
    "Legal voter", insofar as the signing of a petition for a local option election is concerned, means a person who is registered to vote at the address shown opposite his signature on the petition or was registered to vote at such address when he signed the petition.
    "Annexed area" means a territory which has attached to and become a part of a different political subdivision or precinct. The term shall be an appropriate designation only until the area to which it attaches holds a referendum hereunder.
    "Disconnected area" means a territory which has detached or separated from a political subdivision or precinct.
    "Licensed establishment" means the premises specified in a retailer's license pursuant to paragraph (d) of Section 5-1 and whose primary business is the sale of alcoholic beverages on the premises, which premises are located in any municipality having more than 2,000,000 inhabitants.
    In the phrase, "Shall the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor (or alcoholic liquor other than beer containing not more than 4% of alcohol by weight) (or alcoholic liquor containing more than 4% of alcohol by weight except in the original package and not for consumption on the premises) be prohibited in (or at) ....?" the proper name, whether of a "township", "road district", "precinct", "city", "village" or "incorporated town", or the street address of the licensed establishment, shall be understood to be inserted in the blank, and the same shall be inserted in the petitions filed by and the ballots prepared for the voters of any precinct, township, road district, city, village or incorporated town.
    "Clerk", with reference to cities, villages and incorporated towns, and precinct situated therein, means the town, city or village clerk, as the case may be; with reference to cities, villages and incorporated towns which have by ordinance created a Board of Election Commissioners, it means the Board of Election Commissioners; with reference to road districts in counties not under township organization, it means the road district clerk; with reference to townships or parts of townships lying outside of cities, villages and incorporated towns in counties under township organization, it means the township clerk.
    "Election" as used in reference to cities, villages and incorporated towns, means an election at a time fixed by the general election law for choosing city, village or incorporated town officers. "Election" also means an election at a time fixed by the general election law for choosing county, township or road district officers.
    In case an election is to be held for officers of the city, village, incorporated town, township, or road district to which a proposition requested pursuant to this Article shall be submitted, or for the election of officers of a township or road district in which it is requested that such proposition be submitted to that part of a township or road district lying outside the corporate limits of a city, village or incorporated town, not less than 90 days nor more than 6 months following the filing of such petition, then the words "next ensuing election" as used herein shall mean the next ensuing election for officers of such city, village, incorporated town, township or road district, regardless of any intervening elections at which residents of such city, village, incorporated town, township or road district may vote.
(Source: P.A. 86-861; 87-347.)

    (235 ILCS 5/9-2) (from Ch. 43, par. 167)
    Sec. 9-2. When any legal voters of a precinct in any city, village or incorporated town of more than 200,000 inhabitants, as determined by the last preceding Federal census, desire to pass upon the question of whether the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor shall be prohibited in the precinct or at a particular street address within the precinct, they shall, at least 104 days before an election, file in the office of the clerk of such city, village or incorporated town, a petition directed to the clerk, containing the signatures of not less than 25% of the legal voters registered with the board of election commissioners or county clerk, as the case may be, from the precinct. Provided, however, that when the petition seeks to prohibit the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor at a particular street address of a licensed establishment within the precinct the petition shall contain the signatures of not less than 40% of the legal voters requested from that precinct. The petition shall request that the proposition "Shall the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor be prohibited in (or at) ....?" be submitted to the voters of the precinct at the next ensuing election at which such proposition may be voted upon. The submission of the question to the voters of such precinct at such election shall be mandatory when the petition has been filed in proper form with the clerk. If more than one set of petitions are presented to the clerk for submission at the same election, the petition presented first shall be given preference; however, the clerk shall provisionally accept any other set of petitions setting forth the same (or substantially the same) proposition. If the first set of petitions for a proposition is found to be in proper form and is not found to be invalid, it shall be accepted by the clerk and all provisionally accepted sets of petitions setting forth the same (or substantially the same) proposition shall be rejected by the clerk. If the first set of petitions for a proposition is found not to be in proper form or is found to be invalid, the clerk shall (i) reject the first set of petitions, (ii) accept the first provisionally accepted set of petitions that is in proper form and is not found to be invalid, and (iii) reject all other provisionally accepted sets of petitions setting forth the same (or substantially the same) proposition. Notice of the filing of the petition and the result of the election shall be given to the Secretary of State at his offices in both, Chicago and Springfield, Illinois. A return of the result of the election shall be made to the clerk of the city, village or incorporated town in which the precinct is located. If a majority of the voters voting upon such proposition vote "YES", the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor shall be prohibited in the precinct or at the street address. If the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor at a particular street address is prohibited pursuant to this Section, the license for any establishment at that street address shall be void, and no person may apply for a license for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor at an establishment at that street address unless such prohibition is discontinued pursuant to Section 9-10.
    In cities, villages and incorporated towns of 200,000 or less population, as determined by the last preceding Federal census, the vote upon the question of prohibiting the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor, or alcoholic liquor other than beer containing not more than 4% of alcohol by volume, or alcoholic liquor containing more than 4% of alcohol by weight in the original package and not for consumption on the premises, shall be by the voters of the political subdivision as a unit. When any legal voters of such a city, village or incorporated town desire to pass upon the question of whether the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor shall be prohibited in the municipality, they shall, at least 104 days before an election, file in the office of the clerk of the municipality, a petition directed to the clerk, containing the signatures of not less than 25% of the legal voters registered with the board of election commissioners or county clerk, as the case may be, from the municipality. The petition shall request that the proposition, "Shall the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor be prohibited in....?" be submitted to the voters of the municipality at the next ensuing election at which the proposition may be voted upon. The submission of the question to the voters of the municipality at such election shall be mandatory when the petition has been filed in proper form with the clerk. If more than one set of petitions are presented to the clerk for submission at the same election, setting forth the same or different propositions, the petition presented first shall be given preference and the clerk shall refuse to accept any other set of petitions. Notice of the filing of the petition and the result of the election shall be given to the Secretary of State at his offices in both Chicago and Springfield, Illinois. A return of the result of the election shall be made to the clerk of the city, village or incorporated town. If a majority of the voters voting upon the proposition vote "Yes", the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor shall be prohibited in the municipality.
    In the event a municipality does not vote to prohibit the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor, the council or governing body shall ascertain and determine what portions of the municipality are predominantly residence districts. No license permitting the sale of alcoholic liquors shall be issued by the local liquor commissioner or licensing officer permitting the sale of alcoholic liquors at any place within the residence district so determined, unless the owner or owners of at least two-thirds of the frontage, 200 feet in each direction along the street and streets adjacent to the place of business for which a license is sought, file with the local liquor commissioner or licensing officer, his or their written consent to the use of such place for the sale of alcoholic liquors.
    In each township or road district lying outside the corporate limits of a city, village or incorporated town, or in a part of a township or road district lying partly within and partly outside a city, village or incorporated town, the vote of such township, road district or part thereof, shall be as a unit. When any legal voters of any such township, or part thereof, in counties under township organization, or any legal voters of such road district or part thereof, in counties not under township organization, desire to vote upon the proposition as to whether the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor shall be prohibited in such township or road district or part thereof, they shall, at least 90 days before an election, file in the office of the township or road district clerk, of the township or road district within which the election is to be held, a petition directed to the clerk and containing the signatures of not less than 25% of the legal voters registered with the county clerk from such township or road district or part thereof. The submission of the question to the voters of the township, road district or part thereof, at the next ensuing election shall be mandatory when the petition has been filed in proper form with the clerk. If more than one set of petitions are presented to the clerk for submission at the same election, setting forth the same or different propositions, the petition presented first shall be given preference and the clerk shall refuse to accept any other set of petitions. A return of the result of such election shall be made to the clerk of the township or road district in which the territory is situated, and shall also be made to the Secretary of State at his offices in both Chicago and Springfield, Illinois.
(Source: P.A. 96-1008, eff. 7-6-10.)

    (235 ILCS 5/9-2a) (from Ch. 43, par. 167a)
    Sec. 9-2a. Sports Facilities. Any vote under this Article, whenever held, to prohibit sales at retail of alcoholic liquor (or alcoholic liquor other than liquor containing not more than 4% of alcohol by weight) in a precinct in a city, village or incorporated town of more than 200,000 inhabitants shall not apply to such sales at any new sports facility owned by any unit of local government and constructed after July 7, 1988, or at any new stadium described in subsection (a) of Section 10-215 of the Property Tax Code, or to a sports stadium having more than 15,000 but less than 50,000 seats in any municipality having more than 2,000,000 inhabitants, and such sales shall not be prohibited pursuant to any vote of the legal voters in such a precinct. It is declared to be the law of this State, pursuant to subsections (h) and (i) of Section 6 of Article VII of the Illinois Constitution of 1970 that the power to determine the application of any local referendum with respect to sales of alcoholic liquors as provided herein is an exercise of exclusive State power and may not be exercised concurrently by any unit of local government, including home rule units.
(Source: P.A. 88-670, eff. 12-2-94.)

    (235 ILCS 5/9-2b)
    Sec. 9-2b. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 93-996, eff. 8-23-04. Repealed by P.A. 94-282, eff. 7-21-05.)

    (235 ILCS 5/9-2c)
    Sec. 9-2c. Museum of Science and Industry. Any vote under this Article, whenever held, to prohibit sales at retail of alcoholic liquor (or alcoholic liquor other than liquor containing not more than 4% of alcohol by weight) in a precinct in a city, village, or incorporated town of more than 200,000 inhabitants shall not apply to such sales at the Museum of Science and Industry in Chicago.
(Source: P.A. 98-592, eff. 11-15-13.)

    (235 ILCS 5/9-2d)
    Sec. 9-2d. Private institution of higher learning. Any vote under this Article, whenever held, to prohibit sales at retail of alcoholic liquor (or alcoholic liquor other than beer containing not more than 4% of alcohol by weight or alcoholic liquor containing more than 4% alcohol by weight in the original package and not for consumption on the premises) in a precinct in a city, village, or incorporated town of more than 200,000 inhabitants shall not apply to retail sales of alcoholic liquor if:
        (1) the alcoholic liquor is sold on property owned
    	
by a private institution of higher learning or an affiliate thereof that is bounded by the south side of 60th Street on the north, the west side of Kimbark Avenue to the east, the north side of 61st Street to the south, and the east side of Woodlawn Avenue to the west in the City of Chicago;
        (2) the alcoholic liquor is sold by a private
    	
institution of higher learning or an affiliate thereof, by a person who leases the property owned by the private institution of higher learning or an affiliate thereof, or by a person contractually authorized to sell alcoholic liquor on the premises;
        (3) the person conducting the retail sale of
    	
alcoholic liquor obtains all of the necessary local and State licenses authorizing the retail sale of alcoholic liquor; and
        (4) the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the
    	
principal business to be carried on by the license holder.
(Source: P.A. 101-156, eff. 1-1-20.)

    (235 ILCS 5/9-3) (from Ch. 43, par. 168)
    Sec. 9-3. A vote under the provisions of this Act, shall become operative on the 30th day after the day of the election at which such vote is cast.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/9-4) (from Ch. 43, par. 169)
    Sec. 9-4. A petition for submission of the proposition shall be in substantially the following form:
    To the .... clerk of the (here insert the corporate or legal name of the county, township, road district, city, village or incorporated town):
    The undersigned, residents and legal voters of the .... (insert the legal name or correct designation of the political subdivision or precinct, as the case may be), respectfully petition that you cause to be submitted, in the manner provided by law, to the voters thereof, at the next election, the proposition "Shall the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor (or alcoholic liquor other than beer containing not more than 4% of alcohol by weight) (or alcoholic liquor containing more than 4% of alcohol by weight except in the original package and not for consumption on the premises) be prohibited in this .... (or at the following address ....)?"
--------------------------------------------------------------
 Name of   P. O. address   Description of precinct  Date of
 signer    (including      township, road district  signing
           street no.,     or part thereof, as of
           if any).        the last general
                           election
--------------------------------------------------------------
    A petition for a proposition to be submitted to the voters of a precinct shall also contain in plain and nonlegal language a description of the precinct to which the proposition is to be submitted at the election. The description shall describe the territory of the precinct by reference to streets, natural or artificial landmarks, addresses, or by any other method which would enable a voter signing such petition to be informed of the territory of the precinct. Each such petition for a precinct referendum shall also contain a list of the names and addresses of all licensees in the precinct.
    Such petition shall conform to the requirements of the general election law, as to form and signature requirements. The circulator's statement shall include an attestation of: (1) that none of the signatures on this petition sheet were signed more than 4 months before the filing of this petition, or (2) the dates on which the petitioners signed the petition, and shall be sworn to before an officer residing in the county where such legal voters reside and authorized to administer oaths therein. No signature shall be revoked except by a revocation filed within 20 days from the filing of the petition with the clerk with whom the petition is required to be filed. Upon request of any citizen for a photostatic copy of the petition and paying or tendering to the clerk the costs of making the photostatic copy, the clerk shall immediately make, or cause to be made a photostatic copy of such petition. The clerk shall also deliver to such person, his official certification that such copy is a true copy of the original, stating the day when such original was filed in his office. Any 5 legal voters or any affected licensee of any political subdivision, district or precinct in which a proposed election is about to be held as provided for in this Act, within any time up to 72 days immediately prior to the date of such proposed election and upon filing a bond for costs, may contest the validity of the petitions for such election by filing a verified petition in the Circuit Court for the county in which the political subdivision, district or precinct is situated, setting forth the grounds for contesting the validity of such petitions. Upon the filing of the petition, a summons shall be issued by the Court, addressed to the appropriate city, village, town, township or road district clerk, notifying the clerk of the filing of the petition and directing him to appear before the Court on behalf of the political subdivision or district at the time named in the summons; provided, the time shall not be less than 5 days nor more than 15 days after the filing of the petition. The procedure in these cases, as far as may be applicable, shall be the same as that provided for the objections to petitions in the general election law. Any legal voter in the political subdivision or precinct in which such election is to be held may appear in person or by counsel, in any such contest to defend or oppose the validity of the petition for election.
    The municipal, town or road district clerk shall certify the proposition to be submitted at the election to the appropriate election officials, in accordance with the general election law, unless the petition has been determined to be invalid. If the court determines the petitions to be invalid subsequent to the certification by the clerk, the court's order shall be transmitted to the election officials and shall nullify such certification.
(Source: P.A. 96-1008, eff. 7-6-10.)

    (235 ILCS 5/9-5) (from Ch. 43, par. 170)
    Sec. 9-5. The appropriate election officials to whom the proposition has been certified shall cause notice to be given in the manner provided by the general election law of the submission of said proposition at the next election to the voters of the political subdivision or precinct entitled to vote thereon. Publication of the submission of such proposition to the voters of such political subdivision or precinct shall likewise be made in the manner provided by the general election law; provided, the failure of the election officials to cause such notice to be given, or the failure to make publication of the submission of the proposition, shall not affect the validity or binding force of the vote upon the proposition.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/9-6) (from Ch. 43, par. 171)
    Sec. 9-6. The proposition shall be in substantially the following form:
--------------------------------------------------------------
    Shall the sale at retail of
alcoholic  liquor  (or alcoholic
liquor other than beer containing             YES
not more than 4% of alcohol by
weight) (or alcoholic liquor               -------------------
containing more than 4% alcohol by
weight in the original package
and not for consumption on the                NO
premises) be prohibited in (or at) ....?
--------------------------------------------------------------
    In a precinct referendum, the proposition ballot shall also contain a common description of the precinct in plain and nonlegal language, which may be prepared by the election official or adopted from the description on the petition, unless the election official responsible for conducting the election determines that a description cannot be included within the space limitations on the ballot to be used in the election. If the description is not to be included on the ballot, the election officials shall prepare large printed copies of the description of the precinct together with a notice of the proposition which shall be prominently displayed in the precinct polling place at the election.
(Source: P.A. 86-861.)

    (235 ILCS 5/9-7) (from Ch. 43, par. 172)
    Sec. 9-7. The clerk shall record in a well bound book, to be kept in his office by himself and his successor, the result of the vote upon the proposition. The result of the vote may be proved in all courts and in all proceedings by this record or by the official certification of the clerk. In cases where the record or certification shows that a majority of the voters voting upon the proposition voted "YES", the record or certification shall be prima facie evidence that the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor or the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor other than beer containing not more than 4% of alcohol by weight or the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor containing more than 4% of alcohol by weight except in the original package and not for consumption on the premises, as the case may be, is prohibited in the political subdivision or precinct or at the licensed establishment to which such vote was applicable.
(Source: P.A. 86-861.)

    (235 ILCS 5/9-8) (from Ch. 43, par. 173)
    Sec. 9-8. The status of all the territory within any political subdivision or precinct, relative to the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor, or the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor other than beer containing not more than 4% of alcohol by weight, or the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor containing more than 4% of alcohol by weight except in the original package and not for consumption on the premises, as the case may be, shall remain the same, notwithstanding any change which may be made in the limits of any such political subdivision or precinct until the voters thereof have changed such status as to annexed or disconnected areas under the provisions of Section 9-9 of this Article, or until the voters have changed such status for areas other than annexed or disconnected areas under the provisions of Section 9-2 or Section 9-10.
(Source: P.A. 84-716.)

    (235 ILCS 5/9-9) (from Ch. 43, par. 173.1)
    Sec. 9-9. The status of an annexed area or disconnected area, relative to the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor pursuant to Section 9-8, shall remain the same until changed in accordance with the following provisions:
    (a) Upon the filing, in the office of the clerk of the political subdivision or precinct of which the annexed area or disconnected area becomes a part, of a petition directed to such clerk, containing the signatures of not less than 25% of the legal voters residing in such annexed or disconnected area, to submit to the voters thereof the proposition to continue its current status, the clerk shall certify that proposition to the proper election officials, who shall submit the proposition to the voters of the annexed or disconnected area at an election in accordance with the general election law. The petition shall be supported by an affidavit made by one or more of the petitioners and stating that the signatures represent not less than 25% of the legal voters residing in the annexed or disconnected area. The provisions in Sections 9-1, 9-2, 9-4, 9-5, 9-6 and 9-7 shall apply except where they conflict with this Section, in which event the provisions of this Section shall control. If a majority of the voters voting upon such proposition in any such annexed or disconnected area vote "NO", the current status shall cease in that area; or
    (b) Upon the filing in the office of the clerk of the political subdivision of which the annexed area or disconnected area becomes a part of a petition directed to such clerk containing the signatures of not less than 66 2/3% of all the legal voters residing in the annexed or disconnected area to change the status in that annexed or disconnected area relative to the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor by either:
        (1) discontinuing any existing prohibition, or
        (2) prohibiting the sale at retail of alcoholic
    	
liquor, or
        (3) prohibiting the sale at retail of alcoholic
    	
liquor other than beer containing not more than 4% of alcohol by weight, or
        (4) prohibiting the sale at retail of alcoholic
    	
liquor containing more than 4% of alcohol by weight except in the original package and not for consumption on the premises, the requirements for an election in subsection (a) above shall be waived.
The requirement of Section 9-4 regarding verification of a petition shall apply to this petition. Thirty days following the filing of such petition, the requested status, as specified in such petition, shall become effective in the annexed or disconnected area, unless within the 30 day period, written verified objections by a voter residing in the annexed or disconnected area are filed with the clerk. The objections shall be limited to an attack upon the validity of the petition and its execution. In such event, the clerk shall forthwith submit to the Circuit Court for the county in which the area is located, the petition and objections thereto. A hearing shall be held thereon within 30 days after the petition and objections are filed with the court. If the court finds that the petition is valid and properly executed, the court shall enter an order finding that the petition is valid. Thereupon, the requested status shall be effective. If the court finds that the petition is not valid, the petition shall be dismissed.
    (c) A vote under subsection (a) above or the filing of a valid petition under subsection (b) above shall bar further proceedings under this Section for 47 months thereafter.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/9-10) (from Ch. 43, par. 174)
    Sec. 9-10. Upon the filing in the office of the clerk, at least 90 days before an election in any political subdivision or precinct, as the case may be, of a petition directed to such clerk, containing the signatures of not less than 25% or 40% of the legal voters of the territory which has prohibited the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor or the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor other than beer containing not more than 4% of alcohol by weight or the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor containing more than 4% of alcohol by weight except in the original package and not for consumption on the premises, or a petition directed to such clerk containing the signatures of not less than 25% of the legal voters of a municipality within which such territory is located, to submit to the voters thereof the proposition to continue such prohibition, the clerk shall certify such proposition to the proper election officials, who shall submit the proposition at such election to the voters of such political subdivision or precinct. Where such proposition is submitted pursuant to a petition signed by not less than 25% of the legal voters of a municipality within which such territory is located, the legal voters of the entire municipality may vote on the proposition. For the purposes of this Section, the number of legal voters shall be computed upon the same basis as is provided in Section 9-2 for the filing of a petition for referendum on the question of whether the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor shall be prohibited. So far as applicable, the provisions of Sections 9-1, 9-4, 9-5, 9-6 and 9-7 shall apply. The proposition shall be in the following form:
--------------------------------------------------------------
Shall the prohibition of the sale
at retail of alcoholic liquor (or
alcoholic liquor other than beer        YES
containing not more than 4% of
alcohol by weight) or (alcoholic     -------------------------
liquor containing more than 4% of
alcohol by weight in the original        NO
package and not for consumption
on the premises) be continued
in (or at) .................?
--------------------------------------------------------------
In a precinct referendum, the referendum ballot shall also contain a common description of the precinct in plain and nonlegal language, which may be prepared by the election official or adopted from the description on the petition, unless the election official responsible for conducting the election determines that a description cannot be included within the space limitations on the ballots to be used in the election. If the description is not to be included on the ballot, the clerk shall prepare large printed copies of the description of the precinct together with a notice of the proposition which shall be prominently displayed in the precinct polling place at the election. If a majority of the voters voting upon such last mentioned proposition in any such political subdivision or precinct vote "NO", such prohibition shall cease in such political subdivision or precinct or at the applicable licensed establishment; and where such political subdivision or precinct is a city, village or incorporated town situated wholly or partly within the boundaries of a township or road district having a similar prohibition, a majority vote of the voters voting "NO" upon such proposition as above described will result in the prohibition ceasing in that part of the township or road district situated within such city, village or incorporated town. In the event the boundaries of such political subdivision or precinct have been altered or the numbers of any precincts have been changed subsequent to the original election making the territory prohibited territory and prior to the filing of such petition for resubmission of the question, only those voters actually residing in the prohibited territory shall be eligible as signers of such resubmission petition, except that this limitation shall not apply in the case of a resubmission petition signed by at least 25% of the legal voters of a municipality in which the prohibited territory is located. The petition mentioned in this Section shall be a public document and shall be subject to inspection by the public.
(Source: P.A. 86-861.)

    (235 ILCS 5/9-10.1) (from Ch. 43, par. 174.1)
    Sec. 9-10.1. In the event a home rule municipality, as set forth in Article VII of the Illinois Constitution, changes the status of the municipality by ordinance so as to allow the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor in a municipality which has previously prohibited such sale pursuant to local referendum, such sale may be continued in that municipality even though it subsequently ceases to be a home rule municipality. The prohibition against the sale at retail of alcoholic beverages in such a municipality may thereafter be reinstated pursuant to Section 9-2 or by subsequent ordinance of the municipality.
(Source: P.A. 83-736.)

    (235 ILCS 5/9-11) (from Ch. 43, par. 175)
    Sec. 9-11. A vote under the provisions of this Act in and for any political subdivision or precinct or licensed establishment upon the proposition to prohibit the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor or to prohibit the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor other than beer containing not more than 4% of alcohol by weight or to prohibit the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor containing more than 4% of alcohol by weight except in the original package and not for consumption on the premises or in and for any political subdivision or precinct upon the proposition to continue any of such prohibitions shall be a bar to the submission to the voters thereof of any of such propositions as applied to all or any part of that political subdivision or precinct for 47 months thereafter.
(Source: P.A. 86-861.)

    (235 ILCS 5/9-12) (from Ch. 43, par. 175.1)
    Sec. 9-12. Within 10 days after the filing of any petition under this Article, the official with whom the petition is filed shall prepare, in quintuplicate, the report hereinafter prescribed. One copy shall be kept on file in the official's office, and he shall, by registered mail, send two copies to the Secretary of State, one copy to the county clerk and one copy to the person who filed the petition.
    The official shall make such report substantially in the following form:
 
    Report of filing of petition for local option election to be held on .... in .... (name of precinct, etc.).
Date of filing ....
By whom filed ....
Number of signers ....
Proposal(s) to be voted upon ....
.... (Official)

    Immediately upon completion of the canvass of any local option election, the official shall prepare, in quadruplicate, a report of the election result as hereinafter prescribed and shall keep one copy on file in his office and, within 10 days after the canvass, shall, by registered mail, send two copies to the Secretary of State and one copy to the county clerk. The report shall be substantially as follows:
 
    Report of local option election held on .... in .... (name of precinct, etc.) upon the following proposal(s) ....
Number voting "YES" ....
Number voting "NO" ....
.... (Official)

    The official shall sign each copy of every report required by this Section.
    The Secretary of State and the county clerk shall keep on file in their offices, available for inspection, any report received by him pursuant to this Section.
(Source: P.A. 91-357, eff. 7-29-99.)

    (235 ILCS 5/9-13) (from Ch. 43, par. 176)
    Sec. 9-13. It is unlawful to sell alcoholic liquor at retail or to grant or issue, or cause to be granted or issued, any license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail within the limits of any political subdivision or precinct or at any premises while the prohibition against such sales is in effect, or to sell at retail alcoholic liquor other than beer containing not more than 4% of alcohol by weight, or to grant or issue or cause to be granted any license to sell such alcoholic liquor at retail within the limits of such political subdivision or precinct while the prohibition against such sales is in effect, or to sell at retail alcoholic liquor containing more than 4% of alcohol by weight except in the original package and not for consumption on the premises, or to grant or issue or cause to be granted or issued any license to sell such alcoholic liquor at retail within the limits of such political subdivision or precinct while the prohibition against such sales is in effect. If any such license be granted or issued in violation of this section, the license shall be void. This section shall not prohibit the issuance of and operation under a manufacturer's or distributor's or importing distributor's license in accordance with law.
(Source: P.A. 86-861.)

    (235 ILCS 5/9-14) (from Ch. 43, par. 177)
    Sec. 9-14. The giving away or delivery of any alcoholic liquor for the purpose of evading any provision of this Article, or the taking of orders or the making of agreements, at or within any political subdivision or precinct or at any premises while such sales are prohibited, for the sale or delivery of any alcoholic liquor, or other shift or device to evade any provision of this Act, shall constitute an unlawful selling.
(Source: P.A. 86-861.)

    (235 ILCS 5/9-15) (from Ch. 43, par. 178)
    Sec. 9-15. All places where alcoholic liquor is sold in violation of any provision of this Article shall be taken and held and are declared to be common nuisances and may be abated as such.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/9-16) (from Ch. 43, par. 179)
    Sec. 9-16. Any clerk, judge of election, police officer or other officer of the law, who shall refuse or neglect or fail to discharge any duty imposed by this Article, and any one who signs a petition provided for in this Article, knowing he is not qualified to do so, or who files with the clerk any such petition or any sheet or other part thereof knowing that it contains the signature of a person not qualified to sign the same, or who receives, requests or demands or gives, offers or promises any reward for the signing or the refraining from signing of any such petition, or who by treating or giving alcoholic liquor or anything else, or by threats to injure another in person or property, or by betting or other device, either directly or indirectly influences or attempts to influence anyone to sign or refrain from signing any such petition, shall be guilty of a violation of this Article and punishable therefor.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/9-17) (from Ch. 43, par. 180)
    Sec. 9-17. In all prosecutions under this Article, it shall not be necessary to state the kind of liquor sold; nor to describe the place where sold; nor to show the knowledge of the principal to convict for the acts of any agent or servant; nor to state the name of any person to whom liquor is sold; nor to set forth the facts showing that the required number of legal voters petitioned for the submission to the voters of said proposition, nor that a majority of the voters voting upon such proposition voted "YES", but it shall be sufficient to state that the act complained of took place in a territory where such sales were prohibited.
(Source: P.A. 84-551.)

    (235 ILCS 5/9-18) (from Ch. 43, par. 181)
    Sec. 9-18. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to forbid or prevent the sale of alcoholic liquor according to the terms of a license theretofore regularly issued in good faith according to law until after the final disposition of the case wherein an election result, indicating that the sale of alcoholic liquor is prohibited, is contested. Any portion of a license fee which shall have been paid and which represents the unexpired period for which the license was issued after the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor has been prohibited in a political subdivision or precinct in which the premises described in such license is located shall be refunded. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to forbid or prevent the sale of alcoholic liquor by a railroad licensee on trains passing through prohibited territory.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/9-19) (from Ch. 43, par. 182)
    Sec. 9-19. Any 5 legal voters of any political subdivision or precinct in which an election has been held as provided for in this Act, may within 10 days after the canvass of the returns of such election and upon filing a bond for costs, contest the validity of such election by filing a verified petition in the Circuit Court for the county in which such political subdivision or precinct is situated, setting forth the grounds for the contest. Upon the filing of such petition a summons shall forthwith issue from such court addressed to the election official who conducted the election, notifying the official of the filing of such petition and directing him to appear before the court at the time named in the summons; provided, the time shall be not less than 5 nor more than 15 days after the filing of such petition. The procedure in such cases, as far as applicable, shall be the same as that provided in the general election law. Any registered voter in the political subdivision or precinct in which the election has been held may appear in person, or by counsel, in any such contest to defend or oppose the validity of the election.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)


 
    (235 ILCS 5/Art. X heading)
ARTICLE X. VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES, SEARCHES AND SEIZURES

    (235 ILCS 5/10-1) (from Ch. 43, par. 183)
    Sec. 10-1. Violations; penalties. Whereas a substantial threat to the sound and careful control, regulation, and taxation of the manufacture, sale, and distribution of alcoholic liquors exists by virtue of individuals who manufacture, import, distribute, or sell alcoholic liquors within the State without having first obtained a valid license to do so, and whereas such threat is especially serious along the borders of this State, and whereas such threat requires immediate correction by this Act, by active investigation and prosecution by the State Commission, law enforcement officials, and prosecutors, and by prompt and strict enforcement through the courts of this State to punish violators and to deter such conduct in the future:
    (a) Any person who manufactures, imports for distribution or use, transports from outside this State into this State, or distributes or sells 108 liters (28.53 gallons) or more of wine, 45 liters (11.88 gallons) or more of distilled spirits, or 118 liters (31.17 gallons) or more of beer at any place within the State without having first obtained a valid license to do so under the provisions of this Act shall be guilty of a Class 4 felony for each offense. However, any person who was duly licensed under this Act and whose license expired within 30 days prior to a violation shall be guilty of a business offense and fined not more than $1,000 for the first such offense and shall be guilty of a Class 4 felony for each subsequent offense.
    Any person who manufactures, imports for distribution, transports from outside this State into this State for sale or resale in this State, or distributes or sells less than 108 liters (28.53 gallons) of wine, less than 45 liters (11.88 gallons) of distilled spirits, or less than 118 liters (31.17 gallons) of beer at any place within the State without having first obtained a valid license to do so under the provisions of this Act shall be guilty of a business offense and fined not more than $1,000 for the first such offense and shall be guilty of a Class 4 felony for each subsequent offense. This subsection does not apply to a motor carrier or freight forwarder, as defined in Section 13102 of Title 49 of the United States Code, an air carrier, as defined in Section 40102 of Title 49 of the United States Code, or a rail carrier, as defined in Section 10102 of Title 49 of the United States Code.
    Any person who: (1) has been issued an initial cease and desist notice from the State Commission; and (2) for compensation, does any of the following: (i) ships alcoholic liquor into this State without a license authorized by Section 5-1 issued by the State Commission or in violation of that license; or (ii) manufactures, imports for distribution, transports from outside this State into this State for sale or resale in this State, or distributes or sells alcoholic liquors at any place without having first obtained a valid license to do so is guilty of a Class 4 felony for each offense.
    (b) (1) Any retailer, caterer retailer, brew pub, special event retailer, special use permit holder, homebrewer special event permit holder, or craft distiller tasting permit holder who knowingly causes alcoholic liquors to be imported directly into the State of Illinois from outside of the State for the purpose of furnishing, giving, or selling to another, except when having received the product from a duly licensed distributor or importing distributor, shall have his license suspended for 30 days for the first offense and for the second offense, shall have his license revoked by the Commission.
    (2) In the event the State Commission receives a certified copy of a final order from a foreign jurisdiction that an Illinois retail licensee has been found to have violated that foreign jurisdiction's laws, rules, or regulations concerning the importation of alcoholic liquor into that foreign jurisdiction, the violation may be grounds for the State Commission to revoke, suspend, or refuse to issue or renew a license, to impose a fine, or to take any additional action provided by this Act with respect to the Illinois retail license or licensee. Any such action on the part of the State Commission shall be in accordance with this Act and implementing rules.
    For the purposes of paragraph (2): (i) "foreign jurisdiction" means a state, territory, or possession of the United States, the District of Columbia, or the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and (ii) "final order" means an order or judgment of a court or administrative body that determines the rights of the parties respecting the subject matter of the proceeding, that remains in full force and effect, and from which no appeal can be taken.
    (c) Any person who shall make any false statement or otherwise violates any of the provisions of this Act in obtaining any license hereunder, or who having obtained a license hereunder shall violate any of the provisions of this Act with respect to the manufacture, possession, distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor, or with respect to the maintenance of the licensed premises, or shall violate any other provision of this Act, shall for a first offense be guilty of a petty offense and fined not more than $500, and for a second or subsequent offense shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
    (c-5) Any owner of an establishment that serves alcohol on its premises, if more than 50% of the establishment's gross receipts within the prior 3 months is from the sale of alcohol, who knowingly fails to prohibit concealed firearms on its premises or who knowingly makes a false statement or record to avoid the prohibition of concealed firearms on its premises under the Firearm Concealed Carry Act shall be guilty of a business offense with a fine up to $5,000.
    (d) Each day any person engages in business as a manufacturer, foreign importer, importing distributor, distributor or retailer in violation of the provisions of this Act shall constitute a separate offense.
    (e) Any person, under the age of 21 years who, for the purpose of buying, accepting or receiving alcoholic liquor from a licensee, represents that he is 21 years of age or over shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
    (f) In addition to the penalties herein provided, any person licensed as a wine-maker in either class who manufactures more wine than authorized by his license shall be guilty of a business offense and shall be fined $1 for each gallon so manufactured.
    (g) A person shall be exempt from prosecution for a violation of this Act if he is a peace officer in the enforcement of the criminal laws and such activity is approved in writing by one of the following:
        (1) In all counties, the respective State's Attorney;
        (2) The Director of State Police under Section
    	
2605-10, 2605-15, 2605-75, 2605-100, 2605-105, 2605-110, 2605-115, 2605-120, 2605-130, 2605-140, 2605-190, 2605-200, 2605-205, 2605-210, 2605-215, 2605-250, 2605-275, 2605-300, 2605-305, 2605-315, 2605-325, 2605-335, 2605-340, 2605-350, 2605-355, 2605-360, 2605-365, 2605-375, 2605-390, 2605-400, 2605-405, 2605-420, 2605-430, 2605-435, 2605-500, 2605-525, or 2605-550 of the Department of State Police Law (20 ILCS 2605/2605-10, 2605/2605-15, 2605/2605-75, 2605/2605-100, 2605/2605-105, 2605/2605-110, 2605/2605-115, 2605/2605-120, 2605/2605-130, 2605/2605-140, 2605/2605-190, 2605/2605-200, 2605/2605-205, 2605/2605-210, 2605/2605-215, 2605/2605-250, 2605/2605-275, 2605/2605-300, 2605/2605-305, 2605/2605-315, 2605/2605-325, 2605/2605-335, 2605/2605-340, 2605/2605-350, 2605/2605-355, 2605/2605-360, 2605/2605-365, 2605/2605-375, 2605/2605-390, 2605/2605-400, 2605/2605-405, 2605/2605-420, 2605/2605-430, 2605/2605-435, 2605/2605-500, 2605/2605-525, or 2605/2605-550); or
        (3) In cities over 1,000,000, the Superintendent of
    	
Police.
(Source: P.A. 101-37, eff. 7-3-19.)

    (235 ILCS 5/10-2) (from Ch. 43, par. 184)
    Sec. 10-2. If the owner of the licensed premises or any person from whom the licensee derives the right to possession of such premises, or the agent of such owner or person, shall knowingly permit the licensee to use said licensed premises in violation of the terms of this Act, said owner, agent or other person shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Act to the same extent as said licensee and be subject to the same punishment.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/10-3) (from Ch. 43, par. 185)
    Sec. 10-3. Every Act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this Act, by any officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of any licensee, shall be deemed and held to be the act of such employer or licensee, and said employer or licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if said act or omission had been done or omitted by him personally.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/10-4) (from Ch. 43, par. 186)
    Sec. 10-4. Whenever any licensee shall be convicted of any violation of this Act, the licenses of said licensee may, in the discretion of the State commission or of the local commissioner, (whichever has jurisdiction) be revoked and forfeited and all fees paid thereon shall be forfeited, and the bond given by said licensee to secure such licensee's faithful compliance with the terms of this Act shall be forfeited, and it shall thereafter be unlawful and shall constitute a further violation of this Act for said licensee to continue to operate under said license.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/10-5) (from Ch. 43, par. 187)
    Sec. 10-5. Whenever any officer, director, manager or other employe in a position of authority of any licensee under this Act shall be convicted of any violation of this Act while engaged in the course of his employment or while upon the premises described by said license, said license shall be revoked and the fees paid thereon forfeited both as to the holder of said license and as to said premises, and said bond given by said licensee to secure the faithful compliance with the terms of this Act shall be forfeited in like manner as if said licensee had himself been convicted.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/10-6) (from Ch. 43, par. 188)
    Sec. 10-6. Any person who shall knowingly possess, sell, ship, transport or in any wise dispose of any alcoholic liquor under any other than the proper name or brand known to the trade as designating the kind and quality of the contents of the package or other containers of said alcoholic liquor, or who shall cause any such Act to be done, shall forfeit to the State said alcoholic liquor and said packages and containers and shall be subject to the punishment and penalties provided for violation of this Act.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/10-7) (from Ch. 43, par. 189)
    Sec. 10-7. Every lot, parcel or tract of land, and every building, structure, tent, railroad car, boat, wagon, vehicle, establishment or place whatsoever, together with all furniture, fixtures, ornaments and machinery located thereon, wherein there shall be conducted any unlawful manufacture, distribution or sale of any alcoholic liquor, or whereon or wherein there shall be kept, stored, concealed or allowed any alcoholic liquor intended for illegal sale or to be sold, disposed of or in any other manner used in violation of any of the provisions of this Act is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated as provided by the laws of this State for the abatement of public nuisances.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/10-7.1) (from Ch. 43, par. 189.1)
    Sec. 10-7.1. The State Commission, upon receipt of a complaint or upon having knowledge that any person is engaged in the business as a manufacturer, importing distributor, distributor, or retailer without a license or valid license, shall conduct an investigation. If, after conducting an investigation, the State Commission is satisfied that the alleged conduct occurred or is occurring, it may issue a cease and desist notice as provided in this Act, issue civil penalties as provided in this Act, notify the Department of Revenue and the local liquor authority, or file a complaint with the State's Attorney's Office of the County where the incident occurred or with the Attorney General.
(Source: P.A. 101-37, eff. 7-3-19.)

    (235 ILCS 5/10-8) (from Ch. 43, par. 190)
    Sec. 10-8. Whenever complaint is made in writing, verified by affidavit, to any judge of the circuit court, that complainant has just and reasonable grounds to believe and does believe that alcoholic liquor is manufactured, possessed, kept for sale, used or transported, in violation of this Act, or any mash, still or other property designed for the manufacture of alcoholic liquor is possessed in any premises which are not licensed hereunder, (particularly describing and designating such property in the complaint), the judge may issue a search warrant as hereinafter provided; provided, however, no search warrant shall be necessary for the inspection or search of any premises licensed under this Act, and provided, further, that no search warrant shall be issued for the search of premises in use for residence purposes. The property seized on any such warrant shall not be taken from the officer seizing the same on any order of replevin or other like process.
    Each complaint shall be substantially in the following form:
State of Illinois,)
                  ) ss.
County of Cook.   )
Complaint for Search Warrant.
    The complaint and affidavit of .... (name of complainant), of .... (his residence), made before .... (name of officer) one of the .... (official title of officer), in and for the .... (county, city or village, as the case may be), on (insert date), being first duly sworn, upon his oath says: That he has just and reasonable grounds to believe, and does believe that alcoholic liquor is now unlawfully (manufactured, possessed, used, disposed of or kept for sale, or any mash, still or other property designed for the illegal manufacture of alcoholic liquor is possessed therein, as the case may be), to-wit: At and within a certain .... (here describe the house, building, premises, boat, vehicle, receptacle or other place to be searched, with particulars as to the location sufficiently to identify it, stating the name of the person occupying the same, if known), in the .... (city, village or town of) ...., in the county and state set out above; that the following are the reasons for his or her belief, to-wit .... (here insert the facts upon which such belief is based). Wherefore complainant prays that a search warrant may issue according to law.
...........................
(Signature of complainant.)
    Subscribed and Sworn to before me on (insert date).
............................
(Name of officer.)
............................
(Official title of officer.)
(Source: P.A. 91-357, eff. 7-29-99.)

    (235 ILCS 5/10-9) (from Ch. 43, par. 191)
    Sec. 10-9. If the judge before whom any such complaint is made is satisfied that there is reasonable cause for such belief, he shall issue a warrant directed to any peace officer having jurisdiction, commanding him forthwith to enter the house, building, premises, boat, vehicle, receptacle or other place therein described and designated with particularity, and make diligent and careful search for alcoholic liquor manufactured, possessed or kept for sale, contrary to this Act, and if any such alcoholic liquor be there found, to seize the same, together with the vessels containing the same, and all property, implements, furniture and vehicles kept or used for the purpose of violating, or with which to violate any of the provisions of this Act, and bringing the same and any and all persons (if any there be) in whose possession they are found, before the judge who issued the warrant, or some other judge having a cognizance of the case.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/10-10) (from Ch. 43, par. 192)
    Sec. 10-10. Upon the issuance of any such search warrant, it shall be the duty of the officers executing the same to forthwith enter the house, building, premises, boat, vehicle, receptacle or other place therein described, either in the day time or night time, by force, if necessary, and to remove therefrom and confiscate any alcoholic liquor manufactured, possessed or kept for sale, contrary to the terms of this Act, and any machinery, equipment or material used in connection therewith, and to hold such property until all prosecution arising out of said search and seizure shall have ended and determined, and it shall be the duty of the officers executing such search warrant to arrest any person or persons found using or in possession or control of such alcoholic liquor, articles or things. All alcoholic liquor unlawfully manufactured, stored, kept, sold or otherwise disposed of, and the containers thereof, and all equipment used or fit for use in the manufacture or production of the same which are found at or about any still or outfit for the unlawful manufacture of alcoholic liquor on unlicensed premises are hereby declared contraband, and no right of property shall be or exist in any person owning, furnishing or possessing any such property, liquor, material or equipment, but all such property, articles and things, including alcoholic liquor, shall be sold upon an order of the court, in the manner hereinbefore provided, and the proceeds thereof shall be disposed of in the manner herein provided for the disposition of license fees paid to the State Commission; provided that nothing shall be construed to prevent any officer whose duty it is to make arrests from arresting, with or without a warrant, any person or persons found violating any of the provisions of this Act; provided further, that any officer executing a search warrant shall forthwith make his return thereof to the court or officer issuing said search warrant of the manner and date of his execution thereof, showing what, if anything, was seized and held by said search, together with the name of the owner or owners, if known, and shall attach to said return an accurate list or inventory of the articles and things so seized.
    It shall be the duty of the officer who has seized and is holding any of the property mentioned in this section, to make application to the court on final determination of any prosecution arising under said search and seizure, and in which such prosecution shall have been commenced or prosecuted for an order to sell such property, and the court, if satisfied that the property so seized and held was, at the time of its seizure, being kept or used, or was fit for use in the unlawful manufacture or production of alcoholic liquor, then the court shall make an order that said property and effects be sold by such officer and shall fix the time, place, manner and notice of such sale, and the proceeds of such sale shall be paid over to the State Commission; provided, however, that nothing contained in this Act shall be considered to authorize the sale of any alcoholic liquor unlawfully manufactured fit for human consumption which comes into the possession of any officer by seizure, confiscation or forfeiture under the provisions of this Act without the payment of all taxes required by the laws of this State and of the United States; provided, further that all such unlawfully manufactured alcoholic liquor which is unfit for human consumption shall be destroyed.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)


 
    (235 ILCS 5/Art. XI heading)
ARTICLE XI. PARTIAL INVALIDITY AND REPEAL

    (235 ILCS 5/11-1) (from Ch. 43, par. 193)
    Sec. 11-1. The articles, provisions and sections of this Act shall be deemed to be separable and the invalidity of any portion of this Act shall not affect the validity of the remainder.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (235 ILCS 5/11-2) (from Ch. 43, par. 194)
    Sec. 11-2. The Act in relation to the manufacture, possession and sale of malt and vinous beverages, approved April 26, 1933, as amended is hereby repealed. All other laws in conflict with this Act, or any of the provisions hereof, in so far as such laws and parts thereof are in conflict herewith, are hereby repealed.
    The repeal of the Act in this section named shall not affect the obligation to pay any taxes imposed by said Act on account of malt and vinous beverages manufactured or sold prior to the effective date of such repeal, but all the provisions of this Act relating to the imposition and collection of such taxes and penalties for failure to report and pay such taxes shall remain in effect in so far as they relate to such taxes so imposed and collectible under said "Malt and Vinous Beverage Act.".
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)


 
    (235 ILCS 5/Art. XII heading)
ARTICLE XII. GRAPE AND WINE RESOURCES COUNCIL
(Repealed)
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 100-621, eff. 7-20-18.)