PUBLIC HEALTH
(410 ILCS 710/) Overdose Prevention and Harm Reduction Act.
    (410 ILCS 710/1)
    Sec. 1. Short title. This Act may be cited as the Overdose Prevention and Harm Reduction Act.
(Source: P.A. 101-356, eff. 8-9-19.)

    (410 ILCS 710/5)
    Sec. 5. Needle and hypodermic syringe access program.
    (a) Any governmental or nongovernmental organization, including a local health department, community-based organization, or a person or entity, that promotes scientifically proven ways of mitigating health risks associated with drug use and other high-risk behaviors may establish and operate a needle and hypodermic syringe access program. The objective of the program shall be accomplishing all of the following:
        (1) reducing the spread of HIV, AIDS, viral
    	
hepatitis, and other bloodborne diseases;
        (2) reducing the potential for needle stick injuries
    	
from discarded contaminated equipment; and
        (3) facilitating connections or linkages to
    	
evidence-based treatment.
    (b) Programs established under this Act shall provide all of the following:
        (1) Disposal of used needles and hypodermic syringes.
        (2) Needles, hypodermic syringes, and other safer
    	
drug consumption supplies, at no cost and in quantities sufficient to ensure that needles, hypodermic syringes, or other supplies are not shared or reused.
        (3) Educational materials or training on:
            (A) overdose prevention and intervention; and
            (B) the prevention of HIV, AIDS, viral hepatitis,
        	
and other common bloodborne diseases resulting from shared drug consumption equipment and supplies.
        (4) Access to opioid antagonists approved for the
    	
reversal of an opioid overdose, or referrals to programs that provide access to opioid antagonists approved for the reversal of an opioid overdose.
        (5) Linkages to needed services, including mental
    	
health treatment, housing programs, substance use disorder treatment, and other relevant community services.
        (6) Individual consultations from a trained employee
    	
tailored to individual needs.
        (7) If feasible, a hygienic, separate space for
    	
individuals who need to administer a prescribed injectable medication that can also be used as a quiet space to gather composure in the event of an adverse on-site incident, such as a nonfatal overdose.
        (8) If feasible, access to on-site drug adulterant
    	
testing supplies such as reagents, test strips, or quantification instruments that provide critical real-time information on the composition of substances obtained for consumption.
    (c) Notwithstanding any provision of the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, the Drug Paraphernalia Control Act, or any other law, no employee or volunteer of or participant in a program established under this Act shall be charged with or prosecuted for possession of any of the following:
        (1) Needles, hypodermic syringes, or other drug
    	
consumption paraphernalia obtained from or returned, directly or indirectly, to a program established under this Act.
        (2) Residual amounts of a controlled substance
    	
contained in used needles, used hypodermic syringes, or other used drug consumption paraphernalia obtained from or returned, directly or indirectly, to a program established under this Act.
        (3) Drug adulterant testing supplies such as
    	
reagents, test strips, or quantification instruments obtained from or returned, directly or indirectly, to a program established under this Act.
        (4) Any residual amounts of controlled substances
    	
used in the course of testing the controlled substance to determine the chemical composition and potential threat of the substances obtained for consumption that are obtained from or returned, directly or indirectly, to a program established under this Act.
    In addition to any other applicable immunity or limitation on civil liability, a law enforcement officer who, acting on good faith, arrests or charges a person who is thereafter determined to be entitled to immunity from prosecution under this subsection (c) shall not be subject to civil liability for the arrest or filing of charges.
    (d) Prior to the commencing of operations of a program established under this Act, the governmental or nongovernmental organization shall submit to the Illinois Department of Public Health all of the following information:
        (1) the name of the organization, agency, group,
    	
person, or entity operating the program;
        (2) the areas and populations to be served by the
    	
program; and
        (3) the methods by which the program will meet the
    	
requirements of subsection (b) of this Section.
    The Department of Public Health may adopt rules to implement this subsection.
(Source: P.A. 101-356, eff. 8-9-19.)

    (410 ILCS 710/100)
    Sec. 100. (Amendatory provisions; text omitted).
(Source: P.A. 101-356, eff. 8-9-19; text omitted.)

    (410 ILCS 710/200)
    Sec. 200. (Amendatory provisions; text omitted).
(Source: P.A. 101-356, eff. 8-9-19; text omitted.)

    (410 ILCS 710/999)
    Sec. 999. Effective date. This Act takes effect upon becoming law.
(Source: P.A. 101-356, eff. 8-9-19.)