SCHOOLS
(105 ILCS 5/) School Code.

 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 1 heading)
ARTICLE 1. SHORT TITLE - CONSTRUCTION - DEFINITIONS

    (105 ILCS 5/1-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 1-1)
    Sec. 1-1. Short title. This Act may be cited as the School Code.
(Source: P.A. 86-1475.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 1-2)
    Sec. 1-2. Construction. The provisions of this Act, so far as they are the same as those of any prior statute, shall be construed as a continuation of such prior provisions, and not as a new enactment.
    If in any other statute reference is made to an Act of the General Assembly, or a section of such an Act, which is continued in this School Code, such reference shall be held to refer to the Act or section thereof so continued in this Code.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1-3) (from Ch. 122, par. 1-3)
    Sec. 1-3. Definitions.
    The terms "common schools", "free schools" and "public schools" are used interchangeably to apply to any school operated by authority of this Act.
    "School board" means the governing body of any district created or operating under authority of this Act, including board of school directors and board of education. When the context so indicates it also means the governing body of any non-high school district and of any special charter district, including board of school inspectors.
    "Special charter district" means any city, township or district organized into a school district, under a special Act or charter of the General Assembly or in which schools are now managed and operating within such unit in whole or in part under the terms of such special Act or charter.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1-3.5)
    Sec. 1-3.5. Use of term "registered mail". Whenever the term "registered mail" is used in this Code, it shall be deemed to authorize the use of either registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested.
(Source: P.A. 95-790, eff. 8-8-08.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1-4) (from Ch. 122, par. 1-4)
    Sec. 1-4. It is the policy of this State that all powers granted, either expressly or by necessary implication, by this Act, other Illinois statute, or the Illinois Constitution to any public school district may be exercised by those public school districts notwithstanding effects on competition. It is the intention of the General Assembly that the "State action exemption" to the application of federal antitrust statutes be fully available to all public school districts to the extent their activities are authorized by law as stated herein.
(Source: P.A. 83-929.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 1A heading)
ARTICLE 1A. STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION

    (105 ILCS 5/1A-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 1A-1)
    Sec. 1A-1. Members and terms.
    (a) (Blank).
    (b) The State Board of Education shall consist of 8 members and a chairperson, who shall be appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate from a pattern of regional representation as follows: 2 appointees shall be selected from among those counties of the State other than Cook County and the 5 counties contiguous to Cook County, one of whom must represent the educator community; 2 appointees shall be selected from Cook County, one of whom shall be a resident of the City of Chicago and one of whom shall be a resident of that part of Cook County which lies outside the city limits of Chicago and of whom one must represent the educator community; 2 appointees shall be selected from among the 5 counties of the State that are contiguous to Cook County, one of whom must represent the educator community; and 3 members shall be selected as members-at-large (one of which shall be the chairperson). With respect to the educator community appointments, no more than one member may be employed as a district superintendent, principal, school business official, or teacher and no more than one may be employed by the same school district or school. The changes made to this Section by this amendatory Act of the 100th General Assembly apply to appointments made after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 100th General Assembly. The Governor who takes office on the second Monday of January after his or her election shall be the person who nominates members to fill vacancies whose terms begin after that date and before the term of the next Governor begins.
    The term of each member of the State Board of Education whose term expires on January 12, 2005 shall instead terminate on the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 93rd General Assembly. Of these 3 seats, (i) the member initially appointed pursuant to this amendatory Act of the 93rd General Assembly whose seat was vacant on April 27, 2004 shall serve until the second Wednesday of January, 2009 and (ii) the other 2 members initially appointed pursuant to this amendatory Act of the 93rd General Assembly shall serve until the second Wednesday of January, 2007.
    The term of the member of the State Board of Education whose seat was vacant on April 27, 2004 and whose term expires on January 10, 2007 shall instead terminate on the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 93rd General Assembly. The member initially appointed pursuant to this amendatory Act of the 93rd General Assembly to fill this seat shall be the chairperson and shall serve until the second Wednesday of January, 2007.
    The term of the member of the State Board of Education whose seat was vacant on May 28, 2004 but after April 27, 2004 and whose term expires on January 10, 2007 shall instead terminate on the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 93rd General Assembly. The member initially appointed pursuant to this amendatory Act of the 93rd General Assembly to fill this seat shall serve until the second Wednesday of January, 2007.
    The term of the other member of the State Board of Education whose term expires on January 10, 2007 shall instead terminate on the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 93rd General Assembly. The member initially appointed pursuant to this amendatory Act of the 93rd General Assembly to fill this seat shall serve until the second Wednesday of January, 2007.
    The term of the member of the State Board of Education whose term expires on January 14, 2009 and who was selected from among the 5 counties of the State that are contiguous to Cook County and is a resident of Lake County shall instead terminate on the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 93rd General Assembly. The member initially appointed pursuant to this amendatory Act of the 93rd General Assembly to fill this seat shall serve until the second Wednesday of January, 2009.
    Upon expiration of the terms of the members initially appointed under this amendatory Act of the 93rd General Assembly and members whose terms were not terminated by this amendatory Act of the 93rd General Assembly, their respective successors shall be appointed for terms of 4 years, from the second Wednesday in January of each odd numbered year and until their respective successors are appointed and qualified.
    (c) Of the 4 members, excluding the chairperson, whose terms expire on the second Wednesday of January, 2007 and every 4 years thereafter, one of those members must be an at-large member and at no time may more than 2 of those members be from one political party. Of the 4 members whose terms expire on the second Wednesday of January, 2009 and every 4 years thereafter, one of those members must be an at-large member and at no time may more than 2 of those members be from one political party. Party membership is defined as having voted in the primary of the party in the last primary before appointment.
    (d) Vacancies in terms shall be filled by appointment by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate for the extent of the unexpired term. If a vacancy in membership occurs at a time when the Senate is not in session, the Governor shall make a temporary appointment until the next meeting of the Senate, when the Governor shall appoint a person to fill that membership for the remainder of its term. If the Senate is not in session when appointments for a full term are made, the appointments shall be made as in the case of vacancies.
(Source: P.A. 100-1135, eff. 11-28-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1A-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 1A-2)
    Sec. 1A-2. Qualifications. The members of the State Board of Education shall be citizens of the United States and residents of the State of Illinois and shall be selected as far as may be practicable on the basis of their knowledge of, or interest and experience in, problems of public education. No member of the State Board of Education shall benefit from funds provided by the State Board of Education to an institution of higher learning, public or private, within Illinois, nor shall members be school trustees of a public or nonpublic college, university or technical institution within Illinois. No member shall be appointed to more than 2 4-year terms. Members shall be reimbursed for all ordinary and necessary expenses incurred in performing their duties as members of the Board. Expenses shall be approved by the Board and be consistent with the laws, policies, and requirements of the State of Illinois regarding such expenditures, plus any member may include in his or her claim for expenses $50 per day for meeting days.
(Source: P.A. 100-1135, eff. 11-28-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1A-2.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 1A-2.1)
    Sec. 1A-2.1. Vacancies. The Governor may remove for incompetence, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office any member of the State Board of Education. A vacancy also exists on the State Board of Education when one or more of the following events occur:
        1. A member dies.
        2. A member files a written resignation with the
    	
Governor.
        3. A member is adjudicated to be a person under
    	
legal disability under the Probate Act of 1975 or a person subject to involuntary admission under the Mental Health and Developmental Disabilities Code.
        4. A member ceases to be a resident of the region
    	
from which he or she was appointed.
        5. A member is convicted of an infamous crime or of
    	
any offense involving a violation of his or her duties under this Code.
        6. A member fails to maintain the qualifications
    	
stated in Sections 1A-1 and 1A-2 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 100-1135, eff. 11-28-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1A-4) (from Ch. 122, par. 1A-4)
    Sec. 1A-4. Powers and duties of the Board.
    A. (Blank).
    B. The Board shall determine the qualifications of and appoint a chief education officer, to be known as the State Superintendent of Education, who may be proposed by the Governor and who shall serve at the pleasure of the Board and pursuant to a performance-based contract linked to statewide student performance and academic improvement within Illinois schools. Upon expiration or buyout of the contract of the State Superintendent of Education in office on the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 93rd General Assembly, a State Superintendent of Education shall be appointed by a State Board of Education that includes the 7 new Board members who were appointed to fill seats of members whose terms were terminated on the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 93rd General Assembly. Thereafter, a State Superintendent of Education must, at a minimum, be appointed at the beginning of each term of a Governor after that Governor has made appointments to the Board. A performance-based contract issued for the employment of a State Superintendent of Education entered into on or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 93rd General Assembly must expire no later than February 1, 2007, and subsequent contracts must expire no later than February 1 each 4 years thereafter. No contract shall be extended or renewed beyond February 1, 2007 and February 1 each 4 years thereafter, but a State Superintendent of Education shall serve until his or her successor is appointed. Each contract entered into on or before January 8, 2007 with a State Superintendent of Education must provide that the State Board of Education may terminate the contract for cause, and the State Board of Education shall not thereafter be liable for further payments under the contract. With regard to this amendatory Act of the 93rd General Assembly, it is the intent of the General Assembly that, beginning with the Governor who takes office on the second Monday of January, 2007, a State Superintendent of Education be appointed at the beginning of each term of a Governor after that Governor has made appointments to the Board. The State Superintendent of Education shall not serve as a member of the State Board of Education. The Board shall set the compensation of the State Superintendent of Education who shall serve as the Board's chief executive officer. The Board shall also establish the duties, powers and responsibilities of the State Superintendent, which shall be included in the State Superintendent's performance-based contract along with the goals and indicators of student performance and academic improvement used to measure the performance and effectiveness of the State Superintendent. The State Board of Education may delegate to the State Superintendent of Education the authority to act on the Board's behalf, provided such delegation is made pursuant to adopted board policy or the powers delegated are ministerial in nature. The State Board may not delegate authority under this Section to the State Superintendent to (1) nonrecognize school districts, (2) withhold State payments as a penalty, or (3) make final decisions under the contested case provisions of the Illinois Administrative Procedure Act unless otherwise provided by law.
    C. The powers and duties of the State Board of Education shall encompass all duties delegated to the Office of Superintendent of Public Instruction on January 12, 1975, except as the law providing for such powers and duties is thereafter amended, and such other powers and duties as the General Assembly shall designate. The Board shall be responsible for the educational policies and guidelines for public schools, pre-school through grade 12 and Vocational Education in the State of Illinois. The Board shall analyze the present and future aims, needs, and requirements of education in the State of Illinois and recommend to the General Assembly the powers which should be exercised by the Board. The Board shall recommend the passage and the legislation necessary to determine the appropriate relationship between the Board and local boards of education and the various State agencies and shall recommend desirable modifications in the laws which affect schools.
    D. Two members of the Board shall be appointed by the chairperson to serve on a standing joint Education Committee, 2 others shall be appointed from the Board of Higher Education, 2 others shall be appointed by the chairperson of the Illinois Community College Board, and 2 others shall be appointed by the chairperson of the Human Resource Investment Council. The Committee shall be responsible for making recommendations concerning the submission of any workforce development plan or workforce training program required by federal law or under any block grant authority. The Committee will be responsible for developing policy on matters of mutual concern to elementary, secondary and higher education such as Occupational and Career Education, Teacher Preparation and Certification, Educational Finance, Articulation between Elementary, Secondary and Higher Education and Research and Planning. The joint Education Committee shall meet at least quarterly and submit an annual report of its findings, conclusions, and recommendations to the State Board of Education, the Board of Higher Education, the Illinois Community College Board, the Human Resource Investment Council, the Governor, and the General Assembly. All meetings of this Committee shall be official meetings for reimbursement under this Act. On the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 95th General Assembly, the Joint Education Committee is abolished.
    E. Five members of the Board shall constitute a quorum. A majority vote of the members appointed, confirmed and serving on the Board is required to approve any action, except that the 7 new Board members who were appointed to fill seats of members whose terms were terminated on the effective date of this amendatory act of the 93rd General Assembly may vote to approve actions when appointed and serving.
    Using the most recently available data, the Board shall prepare and submit to the General Assembly and the Governor on or before January 14, 1976 and annually thereafter a report or reports of its findings and recommendations. Such annual report shall contain a separate section which provides a critique and analysis of the status of education in Illinois and which identifies its specific problems and recommends express solutions therefor. Such annual report also shall contain the following information for the preceding year ending on June 30: each act or omission of a school district of which the State Board of Education has knowledge as a consequence of scheduled, approved visits and which constituted a failure by the district to comply with applicable State or federal laws or regulations relating to public education, the name of such district, the date or dates on which the State Board of Education notified the school district of such act or omission, and what action, if any, the school district took with respect thereto after being notified thereof by the State Board of Education. The report shall also include the statewide high school dropout rate by grade level, sex and race and the annual student dropout rate of and the number of students who graduate from, transfer from or otherwise leave bilingual programs. The Auditor General shall annually perform a compliance audit of the State Board of Education's performance of the reporting duty imposed by this amendatory Act of 1986. A regular system of communication with other directly related State agencies shall be implemented.
    The requirement for reporting to the General Assembly shall be satisfied by filing copies of the report with the Speaker, the Minority Leader and the Clerk of the House of Representatives and the President, the Minority Leader and the Secretary of the Senate and the Legislative Council, as required by Section 3.1 of the General Assembly Organization Act, and filing such additional copies with the State Government Report Distribution Center for the General Assembly as is required under paragraph (t) of Section 7 of the State Library Act.
    F. Upon appointment of the 7 new Board members who were appointed to fill seats of members whose terms were terminated on the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 93rd General Assembly, the Board shall review all of its current rules in an effort to streamline procedures, improve efficiency, and eliminate unnecessary forms and paperwork.
(Source: P.A. 95-626, eff. 6-1-08; 95-793, eff. 1-1-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1A-6)
    Sec. 1A-6. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 79-1454. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1A-8) (from Ch. 122, par. 1A-8)
    Sec. 1A-8. Powers of the Board in Assisting Districts Deemed in Financial Difficulties. To promote the financial integrity of school districts, the State Board of Education shall be provided the necessary powers to promote sound financial management and continue operation of the public schools.
    (a) The State Superintendent of Education may require a school district, including any district subject to Article 34A of this Code, to share financial information relevant to a proper investigation of the district's financial condition and the delivery of appropriate State financial, technical, and consulting services to the district if the district (i) has been designated, through the State Board of Education's School District Financial Profile System, as on financial warning or financial watch status, (ii) has failed to file an annual financial report, annual budget, deficit reduction plan, or other financial information as required by law, (iii) has been identified, through the district's annual audit or other financial and management information, as in serious financial difficulty in the current or next school year, or (iv) is determined to be likely to fail to fully meet any regularly scheduled, payroll-period obligations when due or any debt service payments when due or both. In addition to financial, technical, and consulting services provided by the State Board of Education, at the request of a school district, the State Superintendent may provide for an independent financial consultant to assist the district review its financial condition and options.
    (b) The State Board of Education, after proper investigation of a district's financial condition, may certify that a district, including any district subject to Article 34A, is in financial difficulty when any of the following conditions occur:
        (1) The district has issued school or teacher orders
    	
for wages as permitted in Sections 8-16, 32-7.2 and 34-76 of this Code.
        (2) The district has issued tax anticipation warrants
    	
or tax anticipation notes in anticipation of a second year's taxes when warrants or notes in anticipation of current year taxes are still outstanding, as authorized by Sections 17-16, 34-23, 34-59 and 34-63 of this Code, or has issued short-term debt against 2 future revenue sources, such as, but not limited to, tax anticipation warrants and general State aid or evidence-based funding certificates or tax anticipation warrants and revenue anticipation notes.
        (3) The district has for 2 consecutive years shown an
    	
excess of expenditures and other financing uses over revenues and other financing sources and beginning fund balances on its annual financial report for the aggregate totals of the Educational, Operations and Maintenance, Transportation, and Working Cash Funds.
        (4) The district refuses to provide financial
    	
information or cooperate with the State Superintendent in an investigation of the district's financial condition.
        (5) The district is likely to fail to fully meet any
    	
regularly scheduled, payroll-period obligations when due or any debt service payments when due or both.
    No school district shall be certified by the State Board of Education to be in financial difficulty solely by reason of any of the above circumstances arising as a result of (i) the failure of the county to make any distribution of property tax money due the district at the time such distribution is due or (ii) the failure of this State to make timely payments of general State aid, evidence-based funding, or any of the mandated categoricals; or if the district clearly demonstrates to the satisfaction of the State Board of Education at the time of its determination that such condition no longer exists. If the State Board of Education certifies that a district in a city with 500,000 inhabitants or more is in financial difficulty, the State Board shall so notify the Governor and the Mayor of the city in which the district is located. The State Board of Education may require school districts certified in financial difficulty, except those districts subject to Article 34A, to develop, adopt and submit a financial plan within 45 days after certification of financial difficulty. The financial plan shall be developed according to guidelines presented to the district by the State Board of Education within 14 days of certification. Such guidelines shall address the specific nature of each district's financial difficulties. Any proposed budget of the district shall be consistent with the financial plan submitted to and approved by the State Board of Education.
    A district certified to be in financial difficulty, other than a district subject to Article 34A, shall report to the State Board of Education at such times and in such manner as the State Board may direct, concerning the district's compliance with each financial plan. The State Board may review the district's operations, obtain budgetary data and financial statements, require the district to produce reports, and have access to any other information in the possession of the district that it deems relevant. The State Board may issue recommendations or directives within its powers to the district to assist in compliance with the financial plan. The district shall produce such budgetary data, financial statements, reports and other information and comply with such directives. If the State Board of Education determines that a district has failed to comply with its financial plan, the State Board of Education may rescind approval of the plan and appoint a Financial Oversight Panel for the district as provided in Section 1B-4. This action shall be taken only after the district has been given notice and an opportunity to appear before the State Board of Education to discuss its failure to comply with its financial plan.
    No bonds, notes, teachers orders, tax anticipation warrants or other evidences of indebtedness shall be issued or sold by a school district or be legally binding upon or enforceable against a local board of education of a district certified to be in financial difficulty unless and until the financial plan required under this Section has been approved by the State Board of Education.
    Any financial profile compiled and distributed by the State Board of Education in Fiscal Year 2009 or any fiscal year thereafter shall incorporate such adjustments as may be needed in the profile scores to reflect the financial effects of the inability or refusal of the State of Illinois to make timely disbursements of any general State aid, evidence-based funding, or mandated categorical aid payments due school districts or to fully reimburse school districts for mandated categorical programs pursuant to reimbursement formulas provided in this School Code.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1A-9)
    Sec. 1A-9. Duty of the Board to disseminate information concerning the Children's Privacy Protection and Parental Empowerment Act. The Board shall (i) prepare and disseminate to the local educational agencies and the regional offices of education materials advising parents of their rights under the Children's Privacy Protection and Parental Empowerment Act and (ii) add notice to its website advising parents of their rights under the Children's Privacy Protection and Parental Empowerment Act.
(Source: P.A. 93-462, eff. 1-1-04.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1A-10)
    Sec. 1A-10. Divisions of Board. The State Board of Education shall have, without limitation, the following divisions within the Board:
        (1) Educator Effectiveness.
        (2) Improvement and Innovation.
        (3) Fiscal Support Services.
        (4) (Blank).
        (5) Internal Auditor.
        (6) Human Resources.
        (7) Legal.
        (8) Specialized Instruction, Nutrition, and Wellness.
        (9) Language and Early Childhood Development.
The State Board of Education may, after consultation with the General Assembly, add any divisions or functions to the Board that it deems appropriate and consistent with Illinois law.
(Source: P.A. 99-30, eff. 7-10-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1A-11)
    Sec. 1A-11. Children; methamphetamine; protocol. The State Board of Education shall cooperate with the Department of Children and Family Services and the Department of State Police in developing the protocol required under Section 6.5 of the Children and Family Services Act. The Board must post the protocol on the official Web site maintained by the Board.
(Source: P.A. 94-554, eff. 1-1-06.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 1B heading)
ARTICLE 1B. SCHOOL DISTRICT FINANCIAL
OVERSIGHT PANEL AND EMERGENCY
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE

    (105 ILCS 5/1B-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 1B-1)
    Sec. 1B-1. Short title. This Article may be cited as the School District Financial Oversight Panel and Emergency Financial Assistance Law.
(Source: P.A. 88-618, eff. 9-9-94.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1B-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 1B-2)
    Sec. 1B-2. Findings and purpose.
    (a) The General Assembly finds:
        (1) A fundamental goal of the people of the State, as
    	
expressed in Section 1 of Article X of the Illinois Constitution, is the educational development of all persons to the limits of their capacities. When a board of education faces financial difficulties, continued operation of the public school system is threatened.
        (2) A sound financial structure is essential to the
    	
continued operation of any school system. It is vital to commercial, educational and cultural interests that the public schools remain in operation. To achieve that goal, public school systems must have effective access to the private market to borrow short and long term funds.
        (3) To promote the financial integrity of boards of
    	
education of school districts with a population of less than 500,000, it is necessary to provide for emergency State financial assistance and the creation of financial oversight panels with the powers necessary to promote sound financial management to assure the continued availability of educational opportunities.
    (b) It is the purpose of this Article to provide financial oversight panels and emergency State financial assistance to school districts and establish a secure financial basis for their continued existence. The intention of the General Assembly, in enacting this legislation, is to establish procedures, provide powers and impose restrictions to assure the financial and educational integrity of the public schools while leaving principal responsibility for the educational policies of the public schools to the boards of education within the State, consistent with the requirements for satisfying the public policy and purpose herein set forth.
(Source: P.A. 88-618, eff. 9-9-94.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1B-3) (from Ch. 122, par. 1B-3)
    Sec. 1B-3. Definitions. As used in this Article:
    (a) "Financial Oversight Panel" or "Panel" means the Financial Oversight Panel created under Section 1B-4;
    (b) "Board" means a local board of education;
    (c) "Budget" means the annual budget of the board required under Section 17-1 and is subject to the authority of the Panel as provided in this Article;
    (d) "Chairman" means the chairman of the Panel appointed pursuant to Section 1B-5 of this Article;
    (e) "District" means any school district of this State not subject to the provisions of Article 34;
    (f) "Financial plan" means the financial plan of the board required to be developed pursuant to this Article;
    (g) "Fiscal year" means the fiscal year of the board;
    (h) "School year" means the school year of the board;
    (i) "State Board" means the Illinois State Board of Education;
    (j) "State Superintendent" means the State Superintendent of Education.
(Source: P.A. 88-618, eff. 9-9-94.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1B-4) (from Ch. 122, par. 1B-4)
    Sec. 1B-4. Establishment of Emergency Financial Assistance and Financial Oversight Panel. When approved by the State Board under this Article there is established a body both corporate and politic to be known as the "(Name of School District) Financial Oversight Panel" which, in such name, shall exercise all authority vested in such Panels by this Article.
    Upon the affirmative vote of not less than a majority of its full membership, a local board of education of a school district that has been certified to be in financial difficulty under Section 1A-8 may petition the State Board of Education for emergency financial assistance and the establishment of a Financial Oversight Panel for the district as provided under this Article. In addition, the State Superintendent of Education may petition the State Board of Education for the establishment of a Financial Oversight Panel, with or without emergency financial assistance, for any district that has failed to comply with its financial plan and has had the plan rescinded by the State Board as provided in Section 1A-8. No petition for emergency financial assistance shall be approved by the State Board unless there is also established a Financial Oversight Panel.
    In determining whether to allow the petition the State Board shall consider the following factors among others that it deems relevant:
    (a) whether the petition is in the best educational interests of the pupils of the district;
    (b) whether the petition is in the near and long term best financial interests of the district;
    (c) whether the district has sufficient pupil enrollment and assessed valuation to provide and maintain recognized schools;
    (d) whether the petition is in the best interests of the other schools of the area and the educational welfare of all of the pupils therein; and
    (e) whether the board of education has complied with the requirements of Section 1A-8.
    The State Board may vote to either grant or deny the petition based upon the recommendation of the State Superintendent of Education and any other testimony or documentary evidence the State Board deems relevant. The decision of the State Board whether to grant or deny the petition shall be final. If an approved petition requests emergency financial assistance, the school district shall be eligible for emergency State financial assistance, subject to the other provisions of this Article.
(Source: P.A. 88-618, eff. 9-9-94.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1B-5) (from Ch. 122, par. 1B-5)
    Sec. 1B-5. When a petition for emergency financial assistance for a school district is allowed by the State Board under Section 1B-4, the State Superintendent shall within 10 days thereafter appoint 3 members to serve at the State Superintendent's pleasure on a Financial Oversight Panel for the district. The State Superintendent shall designate one of the members of the Panel to serve as its Chairman. In the event of vacancy or resignation the State Superintendent shall appoint a successor within 10 days of receiving notice thereof.
    Members of the Panel shall be selected primarily on the basis of their experience and education in financial management, with consideration given to persons knowledgeable in education finance. A member of the Panel may not be a board member or employee of the district for which the Panel is constituted, nor may a member have a direct financial interest in that district.
    Panel members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for travel and other necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties by the State Board. The amount reimbursed Panel members for their expenses shall be charged to the school district as part of any emergency financial assistance and incorporated as a part of the terms and conditions for repayment of such assistance or shall be deducted from the district's general State aid or evidence-based funding as provided in Section 1B-8.
    The first meeting of the Panel shall be held at the call of the Chairman. The Panel may elect such other officers as it deems appropriate. The Panel shall prescribe the times and places for its meetings and the manner in which regular and special meetings may be called, and shall comply with the Open Meetings Act.
    Two members of the Panel shall constitute a quorum, and the affirmative vote of 2 members shall be necessary for any decision or action to be taken by the Panel.
    The Panel and the State Superintendent shall cooperate with each other in the exercise of their respective powers. The Panel shall report not later than September 1 annually to the State Board and the State Superintendent with respect to its activities and the condition of the school district for the previous fiscal year.
    Any Financial Oversight Panel established under this Article shall remain in existence for not less than 3 years nor more than 10 years from the date the State Board grants the petition under Section 1B-4. If after 3 years the school district has repaid all of its obligations resulting from emergency State financial assistance provided under this Article and has improved its financial situation, the board of education may, not more frequently than once in any 12 month period, petition the State Board to dissolve the Financial Oversight Panel, terminate the oversight responsibility, and remove the district's certification under Section 1A-8 as a district in financial difficulty. In acting on such a petition the State Board shall give additional weight to the recommendations of the State Superintendent and the Financial Oversight Panel.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1B-6) (from Ch. 122, par. 1B-6)
    Sec. 1B-6. General powers. The purpose of the Financial Oversight Panel shall be to exercise financial control over the board of education, and, when approved by the State Board and the State Superintendent of Education, to furnish financial assistance so that the board can provide public education within the board's jurisdiction while permitting the board to meet its obligations to its creditors and the holders of its notes and bonds. Except as expressly limited by this Article, the Panel shall have all powers necessary to meet its responsibilities and to carry out its purposes and the purposes of this Article, including, but not limited to, the following powers:
        (a) to sue and be sued;
        (b) to provide for its organization and internal
    	
management;
        (c) to appoint a Financial Administrator to serve as
    	
the chief executive officer of the Panel. The Financial Administrator may be an individual, partnership, corporation, including an accounting firm, or other entity determined by the Panel to be qualified to serve; and to appoint other officers, agents, and employees of the Panel, define their duties and qualifications and fix their compensation and employee benefits;
        (d) to approve the local board of education
    	
appointments to the positions of treasurer in a Class I county school unit and in each school district which forms a part of a Class II county school unit but which no longer is subject to the jurisdiction and authority of a township treasurer or trustees of schools of a township because the district has withdrawn from the jurisdiction and authority of the township treasurer and the trustees of schools of the township or because those offices have been abolished as provided in subsection (b) or (c) of Section 5-1, and chief school business official, if such official is not the superintendent of the district. Either the board or the Panel may remove such treasurer or chief school business official;
        (e) to approve any and all bonds, notes, teachers
    	
orders, tax anticipation warrants, and other evidences of indebtedness prior to issuance or sale by the school district; and notwithstanding any other provision of The School Code, as now or hereafter amended, no bonds, notes, teachers orders, tax anticipation warrants or other evidences of indebtedness shall be issued or sold by the school district or be legally binding upon or enforceable against the local board of education unless and until the approval of the Panel has been received;
        (f) to approve all property tax levies of the school
    	
district and require adjustments thereto as the Panel deems necessary or advisable;
        (g) to require and approve a school district
    	
financial plan;
        (h) to approve and require revisions of the school
    	
district budget;
        (i) to approve all contracts and other obligations as
    	
the Panel deems necessary and appropriate;
        (j) to authorize emergency State financial
    	
assistance, including requirements regarding the terms and conditions of repayment of such assistance, and to require the board of education to levy a separate local property tax, subject to the limitations of Section 1B-8, sufficient to repay such assistance consistent with the terms and conditions of repayment and the district's approved financial plan and budget;
        (k) to request the regional superintendent to make
    	
appointments to fill all vacancies on the local school board as provided in Section 10-10;
        (l) to recommend dissolution or reorganization of the
    	
school district to the General Assembly if in the Panel's judgment the circumstances so require;
        (m) to direct a phased reduction in the oversight
    	
responsibilities of the Financial Administrator and of the Panel as the circumstances permit;
        (n) to determine the amount of emergency State
    	
financial assistance to be made available to the school district, and to establish an operating budget for the Panel to be supported by funds available from such assistance, with the assistance and the budget required to be approved by the State Superintendent;
        (o) to procure insurance against any loss in such
    	
amounts and from such insurers as it deems necessary;
        (p) to engage the services of consultants for
    	
rendering professional and technical assistance and advice on matters within the Panel's power;
        (q) to contract for and to accept any gifts, grants
    	
or loans of funds or property or financial or other aid in any form from the federal government, State government, unit of local government, school district or any agency or instrumentality thereof, or from any other private or public source, and to comply with the terms and conditions thereof;
        (r) to pay the expenses of its operations based on
    	
the Panel's budget as approved by the State Superintendent from emergency financial assistance funds available to the district or from deductions from the district's general State aid or evidence-based funding;
        (s) to do any and all things necessary or convenient
    	
to carry out its purposes and exercise the powers given to the Panel by this Article; and
        (t) to recommend the creation of a school finance
    	
authority pursuant to Article 1F of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1B-7) (from Ch. 122, par. 1B-7)
    Sec. 1B-7. Financial Administrator; powers and duties. The Financial Administrator appointed by the Financial Oversight Panel shall serve as the Panel's chief executive officer. The Financial Administrator shall exercise the powers and duties required by the Panel, including but not limited to the following:
        (a) to provide guidance and recommendations to the
    	
local board and officials of the school district in developing the district's financial plan and budget prior to board action;
        (b) to direct the local board to reorganize its
    	
financial accounts, budgetary systems, and internal accounting and financial controls, in whatever manner the Panel deems appropriate to achieve greater financial responsibility and to reduce financial inefficiency, and to provide technical assistance to aid the district in accomplishing the reorganization;
        (c) to make recommendations to the Financial
    	
Oversight Panel concerning the school district's financial plan and budget, and all other matters within the scope of the Panel's authority;
        (d) to prepare and recommend to the Panel a proposal
    	
for emergency State financial assistance for the district, including recommended terms and conditions of repayment, and an operations budget for the Panel to be funded from the emergency assistance or from deductions from the district's general State aid or evidence-based funding;
        (e) to require the local board to prepare and submit
    	
preliminary staffing and budgetary analyses annually prior to February 1 in such manner and form as the Financial Administrator shall prescribe; and
        (f) subject to the direction of the Panel, to do all
    	
other things necessary or convenient to carry out its purposes and exercise the powers given to the Panel under this Article.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1B-7.5)
    Sec. 1B-7.5. Hiring of a district superintendent or chief executive officer.
    (a) Upon expiration of the contract of the school district's superintendent who is serving at the time the Financial Oversight Panel is established, a school district under the authority of a Financial Oversight Panel, after consultation with the Financial Oversight Panel, shall have the authority to appoint a district superintendent with a type 75 certificate or a chief executive officer who has the skills of school operations and school finance and who shall have the ultimate responsibility for implementing the policies, procedures, directives, and decisions of the school board and the Financial Oversight Panel.
    (b) The chief executive officer shall have the authority to determine the agenda and order of business at school board meetings, as needed in order to carry forward and implement the objectives and priorities of the school board and Financial Oversight Panel in the administration and management of the school district.
    (c) The chief executive officer shall have all of the powers and duties of a school district superintendent under this Code and such other duties as may be assigned by the school board and Financial Oversight Panel, in accordance with this Code. The district shall not thereafter employ a superintendent during the period that a chief executive officer is serving the district.
    (d) The Financial Oversight Panel shall have the final approval of the superintendent or chief executive officer position under this Section as well as the person, based upon his or her skills to fulfill the position.
(Source: P.A. 96-401, eff. 8-13-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1B-7.10)
    Sec. 1B-7.10. Hiring of a chief fiscal officer.
    (a) In lieu of a Financial Oversight Panel Financial Administrator under Section 1B-7 of this Code, a school district under the authority of a Financial Oversight Panel, after consultation with the Financial Oversight Panel, may appoint a chief fiscal officer who, under the direction of the school board and Financial Oversight Panel, shall have the powers and duties of the district's chief school business official and any other duties regarding budgeting, accounting, and other financial matters that are assigned by the school board or Financial Oversight Panel in accordance with this Code. The district may not employ a chief school business official during the period that the chief fiscal officer is serving in the district. The chief fiscal officer may but is not required to hold a certificate with a chief school business official endorsement issued under Article 21 of this Code.
    (b) The Financial Oversight Panel shall have the final approval of the chief fiscal officer position under this Section as well as the person, based upon his or her skills to fulfill the position.
(Source: P.A. 96-401, eff. 8-13-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1B-8) (from Ch. 122, par. 1B-8)
    Sec. 1B-8. There is created in the State Treasury a special fund to be known as the School District Emergency Financial Assistance Fund (the "Fund"). The School District Emergency Financial Assistance Fund shall consist of appropriations, loan repayments, grants from the federal government, and donations from any public or private source. Moneys in the Fund may be appropriated only to the Illinois Finance Authority and the State Board for those purposes authorized under this Article and Articles 1F and 1H of this Code. The appropriation may be allocated and expended by the State Board for contractual services to provide technical assistance or consultation to school districts to assess their financial condition and to Financial Oversight Panels that petition for emergency financial assistance grants. The Illinois Finance Authority may provide loans to school districts which are the subject of an approved petition for emergency financial assistance under Section 1B-4, 1F-62, or 1H-65 of this Code. Neither the State Board of Education nor the Illinois Finance Authority may collect any fees for providing these services.
    From the amount allocated to each such school district under this Article the State Board shall identify a sum sufficient to cover all approved costs of the Financial Oversight Panel established for the respective school district. If the State Board and State Superintendent of Education have not approved emergency financial assistance in conjunction with the appointment of a Financial Oversight Panel, the Panel's approved costs shall be paid from deductions from the district's general State aid or evidence-based funding.
    The Financial Oversight Panel may prepare and file with the State Superintendent a proposal for emergency financial assistance for the school district and for its operations budget. No expenditures from the Fund shall be authorized by the State Superintendent until he or she has approved the request of the Panel, either as submitted or in such lesser amount determined by the State Superintendent.
    The maximum amount of an emergency financial assistance loan which may be allocated to any school district under this Article, including moneys necessary for the operations of the Panel, shall not exceed $4,000 times the number of pupils enrolled in the school district during the school year ending June 30 prior to the date of approval by the State Board of the petition for emergency financial assistance, as certified to the local board and the Panel by the State Superintendent. An emergency financial assistance grant shall not exceed $1,000 times the number of such pupils. A district may receive both a loan and a grant.
    The payment of an emergency State financial assistance grant or loan shall be subject to appropriation by the General Assembly. Payment of the emergency State financial assistance loan is subject to the applicable provisions of the Illinois Finance Authority Act. Emergency State financial assistance allocated and paid to a school district under this Article may be applied to any fund or funds from which the local board of education of that district is authorized to make expenditures by law.
    Any emergency financial assistance grant proposed by the Financial Oversight Panel and approved by the State Superintendent may be paid in its entirety during the initial year of the Panel's existence or spread in equal or declining amounts over a period of years not to exceed the period of the Panel's existence. An emergency financial assistance loan proposed by the Financial Oversight Panel and approved by the Illinois Finance Authority may be paid in its entirety during the initial year of the Panel's existence or spread in equal or declining amounts over a period of years not to exceed the period of the Panel's existence. All loans made by the Illinois Finance Authority for a school district shall be required to be repaid, with simple interest over the term of the loan at a rate equal to 50% of the one-year Constant Maturity Treasury (CMT) yield as last published by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System before the date on which the district's loan is approved by the Illinois Finance Authority, not later than the date the Financial Oversight Panel ceases to exist. The Panel shall establish and the Illinois Finance Authority shall approve the terms and conditions, including the schedule, of repayments. The schedule shall provide for repayments commencing July 1 of each year or upon each fiscal year's receipt of moneys from a tax levy for emergency financial assistance. Repayment shall be incorporated into the annual budget of the school district and may be made from any fund or funds of the district in which there are moneys available. An emergency financial assistance loan to the Panel or district shall not be considered part of the calculation of a district's debt for purposes of the limitation specified in Section 19-1 of this Code. Default on repayment is subject to the Illinois Grant Funds Recovery Act. When moneys are repaid as provided herein they shall not be made available to the local board for further use as emergency financial assistance under this Article at any time thereafter. All repayments required to be made by a school district shall be received by the State Board and deposited in the School District Emergency Financial Assistance Fund.
    In establishing the terms and conditions for the repayment obligation of the school district the Panel shall annually determine whether a separate local property tax levy is required. The board of any school district with a tax rate for educational purposes for the prior year of less than 120% of the maximum rate for educational purposes authorized by Section 17-2 shall provide for a separate tax levy for emergency financial assistance repayment purposes. Such tax levy shall not be subject to referendum approval. The amount of the levy shall be equal to the amount necessary to meet the annual repayment obligations of the district as established by the Panel, or 20% of the amount levied for educational purposes for the prior year, whichever is less. However, no district shall be required to levy the tax if the district's operating tax rate as determined under Section 18-8, 18-8.05, or 18-8.15 exceeds 200% of the district's tax rate for educational purposes for the prior year.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1B-9) (from Ch. 122, par. 1B-9)
    Sec. 1B-9. Assistance by State agencies, units of local government or school districts. The local board shall render such services to, and permit the use of its facilities and resources by, the Financial Oversight Panel at no charge as may be requested by the Panel. Any State agency, unit of local government, or school district may, within its respective lawful powers and duties, render such services to the Panel as may be requested by the Panel. Upon request of the Panel any such agency, unit of local government or school district is hereby authorized and empowered to loan to the Panel such officers and employees as the Panel may deem necessary and request in carrying out its powers and duties. Officers and employees so transferred shall not lose or forfeit their employment status or rights.
(Source: P.A. 86-954.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1B-10) (from Ch. 122, par. 1B-10)
    Sec. 1B-10. Approval of Financial Plan, Budget and Contracts. In carrying out the purposes of this Article, the Panel shall have the power to approve or to reject the financial plans, budgets and contracts of the board; provided, however, that the Panel shall have no power to impair any existing contract or obligation of the board.
(Source: P.A. 86-954.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1B-11) (from Ch. 122, par. 1B-11)
    Sec. 1B-11. Balanced Budget. The local board's budget for each fiscal year shall be balanced in accordance with an accounting system and procedure to be prescribed by the Panel.
(Source: P.A. 86-954.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1B-12) (from Ch. 122, par. 1B-12)
    Sec. 1B-12. Financial Plans. The local board shall develop, adopt and submit to the Panel for approval an initial financial plan with respect to the remaining portion of the current fiscal year and for the 2 succeeding fiscal years. The board shall develop and adopt subsequent financial plans as directed by the Panel. The financial plans shall supersede any financial plan developed pursuant to Section 1A-8 of this Act. The Panel shall require that each financial plan cover a period of at least 3 fiscal years. After adoption by the board, the board shall submit each plan to the Panel for its approval not later than the date required by the Panel. The Panel shall approve or reject the financial plan within 30 days of its receipt. No financial plan shall have force or effect without approval of the Panel. Each financial plan shall be developed, submitted, approved and monitored in accordance with the following procedures:
    (a) The board shall determine and submit to the Panel, at a time and in a manner prescribed by the Panel, estimates of revenues available to the board during the period for which the financial plan is to be in effect. The Panel shall approve, reject or amend the revenue estimates. In the event the board fails, for any reason, to submit to the Panel estimates of revenue as required by this paragraph, the Panel may prepare such estimates. The financial plan submitted by the board shall be based upon revenue estimates approved or prepared by the Panel. As soon as practicable following the establishment of the Panel, the president of the board shall, at the request of the Chairman of the Panel, make available to the Panel copies of the audited financial statements and of the books and records of account of the board for the preceding 5 fiscal years of the board.
    (b) Each financial plan for each fiscal year or part thereof to which it relates, shall contain (1) a description of revenues and expenditures, provision for debt service, cash resources and uses, capital improvements, and a building utilization component requiring maximum efficient use of all classrooms and buildings, in such manner and detail as the Panel shall prescribe, (2) a description of the means by which the budget will be brought into balance, and (3) such other matters that the Panel, in its discretion, requires. For Panels established under Section 1B-4 for a district that had its financial plan rescinded by the State Board for violating that plan as provided in Section 1A-8, the financial plan required under this Section shall also include the staffing plan required pursuant to subsection (e) of Section 1B-22, provisions for addressing findings or violations identified by the Inspector General or the school district audit, provisions for implementing directives of the Panel, and the plan of action to be followed by the district to maintain long-term financial stability, provide for transition of the Panel's authority, and analyze the need for additional State funding for the district. The initial financial plan shall also include a description of the means by which any outstanding short-term indebtedness shall be paid or refunded by the board. The Panel may prescribe any reasonable time, standards, procedures or forms for preparation and submission of the financial plan.
    (c) The Panel shall approve the initial and each subsequent financial plan if, in its judgment, the plan is complete, is reasonably capable of being achieved, and meets the requirements set forth in this Article. Otherwise, the Panel shall reject the financial plan. In the event of rejection, the Panel may prescribe a procedure and standards for revision of the financial plan by the board.
    (d) The board shall report to the Panel, at such times and in such manner as the Panel may direct, concerning the board's compliance with each financial plan. The Panel may review the board's operations, obtain budgetary data and financial statements, require the board to produce reports, and have access to any other information in the possession of the board that it deems relevant. The Panel may issue recommendations or directives within its powers to the board to assure compliance with the financial plan. The board shall produce such budgetary data, financial statements, reports and other information and comply with such directives.
    (e) After approval of each financial plan, the board shall regularly reexamine the revenue and expenditure estimates on which it was based and revise them as necessary. The board shall promptly notify the Panel of any material change in the revenue or expenditure estimates in the financial plan. The board may submit to the Panel, or the Panel may require the board to submit, modified financial plans based upon revised revenue or expenditure estimates or for any other good reason. The Panel shall approve or reject each modified financial plan.
(Source: P.A. 89-572, eff. 7-30-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1B-13) (from Ch. 122, par. 1B-13)
    Sec. 1B-13. Budgets. The board shall develop, adopt and submit to the Panel for approval by the Panel the annual budget for each fiscal year required by Section 17-1. After adoption by the board, the board shall submit each budget to the Panel for its approval not later than 30 days prior to the commencement of the fiscal year to which the budget relates. The Panel shall approve or reject the budget within 30 days of its receipt from the board. No budget shall have force or effect without approval of the Panel. Each budget shall be developed, submitted, approved and monitored in accordance with the following procedures:
    (a) Each budget submitted by the board shall be based upon revenue estimates approved or prepared by the Panel.
    (b) Each budget shall be consistent with the budgetary structure required by the Panel and contain such information and detail as may be prescribed by the Panel. The Panel may also prescribe any reasonable time, standards, procedures or forms for preparation and submission of the budget. Any deficit for the prior fiscal year and for any fiscal year thereafter shall be included as a current expense item for the succeeding fiscal year.
    (c) The Panel shall approve each budget if, in its judgment, the budget is complete, is reasonably capable of being achieved, will meet the requirements set forth in this Article, and will be consistent with the financial plan in effect. Otherwise, the Panel shall reject the budget. In the event of rejection, the Panel may prescribe a procedure and standards for revision of the budget by the board. In the event the local board fails to adopt a budget approved by the Panel prior to the end of the first quarter of the fiscal year as required by Section 17-1, the offices of all local board members shall be deemed vacant by operation of law.
    (d) The board shall report to the Panel and the Financial Administrator at such times and in such manner as the Panel may direct, concerning the board's compliance with each budget. The Panel may review the board's operations, obtain budgetary data and financial statements, require the board to produce reports, and have access to any other information in the possession of the board that the Panel deems relevant. The Panel may issue recommendations or directives within its powers to the board to assure compliance with the budget. The board shall produce such budgetary data, financial statements, reports and other information and comply with such directives.
    (e) After approval of each budget, the board shall promptly notify the Panel of any material change in the revenue or expenditure estimates in the budget. The board may submit to the Panel, or the Panel may require the board to submit, an amended budget. The Panel shall approve or reject each amended budget pursuant to this Section.
(Source: P.A. 86-954.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1B-14) (from Ch. 122, par. 1B-14)
    Sec. 1B-14. Contracts and Other Obligations. (a) No contract or other obligation shall be entered into by the board unless it is consistent with the financial plan and budget in effect, including any employment contract or collective bargaining agreement.
    (b) The Panel may identify categories and types of contracts and other obligations that shall be subject to approval by the Panel and the procedure for submitting contracts for approval. Each contract or other obligation that is entered into by the board which requires approval by the Panel shall contain a provision stating that it shall not become legally binding on the board unless and until it has received such approval. No contract or other obligation that requires the approval of the Panel shall be legally binding on the board unless and until it has received such approval.
    (c) The board shall submit to the Panel a copy of any contract or other obligation for which the approval of the Panel is required, along with a cost analysis and such other information as the Panel may require. The Panel may prescribe any reasonable time, standards, procedures or forms for submission of the contract or other obligation.
    (d) The Panel shall approve the contract or obligation if, in its judgment, the information required to be submitted is complete and the contract or other obligation is consistent with the budget and financial plan in effect. Otherwise, the Panel shall reject the contract or other obligation. Contracts or other obligations not rejected within 30 days after submission to the Panel shall be considered approved. However, the Panel shall have an additional 30 days to approve or reject the contract or other obligation if it so advises the board within the initial 30 day period.
(Source: P.A. 86-954.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1B-15) (from Ch. 122, par. 1B-15)
    Sec. 1B-15. Expenditures. The board shall meet its debt service obligations as they become due. No other expenditure shall be made by the board unless it is consistent with the financial plan and budget in effect.
(Source: P.A. 86-954.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1B-16) (from Ch. 122, par. 1B-16)
    Sec. 1B-16. Cash accounts and bank accounts. (a) The Panel shall require the board or any officer of the board, including the board's treasurer or any person acting as the board's official or ex officio treasurer, to establish and maintain separate cash accounts and separate bank accounts in accordance with such standards and procedures as the Panel may prescribe.
    (b) The Panel shall have the power to assume exclusive administration of the cash accounts and bank accounts of the board, to establish and maintain whatever new cash accounts and bank accounts it may deem appropriate, and to withdraw funds from such accounts for the lawful expenditures of the board.
(Source: P.A. 86-954.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1B-17) (from Ch. 122, par. 1B-17)
    Sec. 1B-17. Hearings. To the extent feasible, the Financial Oversight Panel shall provide for and encourage participation by the public in the development and review of financial policy. The Panel shall hold public hearings as it may deem appropriate to the performance of any of its functions. The Panel may designate one or more of its members or the Financial Administrator to preside over any hearing.
(Source: P.A. 86-954.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1B-18) (from Ch. 122, par. 1B-18)
    Sec. 1B-18. Limitations of actions after abolition; indemnification. (a) Termination of the Financial Oversight Panel shall bar any remedy available against the Panel, its members, employees, or agents, for any right or claim existing, or any liability incurred, prior to such abolition unless the action or other proceeding thereon is commenced prior to the expiration of 2 years after the date of such termination.
    (b) The Panel may indemnify any member, officer, employee, or agent who was or is a party, or is threatened to be made a party, to any threatened, pending or completed action, suit or proceeding, whether civil, criminal, administrative or investigative, by reason of the fact that he was a member, officer, employee or agent of the Panel, against expenses (including attorneys' fees), judgments, fines and amounts paid in settlement actually and reasonably incurred by him in connection with such action, suit or proceeding, if he acted in good faith and in a manner he reasonably believed to be in, or not opposed to, the best interests of the Panel and, with respect to any criminal action or proceeding, had no reasonable cause to believe his conduct was unlawful. The termination of any action, suit or proceeding by judgment, order, settlement, conviction, or upon a plea of nolo contendere or its equivalent, shall not, of itself, create a presumption that the person did not act in good faith in a manner which he reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the best interests of the Panel, and, with respect to any criminal action or proceeding, had reasonable cause to believe that his conduct was unlawful.
    To the extent that a member, officer, employee or agent of the Panel has been successful, on the merits or otherwise, in the defense of any such action, suit or proceeding referred to in this subsection or in defense of any claim, issue or matter therein, he shall be indemnified against expenses (including attorneys' fees) actually and reasonably incurred by him in connection therewith. Any such indemnification shall be made by the Panel only as authorized in the specific case, upon a determination that indemnification of the member, officer, employee or agent is proper in the circumstances because he has met the applicable standard of conduct. The determination shall be made by the Panel by a majority vote of a quorum consisting of members who are not parties to such action, suit or proceeding, or if such a quorum is not obtainable, or, even if obtainable, a quorum of disinterested members so directs, by independent legal counsel in a written opinion.
    Reasonable expenses incurred in defending an action, suit or proceeding shall be paid by the Panel in advance of the final disposition of such action, suit or proceeding, as authorized by the Panel in the specific case, upon receipt of an undertaking by or on behalf of the member, officer, employee or agent to repay such amount, unless it shall ultimately be determined that he is entitled to be indemnified by the Panel as authorized in this Section.
    Any member, officer, employee or agent against whom any action, suit or proceeding is brought may employ his or her own attorney to appear on his or her behalf.
    The right to indemnification accorded by this Section shall not limit any other right to indemnification to which the member, officer, employee or agent may be entitled. Any rights hereunder shall inure to the benefit of the heirs, executors and administrators of any member, officer, employee or agent of the Panel.
    The Panel may purchase and maintain insurance on behalf of any person who is or was a member, officer, employee or agent of the Panel against any liability asserted against him and incurred by him in any such capacity, or arising out of his status as such, whether or not the Panel would have the power to indemnify him against such liability under the provisions of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 86-954.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1B-19) (from Ch. 122, par. 1B-19)
    Sec. 1B-19. Abolition of Panel. The Financial Oversight Panel shall be abolished 10 years after approval of the petition providing for its creation, or at such earlier date determined by the State Board. Upon the abolition of the Panel, all of its rights and property shall pass to and be vested in the State.
(Source: P.A. 86-954.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1B-20) (from Ch. 122, par. 1B-20)
    Sec. 1B-20. Sanctions. (a) No member, officer, employee, or agent of the board shall commit the board to any contract or other obligation or incur any liability on behalf of the board for any purpose if the amount of such contract, obligation or liability is in excess of the amount authorized for that purpose then available under the financial plan and budget then in effect.
    (b) No member, officer, employee or agent of the board shall commit the board to any contract or other obligation on behalf of the board for the payment of money for any purpose required to be approved by the Financial Oversight Panel unless such contract or other obligation has been approved by the Panel.
    (c) No member, officer, employee or agent of the board shall take any action in violation of any valid order of the Panel or shall fail or refuse to take any action required by any such order or shall prepare, present, or certify any information (including any projections or estimates) or report for the Panel or any of its agents that is false or misleading, or, upon learning that any such information is false or misleading, shall fail promptly to advise the Panel or its agents.
    (d) In addition to any penalty or liability under any other law, any member, officer, employee or agent of the board who violates subsection (a), (b), or (c) of this Section shall be subject to appropriate administrative discipline, including, if warranted, suspension from duty without pay, removal from office, or termination of employment.
(Source: P.A. 86-954.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1B-21)
    Sec. 1B-21. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1B-22)
    Sec. 1B-22. Additional Powers of the Panel. For Panels established under Section 1B-4 for a district which had its financial plan rescinded by the State Board for violating that plan as provided in Section 1A-8, the Panel shall have the following additional powers:
    (a) As necessary to carry out its purposes when district resources are not readily available or appropriate for use by the Panel, the Panel may make and execute contracts, leases, subleases and all other instruments or agreements necessary or convenient for the exercise of the powers and functions granted by this Article.
    (b) As necessary to carry out its purposes when district resources are not readily available or appropriate for use by the Panel, the Panel may purchase personal property necessary or convenient for its purposes; mortgage, pledge or otherwise grant security interests in such properties; and convey to the district such of its property as, in the judgment of the Panel, is no longer necessary for its purposes.
    (c) As necessary to carry out its purposes when district resources are not readily available or appropriate for use by the Panel, the Panel may appoint officers, agents, and employees of the Panel, define their duties and qualifications, and fix their compensation and employee benefits.
    (d) In order to investigate allegations of or incidents of waste, fraud, or financial mismanagement which the Board is unable or unwilling to properly investigate as requested by the Panel, the Panel may appoint an Inspector General who shall have the authority to conduct investigations into such allegations or incidents. The Inspector General shall make recommendations to the Panel about its investigations. The Inspector General shall be independent of the operations of the Panel and the Board and perform other duties requested by the Panel. The Inspector General shall have access to all information and personnel necessary to perform the duties of the office. If the Inspector General determines that a possible criminal act has been committed or that special expertise is required in the investigation, he shall immediately notify the State's Attorney in the county in which the district is located. All investigations conducted by the Inspector General shall be conducted in a manner that ensures the preservation of evidence for use in criminal prosecutions. At all times the Inspector General shall be granted access to any building or facility that is owned, operated, or leased by the Panel or the Board. The Inspector General shall have the power to subpoena witnesses and compel the production of books and papers pertinent to an investigation authorized by this Code. Any person who (1) fails to appear in response to a subpoena; (2) fails to answer any question; (3) fails to produce any books or papers pertinent to an investigation under this Code; or (4) knowingly gives false testimony during an investigation under this Code is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor. The Inspector General shall provide to the Panel and the State Board of Education a summary of reports and investigations made under this Section for the previous fiscal year no later than January 1 of each year. The summaries shall detail the final disposition of those recommendations. The summaries shall not contain any confidential or identifying information concerning the subjects of the reports and investigations. The summaries shall also include detailed recommended administrative actions and matters for consideration by the State Board of Education or the General Assembly.
    (e) No hiring or appointment of any person in any position by the Board, the superintendent, or any other officer or employee of the Board shall be made or entered into unless it is consistent with the Financial Plan and Budget in effect and the staffing plan approved by the Panel under this Section. The hiring or appointment of any person shall not be binding on the Board unless and until it is in compliance with this Section. The Board shall submit to the Panel for approval by the Panel a staffing plan for the upcoming school year at the same time as the submission of the Budget, except that the staffing plan for the fiscal year ending in 1997 shall be submitted to the Panel within 90 days after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1996. The staffing plan shall be accompanied by a cost analysis and such other information as the Panel may require. The Panel may prescribe standards, procedures, and forms for submission of the staffing plan. The Panel shall approve the staffing plan if the information required to be submitted is complete and the staffing plan is consistent with the Budget and Financial Plan in effect. Otherwise, the Panel shall reject the staffing plan. In the event of rejection, the Panel shall prescribe a procedure and standards for revision of the staffing plan. The Panel shall act on the staffing plan at the same time as the approval of the Budget, except that the staffing plan for the fiscal year ending in 1997 shall be acted upon within 60 days of the submission of the staffing plan by the Board. The Board shall report to the Panel, at such times and in such manner as the Panel may direct, concerning the Board's compliance with each staffing plan. The Panel may review the Board's operations, obtaining budgetary data and financial statements, may require the Board to produce reports, and shall have access to any other information in the possession of the Board that it deems relevant. The Panel may issue directives to the Board to assure compliance with the staffing plan, including the issuance of reduction in force notices, non-renewal of employment contracts, or any other notices or actions required by contract or law. The Board shall produce such budgetary data, financial statements, reports, and other information and shall comply with such directives. After approval of each staffing plan, the Board shall regularly reexamine the estimates on which it was based and revise them as necessary. The Board shall promptly notify the Panel of any material change in the estimates in the staffing plan. The Board may submit to the Panel, or the Panel may require the Board to submit, modifications to the staffing plan based upon revised revenue or expenditure estimates or for any other good reason. The Panel shall approve or reject each modified staffing plan within 60 days of its submission in a manner similar to the provisions of this subsection for the approval or rejection of the initial staffing plan.
    (f) The Panel shall examine the business records and audit the accounts of the Board or require that the Board examine its business records and audit its accounts at such time and in such manner as the Panel may prescribe. The Board shall appoint a certified public accountant annually, approved by the Panel, to audit its financial statements. The audit conducted pursuant to this paragraph shall be in lieu of the audit that the Board is required to undertake pursuant to Section 3-7.
    (g) The Panel shall initiate and direct financial management assessments and similar analyses of the operations of the Board as may, in the judgment of the Panel, assure sound and efficient financial management of the Board. Upon the completion of these assessments, the Panel shall give directives to the Board regarding improvements and changes that derive from these assessments, which the Board shall implement. In conjunction with its budgetary submission to the Panel for each fiscal year, the Board shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Panel that the directives of the Panel have been implemented in whole or in part or, in the alternative, are not capable of being implemented. In consideration of whether to approve or reject the budget for a fiscal year, the Panel shall adjudge whether the Board has fully considered and responsibly proposed implementation of the Panel's directives.
    (h) The Panel shall initiate and direct a management audit of the Board at least once every 2 years. The audit shall review the personnel, organization, contracts, leases, and physical properties of the Board to determine whether the Board is managing and utilizing its resources in an economical and efficient manner. The audit shall determine the causes of any inefficiencies or uneconomical practices, including inadequacies in internal and administrative procedures, organizational structure, uses of resources, utilization of real property, allocation of personnel, purchasing policies, and equipment.
    (i) In the event that the Board refuses or fails to follow a directive of the Panel to issue notices of non-renewal of contracts, to issue notices of reduction in force to employees, to issue requests for bids or proposals, or to obtain financial or other information that the Panel finds necessary for the implementation of its responsibilities under this Article, the Panel may take such action in the name of the district, and such action shall be binding the same as if the action had been taken by the Board. The powers established by this paragraph do not authorize the Panel to enter into contracts in the name of the Board.
    (j) The Panel shall meet with the Board or its designees in closed session prior to the Board commencing any collective bargaining negotiations to discuss the financial issues relevant to the bargaining and for the purpose of the Panel approving the budget limitations for the potential collective bargaining agreement. The Board shall not make or consider any proposal which does not comply with the collective bargaining budget approved by the Panel. The Board shall keep the Panel apprised as to the status of the bargaining. The Board shall present any proposed change in the approved collective bargaining budget to the Panel in closed session for approval. Prior to the Board taking a final vote on any tentative agreement approved by the employee organization, the Board shall discuss the tentative agreement with the Panel in closed session. Upon final approval of a collective bargaining agreement by both the Board and the employee organization, the Board shall submit the final collective bargaining agreement to the Panel for approval. At the same time that the Board submits the final agreement to the Panel, the Board shall notify the employee organization that the final agreement has been submitted and the date of the Panel meeting at which the final agreement will be considered. The employee organization shall be provided an opportunity to discuss the final agreement with the Panel prior to the Panel taking action on the agreement. No collective bargaining agreement shall be binding upon the district unless the Board has followed the requirements of this paragraph and the final agreement has been approved by the Panel.
    (k) The budget of the Panel or any revisions to the budget, including any costs to the Panel associated with the appointment of an Inspector General, shall be approved by the State Superintendent upon request of the Panel and after opportunity for response by the Board.
(Source: P.A. 89-572, eff. 7-30-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1B-25)
    Sec. 1B-25. Establishment prohibited. No school district may have a Financial Oversight Panel established pursuant to this Article after Article 1H of this Code is established.
(Source: P.A. 97-429, eff. 8-16-11.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 1C heading)
ARTICLE 1C. BLOCK GRANTS

    (105 ILCS 5/1C-1)
    Sec. 1C-1. Purpose. The purpose of this Article is to permit greater flexibility and efficiency in the distribution and use of certain State funds available to local education agencies for the improvement of the quality of educational services pursuant to locally established priorities.
    Through fiscal year 2017, this Article does not apply to school districts having a population in excess of 500,000 inhabitants.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1C-2)
    Sec. 1C-2. Block grants.
    (a) For fiscal year 1999, and each fiscal year thereafter, the State Board of Education shall award to school districts block grants as described in subsection (c). The State Board of Education may adopt rules and regulations necessary to implement this Section. In accordance with Section 2-3.32, all state block grants are subject to an audit. Therefore, block grant receipts and block grant expenditures shall be recorded to the appropriate fund code.
    (b) (Blank).
    (c) An Early Childhood Education Block Grant shall be created by combining the following programs: Preschool Education, Parental Training and Prevention Initiative. These funds shall be distributed to school districts and other entities on a competitive basis, except that the State Board of Education shall award to a school district having a population exceeding 500,000 inhabitants 37% of the funds in each fiscal year. Not less than 14% of the Early Childhood Education Block Grant allocation of funds shall be used to fund programs for children ages 0-3. Beginning in Fiscal Year 2016, at least 25% of any additional Early Childhood Education Block Grant funding over and above the previous fiscal year's allocation shall be used to fund programs for children ages 0-3. Once the percentage of Early Childhood Education Block Grant funding allocated to programs for children ages 0-3 reaches 20% of the overall Early Childhood Education Block Grant allocation for a full fiscal year, thereafter in subsequent fiscal years the percentage of Early Childhood Education Block Grant funding allocated to programs for children ages 0-3 each fiscal year shall remain at least 20% of the overall Early Childhood Education Block Grant allocation. However, if, in a given fiscal year, the amount appropriated for the Early Childhood Education Block Grant is insufficient to increase the percentage of the grant to fund programs for children ages 0-3 without reducing the amount of the grant for existing providers of preschool education programs, then the percentage of the grant to fund programs for children ages 0-3 may be held steady instead of increased.
(Source: P.A. 99-589, eff. 7-21-16; 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1C-3)
    Sec. 1C-3. Application. Block grants shall be available, pursuant to appropriation, upon applications made pursuant to school improvement plans. Block grants shall be made utilizing a per pupil basis to determine entitlement.
(Source: P.A. 88-555, eff. 7-27-94; 89-397, eff. 8-20-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1C-4)
    Sec. 1C-4. Reports. A school district that receives an Early Childhood Education Block Grant shall report to the State Board of Education on its use of the block grant in such form and detail as the State Board of Education may specify. In addition, the report must include the following description for the district, which must also be reported to the General Assembly: block grant allocation and expenditures by program; population and service levels by program; and administrative expenditures by program. The State Board of Education shall ensure that the reporting requirements for a district organized under Article 34 of this Code are the same as for all other school districts in this State.
(Source: P.A. 99-30, eff. 7-10-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1C-5)
    Sec. 1C-5. Rules. The State Board of Education shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to implement the provisions of this Article.
(Source: P.A. 88-555, eff. 7-27-94.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 1D heading)
ARTICLE 1D. BLOCK GRANTS FOR DISTRICTS
WITH OVER 500,000 INHABITANTS

    (105 ILCS 5/1D-1)
    (Text of Section from P.A. 100-55)
    Sec. 1D-1. Block grant funding.
    (a) For fiscal year 1996 and each fiscal year thereafter, the State Board of Education shall award to a school district having a population exceeding 500,000 inhabitants a general education block grant and an educational services block grant, determined as provided in this Section, in lieu of distributing to the district separate State funding for the programs described in subsections (b) and (c). The provisions of this Section, however, do not apply to any federal funds that the district is entitled to receive. In accordance with Section 2-3.32, all block grants are subject to an audit. Therefore, block grant receipts and block grant expenditures shall be recorded to the appropriate fund code for the designated block grant.
    (b) The general education block grant shall include the following programs: REI Initiative, Summer Bridges, Preschool Education, K-6 Comprehensive Arts, School Improvement Support, Urban Education, Scientific Literacy, Substance Abuse Prevention, Second Language Planning, Staff Development, Outcomes and Assessment, K-6 Reading Improvement, 7-12 Continued Reading Improvement, Truants' Optional Education, Hispanic Programs, Agriculture Education, Parental Training, Prevention Initiative, Report Cards, and Criminal Background Investigations. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, all amounts paid under the general education block grant from State appropriations to a school district in a city having a population exceeding 500,000 inhabitants shall be appropriated and expended by the board of that district for any of the programs included in the block grant or any of the board's lawful purposes. Beginning in Fiscal Year 2018, at least 25% of any additional Preschool Education, Parental Training, and Prevention Initiative program funding over and above the previous fiscal year's allocation shall be used to fund programs for children ages 0-3. Beginning in Fiscal Year 2018, funding for Preschool Education, Parental Training, and Prevention Initiative programs above the allocation for these programs in Fiscal Year 2017 must be used solely as a supplement for these programs and may not supplant funds received from other sources.
    (c) The educational services block grant shall include the following programs: Regular and Vocational Transportation, State Lunch and Free Breakfast Program, Special Education (Personnel, Transportation, Orphanage, Private Tuition), funding for children requiring special education services, Summer School, Educational Service Centers, and Administrator's Academy. This subsection (c) does not relieve the district of its obligation to provide the services required under a program that is included within the educational services block grant. It is the intention of the General Assembly in enacting the provisions of this subsection (c) to relieve the district of the administrative burdens that impede efficiency and accompany single-program funding. The General Assembly encourages the board to pursue mandate waivers pursuant to Section 2-3.25g.
    The funding program included in the educational services block grant for funding for children requiring special education services in each fiscal year shall be treated in that fiscal year as a payment to the school district in respect of services provided or costs incurred in the prior fiscal year, calculated in each case as provided in this Section. Nothing in this Section shall change the nature of payments for any program that, apart from this Section, would be or, prior to adoption or amendment of this Section, was on the basis of a payment in a fiscal year in respect of services provided or costs incurred in the prior fiscal year, calculated in each case as provided in this Section.
    (d) For fiscal year 1996 and each fiscal year thereafter, the amount of the district's block grants shall be determined as follows: (i) with respect to each program that is included within each block grant, the district shall receive an amount equal to the same percentage of the current fiscal year appropriation made for that program as the percentage of the appropriation received by the district from the 1995 fiscal year appropriation made for that program, and (ii) the total amount that is due the district under the block grant shall be the aggregate of the amounts that the district is entitled to receive for the fiscal year with respect to each program that is included within the block grant that the State Board of Education shall award the district under this Section for that fiscal year. In the case of the Summer Bridges program, the amount of the district's block grant shall be equal to 44% of the amount of the current fiscal year appropriation made for that program.
    (e) The district is not required to file any application or other claim in order to receive the block grants to which it is entitled under this Section. The State Board of Education shall make payments to the district of amounts due under the district's block grants on a schedule determined by the State Board of Education.
    (f) A school district to which this Section applies shall report to the State Board of Education on its use of the block grants in such form and detail as the State Board of Education may specify. In addition, the report must include the following description for the district, which must also be reported to the General Assembly: block grant allocation and expenditures by program; population and service levels by program; and administrative expenditures by program. The State Board of Education shall ensure that the reporting requirements for the district are the same as for all other school districts in this State.
    (g) This paragraph provides for the treatment of block grants under Article 1C for purposes of calculating the amount of block grants for a district under this Section. Those block grants under Article 1C are, for this purpose, treated as included in the amount of appropriation for the various programs set forth in paragraph (b) above. The appropriation in each current fiscal year for each block grant under Article 1C shall be treated for these purposes as appropriations for the individual program included in that block grant. The proportion of each block grant so allocated to each such program included in it shall be the proportion which the appropriation for that program was of all appropriations for such purposes now in that block grant, in fiscal 1995.
    Payments to the school district under this Section with respect to each program for which payments to school districts generally, as of the date of this amendatory Act of the 92nd General Assembly, are on a reimbursement basis shall continue to be made to the district on a reimbursement basis, pursuant to the provisions of this Code governing those programs.
    (h) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any school district receiving a block grant under this Section may classify all or a portion of the funds that it receives in a particular fiscal year from any block grant authorized under this Code or from general State aid pursuant to Section 18-8.05 of this Code (other than supplemental general State aid) as funds received in connection with any funding program for which it is entitled to receive funds from the State in that fiscal year (including, without limitation, any funding program referred to in subsection (c) of this Section), regardless of the source or timing of the receipt. The district may not classify more funds as funds received in connection with the funding program than the district is entitled to receive in that fiscal year for that program. Any classification by a district must be made by a resolution of its board of education. The resolution must identify the amount of any block grant or general State aid to be classified under this subsection (h) and must specify the funding program to which the funds are to be treated as received in connection therewith. This resolution is controlling as to the classification of funds referenced therein. A certified copy of the resolution must be sent to the State Superintendent of Education. The resolution shall still take effect even though a copy of the resolution has not been sent to the State Superintendent of Education in a timely manner. No classification under this subsection (h) by a district shall affect the total amount or timing of money the district is entitled to receive under this Code. No classification under this subsection (h) by a district shall in any way relieve the district from or affect any requirements that otherwise would apply with respect to the block grant as provided in this Section, including any accounting of funds by source, reporting expenditures by original source and purpose, reporting requirements, or requirements of provision of services.
(Source: P.A. 100-55, eff. 8-11-17.)
 
    (Text of Section from P.A. 100-465)
    Sec. 1D-1. Block grant funding.
    (a) For fiscal year 1996 through fiscal year 2017, the State Board of Education shall award to a school district having a population exceeding 500,000 inhabitants a general education block grant and an educational services block grant, determined as provided in this Section, in lieu of distributing to the district separate State funding for the programs described in subsections (b) and (c). The provisions of this Section, however, do not apply to any federal funds that the district is entitled to receive. In accordance with Section 2-3.32, all block grants are subject to an audit. Therefore, block grant receipts and block grant expenditures shall be recorded to the appropriate fund code for the designated block grant.
    (b) The general education block grant shall include the following programs: REI Initiative, Summer Bridges, Preschool At Risk, K-6 Comprehensive Arts, School Improvement Support, Urban Education, Scientific Literacy, Substance Abuse Prevention, Second Language Planning, Staff Development, Outcomes and Assessment, K-6 Reading Improvement, 7-12 Continued Reading Improvement, Truants' Optional Education, Hispanic Programs, Agriculture Education, Parental Education, Prevention Initiative, Report Cards, and Criminal Background Investigations. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, all amounts paid under the general education block grant from State appropriations to a school district in a city having a population exceeding 500,000 inhabitants shall be appropriated and expended by the board of that district for any of the programs included in the block grant or any of the board's lawful purposes.
    (c) The educational services block grant shall include the following programs: Regular and Vocational Transportation, State Lunch and Free Breakfast Program, Special Education (Personnel, Transportation, Orphanage, Private Tuition), funding for children requiring special education services, Summer School, Educational Service Centers, and Administrator's Academy. This subsection (c) does not relieve the district of its obligation to provide the services required under a program that is included within the educational services block grant. It is the intention of the General Assembly in enacting the provisions of this subsection (c) to relieve the district of the administrative burdens that impede efficiency and accompany single-program funding. The General Assembly encourages the board to pursue mandate waivers pursuant to Section 2-3.25g.
    The funding program included in the educational services block grant for funding for children requiring special education services in each fiscal year shall be treated in that fiscal year as a payment to the school district in respect of services provided or costs incurred in the prior fiscal year, calculated in each case as provided in this Section. Nothing in this Section shall change the nature of payments for any program that, apart from this Section, would be or, prior to adoption or amendment of this Section, was on the basis of a payment in a fiscal year in respect of services provided or costs incurred in the prior fiscal year, calculated in each case as provided in this Section.
    (d) For fiscal year 1996 through fiscal year 2017, the amount of the district's block grants shall be determined as follows: (i) with respect to each program that is included within each block grant, the district shall receive an amount equal to the same percentage of the current fiscal year appropriation made for that program as the percentage of the appropriation received by the district from the 1995 fiscal year appropriation made for that program, and (ii) the total amount that is due the district under the block grant shall be the aggregate of the amounts that the district is entitled to receive for the fiscal year with respect to each program that is included within the block grant that the State Board of Education shall award the district under this Section for that fiscal year. In the case of the Summer Bridges program, the amount of the district's block grant shall be equal to 44% of the amount of the current fiscal year appropriation made for that program.
    (e) The district is not required to file any application or other claim in order to receive the block grants to which it is entitled under this Section. The State Board of Education shall make payments to the district of amounts due under the district's block grants on a schedule determined by the State Board of Education.
    (f) A school district to which this Section applies shall report to the State Board of Education on its use of the block grants in such form and detail as the State Board of Education may specify. In addition, the report must include the following description for the district, which must also be reported to the General Assembly: block grant allocation and expenditures by program; population and service levels by program; and administrative expenditures by program. The State Board of Education shall ensure that the reporting requirements for the district are the same as for all other school districts in this State.
    (g) Through fiscal year 2017, this paragraph provides for the treatment of block grants under Article 1C for purposes of calculating the amount of block grants for a district under this Section. Those block grants under Article 1C are, for this purpose, treated as included in the amount of appropriation for the various programs set forth in paragraph (b) above. The appropriation in each current fiscal year for each block grant under Article 1C shall be treated for these purposes as appropriations for the individual program included in that block grant. The proportion of each block grant so allocated to each such program included in it shall be the proportion which the appropriation for that program was of all appropriations for such purposes now in that block grant, in fiscal 1995.
    Payments to the school district under this Section with respect to each program for which payments to school districts generally, as of the date of this amendatory Act of the 92nd General Assembly, are on a reimbursement basis shall continue to be made to the district on a reimbursement basis, pursuant to the provisions of this Code governing those programs.
    (h) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any school district receiving a block grant under this Section may classify all or a portion of the funds that it receives in a particular fiscal year from any block grant authorized under this Code or from general State aid pursuant to Section 18-8.05 of this Code (other than supplemental general State aid) as funds received in connection with any funding program for which it is entitled to receive funds from the State in that fiscal year (including, without limitation, any funding program referred to in subsection (c) of this Section), regardless of the source or timing of the receipt. The district may not classify more funds as funds received in connection with the funding program than the district is entitled to receive in that fiscal year for that program. Any classification by a district must be made by a resolution of its board of education. The resolution must identify the amount of any block grant or general State aid to be classified under this subsection (h) and must specify the funding program to which the funds are to be treated as received in connection therewith. This resolution is controlling as to the classification of funds referenced therein. A certified copy of the resolution must be sent to the State Superintendent of Education. The resolution shall still take effect even though a copy of the resolution has not been sent to the State Superintendent of Education in a timely manner. No classification under this subsection (h) by a district shall affect the total amount or timing of money the district is entitled to receive under this Code. No classification under this subsection (h) by a district shall in any way relieve the district from or affect any requirements that otherwise would apply with respect to the block grant as provided in this Section, including any accounting of funds by source, reporting expenditures by original source and purpose, reporting requirements, or requirements of provision of services.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 1E heading)
ARTICLE 1E. DOWNSTATE SCHOOL FINANCE AUTHORITY
(This Article scheduled to be repealed in
accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1E-165)

    (105 ILCS 5/1E-1)
    (This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1E-165)
    Sec. 1E-1. Short title. This Article may be cited as the Downstate School Finance Authority Law.
(Source: P.A. 92-547, eff. 6-13-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1E-5)
    (This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1E-165)
    Sec. 1E-5. Findings; purpose; intent.
    (a) The General Assembly finds all of the following:
        (1) A fundamental goal of the people of this State,
    	
as expressed in Section 1 of Article X of the Illinois Constitution, is the educational development of all persons to the limits of their capacities. When a board of education faces financial difficulties, continued operation of the public school system is threatened.
        (2) A sound financial structure is essential to the
    	
continued operation of any school system. It is vital to commercial, educational, and cultural interests that public schools remain in operation. To achieve that goal, public school systems must have effective access to the private market to borrow short and long term funds.
        (3) To promote the financial integrity of districts,
    	
as defined in this Article, it is necessary to provide for the creation of school finance authorities with the powers necessary to promote sound financial management and to ensure the continued operation of the public schools.
    (b) It is the purpose of this Article to provide a secure financial basis for the continued operation of public schools. The intention of the General Assembly, in creating this Article, is to establish procedures, provide powers, and impose restrictions to ensure the financial and educational integrity of the public schools, while leaving principal responsibility for the educational policies of public schools to the boards of education within the State, consistent with the requirements for satisfying the public policy and purpose set forth in this Article.
(Source: P.A. 92-547, eff. 6-13-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1E-10)
    (This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1E-165)
    Sec. 1E-10. Definitions. As used in this Article:
    "Authority" means a School Finance Authority created under this Article.
    "Bonds" means bonds authorized to be issued by the Authority under Section 1E-65 of this Code.
    "Budget" means the annual budget of the district required under Section 17-1 of this Code, as in effect from time to time.
    "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Authority.
    "District" means any school district having a population of not more than 500,000 that prior to the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 92nd General Assembly has had a Financial Oversight Panel established for the district under Section 1B-4 of this Code following the district's petitioning of the State Board of Education for the creation of the Financial Oversight Panel and for which the Financial Oversight Panel has been in existence for at least one year.
    "Financial plan" means the financial plan of the district to be developed pursuant to this Article, as in effect from time to time.
    "Fiscal year" means the fiscal year of the district.
    "State Board" means the State Board of Education.
    "State Superintendent" means the State Superintendent of Education.
    "Obligations" means bonds and notes of the Authority.
(Source: P.A. 92-547, eff. 6-13-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1E-15)
    (This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1E-165)
    Sec. 1E-15. Establishment of Authority; duties of district.
    (a) A Financial Oversight Panel created under Article 1B of this Code for a district may petition the State Board for the establishment of a School Finance Authority for the district. The petition shall cite the reasons why the creation of a School Finance Authority for the district is necessary. The State Board may grant the petition upon determining that the approval of the petition is in the best educational and financial interests of the district.
    (b) Upon approval of the petition by the State Board all of the following shall occur:
        (1) There is established a body both corporate and
    	
politic to be known as the "(Name of School District) School Finance Authority", which in this name shall exercise all authority vested in an Authority by this Article.
        (2) The Financial Oversight Panel is abolished, and
    	
all of its rights, property, assets, contracts, and liabilities shall pass to and be vested in the Authority.
        (3) The duties and obligations of the district under
    	
Article 1B of this Code shall be transferred and become duties and obligations owed by the district to the School Finance Authority.
    (c) In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this Article and the provisions of Article 1B of this Code, the provisions of this Article control.
(Source: P.A. 92-547, eff. 6-13-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1E-20)
    (This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1E-165)
    Sec. 1E-20. Members of Authority; meetings.
    (a) When a petition for a School Finance Authority is allowed by the State Board under Section 1E-15 of this Code, the State Superintendent shall within 10 days thereafter appoint 5 members to serve on a School Finance Authority for the district. Of the initial members, 2 shall be appointed to serve a term of 2 years and 3 shall be appointed to serve a term of 3 years. Thereafter, each member shall serve for a term of 3 years and until his or her successor has been appointed. The State Superintendent shall designate one of the members of the Authority to serve as its Chairperson. In the event of vacancy or resignation, the State Superintendent shall, within 10 days after receiving notice, appoint a successor to serve out that member's term. The State Superintendent may remove a member for incompetence, malfeasance, neglect of duty, or other just cause.
    Members of the Authority shall be selected primarily on the basis of their experience and education in financial management, with consideration given to persons knowledgeable in education finance. Two members of the Authority shall be residents of the school district that the Authority serves. A member of the Authority may not be a member of the district's school board or an employee of the district nor may a member have a direct financial interest in the district.
    Authority members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed by the State Board for travel and other necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties. Unless paid from bonds issued under Section 1E-65 of this Code, the amount reimbursed members for their expenses shall be charged to the school district as part of any emergency financial assistance and incorporated as a part of the terms and conditions for repayment of the assistance or shall be deducted from the district's general State aid or evidence-based funding as provided in Section 1B-8 of this Code.
    The Authority may elect such officers as it deems appropriate.
    (b) The first meeting of the Authority shall be held at the call of the Chairperson. The Authority shall prescribe the times and places for its meetings and the manner in which regular and special meetings may be called and shall comply with the Open Meetings Act.
    Three members of the Authority shall constitute a quorum. When a vote is taken upon any measure before the Authority, a quorum being present, a majority of the votes of the members voting on the measure shall determine the outcome.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1E-25)
    (This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1E-165)
    Sec. 1E-25. General powers. The purposes of the Authority shall be to exercise financial control over the district and to furnish financial assistance so that the district can provide public education within the district's jurisdiction while permitting the district to meet its obligations to its creditors and the holders of its debt. Except as expressly limited by this Article, the Authority shall have all powers granted to a voluntary or involuntary Financial Oversight Panel and to a Financial Administrator under Article 1B of this Code and all other powers necessary to meet its responsibilities and to carry out its purposes and the purposes of this Article, including without limitation all of the following powers, provided that the Authority shall have no power to violate any statutory provision, to impair any contract or obligation of the district, or to terminate any employee without following the statutory procedures for such terminations set forth in this Code:
        (1) To sue and to be sued.
        (2) To make and execute contracts, leases, subleases
    	
and all other instruments or agreements necessary or convenient for the exercise of the powers and functions granted by this Article.
        (3) To purchase real or personal property necessary
    	
or convenient for its purposes; to execute and deliver deeds for real property held in its own name; and to sell, lease, or otherwise dispose of such of its property as, in the judgment of the Authority, is no longer necessary for its purposes.
        (4) To appoint officers, agents, and employees of the
    	
Authority, including a chief executive officer, a chief fiscal officer, and a chief educational officer to administer and manage, under the direction of the Authority, the operations and educational programs of the district, in accordance with this Article and all other provisions of this Code; to define their duties and qualifications; and to fix their compensation and employee benefits.
        (5) To transfer to the district such sums of money as
    	
are not required for other purposes.
        (6) To borrow money and to issue obligations pursuant
    	
to this Article; to fund, refund, or advance refund the same; to provide for the rights of the holders of its obligations; and to repay any advances.
        (7) Subject to the provisions of any contract with or
    	
for the benefit of the holders of its obligations, to purchase or redeem its obligations.
        (8) To procure all necessary goods and services for
    	
the Authority in compliance with the purchasing laws and requirements applicable to the district.
        (8.5) To take action on behalf of the district as
    	
the Authority deems necessary and in accordance with this Article and all other provisions of this Code, based on the recommendation of the chief executive officer, chief educational officer, or chief fiscal officer, and the district shall be bound by such action in all respects as if the action had been approved by the district itself.
        (9) To do any and all things necessary or convenient
    	
to carry out its purposes and exercise the powers given to it by this Article.
(Source: P.A. 94-234, eff. 7-14-05.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1E-30)
    (This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1E-165)
    Sec. 1E-30. Chief executive officer. The Authority may appoint a chief executive officer who, under the direction of the Authority, shall supervise the Authority's staff, including the chief educational officer and the chief fiscal officer, and shall have ultimate responsibility for implementing the policies, procedures, directives, and decisions of the Authority.
(Source: P.A. 92-547, eff. 6-13-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1E-35)
    (This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1E-165)
    Sec. 1E-35. Chief educational officer. Upon expiration of the contract of the school district's superintendent who is serving at the time the Authority is established, the Authority shall, following consultation with the district, employ a chief educational officer for the district. The chief educational officer shall report to the Authority or the chief executive officer appointed by the Authority.
    The chief educational officer shall have authority to determine the agenda and order of business at school board meetings, as needed in order to carry forward and implement the objectives and priorities of the Authority in the administration and management of the district.
    The chief educational officer shall have all of the powers and duties of a school district superintendent under this Code and such other duties as may be assigned by the Authority, in accordance with this Code. The district shall not thereafter employ a superintendent during the period that a chief educational officer is serving in the district. The chief educational officer shall hold a certificate with a superintendent endorsement issued under Article 21 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 94-234, eff. 7-14-05.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1E-40)
    (This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1E-165)
    Sec. 1E-40. Chief fiscal officer. The Authority may appoint a chief fiscal officer who, under the direction of the Authority, shall have all of the powers and duties of the district's chief school business official and any other duties regarding budgeting, accounting, and other financial matters that are assigned by the Authority, in accordance with this Code. The district may not employ a chief school business official during the period that the chief fiscal officer is serving in the district. The chief fiscal officer may but is not required to hold a certificate with a chief school business official endorsement issued under Article 21 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 92-547, eff. 6-13-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1E-45)
    (This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1E-165)
    Sec. 1E-45. Collective bargaining agreements. The Authority shall have the power to negotiate collective bargaining agreements with the district's employees in lieu of and on behalf of the district. Upon concluding bargaining, the district shall execute the agreements negotiated by the Authority, and the district shall be bound by and shall administer the agreements in all respects as if the agreements had been negotiated by the district itself.
(Source: P.A. 92-547, eff. 6-13-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1E-50)
    (This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1E-165)
    Sec. 1E-50. Deposits and investments.
    (a) The Authority shall have the power to establish checking and whatever other banking accounts it may deem appropriate for conducting its affairs.
    (b) Subject to the provisions of any contract with or for the benefit of the holders of its obligations, the Authority may invest any funds not required for immediate use or disbursement, as provided in the Public Funds Investment Act.
(Source: P.A. 92-547, eff. 6-13-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1E-55)
    (This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1E-165)
    Sec. 1E-55. Cash accounts and bank accounts.
    (a) The Authority shall require the district or any officer of the district, including the district's treasurer, to establish and maintain separate cash accounts and separate bank accounts in accordance with such rules, standards, and procedures as the Authority may prescribe.
    (b) The Authority shall have the power to assume exclusive administration of the cash accounts and bank accounts of the district, to establish and maintain whatever new cash accounts and bank accounts it may deem appropriate, and to withdraw funds from these accounts for the lawful expenditures of the district.
(Source: P.A. 92-547, eff. 6-13-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1E-60)
    (This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1E-165)
    Sec. 1E-60. Financial, management, and budgetary structure. Upon direction of the Authority, the district shall reorganize the financial accounts, management, and budgetary systems of the district in whatever manner the Authority deems appropriate to achieve greater financial responsibility and to reduce financial inefficiency.
(Source: P.A. 92-547, eff. 6-13-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1E-65)
    (This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1E-165)
    Sec. 1E-65. Power to issue bonds.
    (a) The Authority may incur indebtedness by the issuance of negotiable full faith and credit general obligation bonds of the Authority in an outstanding amount not to exceed at any time, including existing indebtedness, 13.8% of the district's most recent equalized assessed valuation, excluding Bonds of the Authority that have been refunded, for (i) the purpose of providing the district with moneys for ordinary and necessary expenditures and other operational needs of the district; (ii) payment or refunding of outstanding debt obligations or tax anticipation warrants of the district, the proceeds of which were used to provide financing for the district; (iii) payment of fees for arrangements as provided in subsection (b) of Section 1E-70 of this Code; (iv) payment of interest on Bonds; (v) establishment of reserves to secure Bonds; (vi) the payment of costs of issuance of Bonds; (vii) payment of principal of or interest or redemption premium on any Bonds or notes of the Authority; and (viii) all other expenditures of the Authority incidental to and necessary or convenient for carrying out its corporate purposes and powers.
    (b) The Authority may from time to time (i) issue Bonds to refund any outstanding Bonds or notes of the Authority, whether the Bonds or notes to be refunded have or have not matured or become redeemable, and (ii) issue Bonds partly to refund Bonds or notes then outstanding and partly for any other purpose set forth in this Section.
    (c) Bonds issued in accordance with subsection (a) of this Section are not subject to any other statutory limitation as to debt, including without limitation that established by the Local Government Debt Limitation Act, and may be issued without referendum.
(Source: P.A. 92-547, eff. 6-13-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1E-70)
    (This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1E-165)
    Sec. 1E-70. Terms of bonds.
    (a) Whenever the Authority desires or is required to issue Bonds as provided in this Article, it shall adopt a resolution designating the amount of the Bonds to be issued, the purposes for which the proceeds of the Bonds are to be used, and the manner in which the proceeds shall be held pending the application thereof. The Bonds shall be issued in the corporate name of the Authority and shall bear such date or dates and shall mature at such time or times, not exceeding 20 years from their date, as the resolution may provide. The Bonds may be issued as serial bonds payable in installments, as term bonds with sinking fund installments, or as a combination of these as the Authority may determine in the resolution. The Bonds shall be in such denominations as the Authority may determine. The Bonds shall be in such form, carry such registration privileges, be executed in such manner, be payable at such place or places, and be subject to such terms of redemption at such redemption prices, including premium, as the resolution may provide. The Bonds shall be sold by the Authority at public or private sale, as determined by the Authority.
    (b) In connection with the issuance of its Bonds, the Authority may enter into arrangements to provide additional security and liquidity for the Bonds. These may include without limitation municipal bond insurance, letters of credit, lines of credit by which the Authority may borrow funds to pay or redeem its Bonds, and purchase or remarketing arrangements for ensuring the ability of owners of the Authority's Bonds to sell their Bonds or to have their Bonds redeemed. The Authority may enter into contracts and may agree to pay fees to persons providing the arrangements, including from Bond proceeds, but only under circumstances in which the total interest paid or to be paid on the Bonds, together with the fees for the arrangements (being treated as if interest), would not, taken together, cause the Bonds to bear interest, calculated to their absolute maturity, at a rate in excess of the maximum rate allowed by law.
    The resolution of the Authority authorizing the issuance of its Bonds may provide that interest rates may vary from time to time depending upon criteria established by the Authority, which may include without limitation a variation in interest rates as may be necessary to cause the Bonds to be remarketable from time to time at a price equal to their principal amount, and may provide for appointment of a national banking association, bank, trust company, investment banker, or other financial institution to serve as a remarketing agent in that connection. The resolution of the Authority authorizing the issuance of its Bonds may provide that alternative interest rates or provisions shall apply during such times as the Bonds are held by a person providing a letter of credit or other credit enhancement arrangement for those Bonds.
(Source: P.A. 92-547, eff. 6-13-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1E-75)
    (This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1E-165)
    Sec. 1E-75. Tax levy.
    (a) Before or at the time of issuing any Bonds, the Authority shall provide by resolution for the levy and collection of a direct annual tax upon all the taxable property located within the district without limit as to rate or amount sufficient to pay and discharge the principal thereof at maturity or on sinking fund installment dates and to pay the interest thereon as it falls due. The taxes as levied shall also include additional amounts to the extent that the collections in the prior years were insufficient to pay and discharge the principal thereof at maturity, sinking fund installments, if any, and interest thereon as it fell due, and the amount so collected shall be placed in the debt service reserve fund. The tax shall be in addition to and exclusive of the maximum of all taxes that the Authority or the district is authorized by law to levy for any and all school purposes. The resolution shall be in force upon its adoption.
    (b) The levy shall be for the sole benefit of the holders of the Bonds, and the holders of the Bonds shall have a security interest in and lien upon all rights, claims, and interests of the Authority arising pursuant to the levy and all present and future proceeds of the levy until the principal of and sinking fund installments and interest on the Bonds are paid in full. All proceeds from the levy shall be deposited by each county collector directly in the debt service fund established pursuant to Section 1E-80 of this Code, shall be applied solely for the payment of principal of and sinking fund installments and interest on the Bonds, and shall not be used for any other purpose.
    (c) Upon the filing in the office of the county clerk of each county where the school district is located of a duly certified copy of the resolution, it shall be the duty of each county clerk to extend the tax provided for in the resolution, including an amount determined by the Authority to cover loss and cost of collection and also deferred collections and abatements in the amount of the taxes as extended on the collectors' books. The tax shall be separate and apart from all other taxes of the Authority or the district and shall be separately identified by the collectors.
(Source: P.A. 92-547, eff. 6-13-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1E-80)
    (This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1E-165)
    Sec. 1E-80. Debt service fund. The Authority shall establish a debt service fund for the Bonds to be maintained by a paying agent, escrow agent, depository, or corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the power of a trust company within this State, separate and segregated from all other funds and accounts of the Authority and the district. All moneys on deposit in the debt service fund shall be held in trust in the debt service fund for the benefit of the holders of the Bonds, shall be applied solely for the payment of the principal of and sinking fund installment, redemption premium, if any, and interest on the Bonds, and shall not be used for any other purpose. The holders of the Bonds shall have a security interest in and lien upon all such moneys.
(Source: P.A. 92-547, eff. 6-13-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1E-85)
    (This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1E-165)
    Sec. 1E-85. Debt service reserve fund.
    (a) The Authority may create and establish a debt service reserve fund to be maintained by a paying agent, escrow agent, depository, or corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the power of a trust company within the State, separate and segregated from all other funds and accounts of the Authority. The Authority may pay the following into the debt service reserve fund:
        (1) any proceeds from the sale of Bonds to the extent
    	
provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the Bonds; and
        (2) any other moneys that may be available to the
    	
Authority for the purpose of the fund.
    (b) The amount to be accumulated in the debt service reserve fund shall be determined by the Authority but shall not exceed the maximum amount of interest, principal, and sinking fund installments due in any succeeding calendar year.
    (c) All moneys on deposit in the debt service reserve fund shall be held in trust for the benefit of the holders of the Bonds, shall be applied solely for the payment of principal of and sinking fund installments and interest on the Bonds to the extent not paid from the debt service fund, and shall not be used for any other purpose.
    (d) Any moneys in the debt service reserve fund in excess of the amount determined by the Authority pursuant to a resolution authorizing the issuance of Bonds may be withdrawn by the Authority and used for any of its lawful purposes.
    (e) In computing the amount of the debt service reserve fund, investments shall be valued as the Authority provides in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the Bonds.
(Source: P.A. 92-547, eff. 6-13-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1E-90)
    (This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1E-165)
    Sec. 1E-90. Bond anticipation notes.
    (a) After the issuance of Bonds has been authorized, the Authority shall have power to issue from time to time, pursuant to a resolution or resolutions of the Authority, negotiable bond anticipation notes of the Authority in anticipation of the issuance of Bonds.
    (b) Bond anticipation notes shall mature not later than 2 years after the date of issuance, may be made redeemable prior to their maturity, and may be sold in such manner, in such denominations, and at such price or prices and shall bear interest at such rate or rates not to exceed the maximum annual rate authorized by law, as a resolution authorizing the issuance of the bond anticipation notes may provide.
    (c) The bond anticipation notes may be made payable as to both principal and interest from the proceeds of the Bonds. The Authority may provide for payment of interest on the bond anticipation notes from direct annual taxes upon all the taxable property located within the district that are authorized to be levied annually for that purpose without limit as to rate or amount sufficient to pay the interest as it falls due, in the manner, subject to the security interest and lien, and with the effect provided in Section 1E-75 of this Code.
    (d) The Authority is authorized to issue renewal notes in the event it is unable to issue Bonds to pay outstanding bond anticipation notes, on terms the Authority deems reasonable.
    (e) A debt service fund shall be established in the manner provided in Section 1E-80 of this Code by the Authority for the bond anticipation notes, and the proceeds of any tax levy made pursuant to this Section shall be deposited in the fund upon receipt.
(Source: P.A. 92-547, eff. 6-13-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1E-95)
    (This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1E-165)
    Sec. 1E-95. Vesting powers in trustee or other authorized agent. The resolution authorizing issuance of the Bonds shall vest in a trustee, paying agent, escrow agent, or depository such rights, powers, and duties in trust as the Authority may determine and may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the holders of the Bonds and limiting such rights and remedies as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the Authority in relation to the exercise of its corporate powers and the custody, safeguarding, and application of all moneys. The resolution shall provide for the manner in which moneys in the various funds and accounts of the Authority may be invested and the disposition of the earnings on the investments.
(Source: P.A. 92-547, eff. 6-13-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1E-100)
    (This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1E-165)
    Sec. 1E-100. Discharge of bonds.
    (a) If the Authority pays or causes to be paid to the holders of all Bonds then outstanding the principal, redemption price, if any, and interest to become due on the Bonds, at the times and in the manner stipulated therein and in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the Bonds, then the covenants, agreements, and other obligations of the Authority to the Bondholders shall be discharged and satisfied.
    (b) Bonds or interest installments for the payment or redemption of which moneys have been set aside and held in trust by the trustee or other authorized agent provided for in Section 1E-95 of this Code, through deposit by the Authority of funds for the payment, redemption, or otherwise, at the maturity or redemption date, are deemed to have been paid within the meaning and with the effect expressed in subsection (a) of this Section. All outstanding Bonds of any series, prior to the maturity or redemption date, are deemed to have been paid within the meaning and with the effect expressed in subsection (a) of this Section if (1) there has been deposited with the trustee or other authorized agent either (A) moneys in an amount that is sufficient or (B) direct obligations of the United States of America the principal of and the interest on which, when due, will provide moneys that, together with the moneys, if any, deposited with the trustee or other authorized agent at the same time, are sufficient to pay, when due, the principal, sinking fund installment, or redemption price, if applicable, of and interest due and to become due on the Bonds on and prior to the redemption date, sinking fund installment date, or maturity date, as the case may be, and (2) the Authority has given the trustee or other authorized agent, in form satisfactory to it, irrevocable instructions to give notice to the effect and in accordance with the procedures provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the Bonds. Neither direct obligations of the United States of America, moneys deposited with the trustee or other authorized agent, or principal or interest payments on the securities shall be withdrawn or used for any purpose other than, and shall be held in trust for, the payment of the principal or redemption price, if applicable, and interest on the Bonds.
(Source: P.A. 92-547, eff. 6-13-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1E-105)
    (This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1E-165)
    Sec. 1E-105. Pledge of the State. The State of Illinois pledges to and agrees with the holders of Bonds that the State will not limit or alter the rights and powers vested in the Authority by this Article with respect to the issuance of obligations so as to impair the terms of any contract made by the Authority with these holders or in any way impair the rights and remedies of these holders until the Bonds, together with interest on the Bonds, interest on any unpaid installments of interest, and all costs and expenses in connection with any action or proceedings by or on behalf of these holders, are fully met and discharged or provisions made for their payment. The Authority is authorized to include this pledge and agreement of the State in any resolution or contract with the holders of Bonds.
(Source: P.A. 92-547, eff. 6-13-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1E-110)
    (This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1E-165)
    Sec. 1E-110. Statutory lien. Any pledge, assignment, lien, or security interest for the benefit of the holders of Bonds or bond anticipation notes, if any, created pursuant to this Article are valid and binding from the time the Bonds are issued, without any physical delivery or further act, and are valid and binding as against and prior to any claims of all other parties having claims of any kind in tort, contract, or otherwise against the State, the Authority, the district, or any other person, irrespective of whether the other parties have notice.
(Source: P.A. 92-547, eff. 6-13-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1E-115)
    (This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1E-165)
    Sec. 1E-115. State or district not liable on obligations. Obligations shall not be deemed to constitute (i) a debt or liability of the State, the district, or any political subdivision of the State or district other than the Authority or (ii) a pledge of the full faith and credit of the State, the district, or any political subdivision of the State or district other than the Authority but shall be payable solely from the funds and revenues provided for in this Article. The issuance of obligations shall not directly, indirectly, or contingently obligate the State, the district, or any political subdivision of the State or district other than the Authority to levy any form of taxation therefor or to make any appropriation for their payment. Nothing in this Section shall prevent or be construed to prevent the Authority from pledging its full faith and credit to the payment of obligations. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to authorize the Authority to create a debt of the State or the district within the meaning of the Constitution or laws of Illinois, and all obligations issued by the Authority pursuant to the provisions of this Article are payable and shall state that they are payable solely from the funds and revenues pledged for their payment in accordance with the resolution authorizing their issuance or any trust indenture executed as security therefor. The State or the district shall not in any event be liable for the payment of the principal of or interest on any obligations of the Authority or for the performance of any pledge, obligation, or agreement of any kind whatsoever that may be undertaken by the Authority. No breach of any such pledge, obligation, or agreement may impose any liability upon the State or the district or any charge upon their general credit or against their taxing power.
(Source: P.A. 92-547, eff. 6-13-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1E-120)
    (This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1E-165)
    Sec. 1E-120. Obligations as legal investments. The obligations issued under the provisions of this Article are hereby made securities in which all public officers and bodies of this State, all political subdivisions of this State, all persons carrying on an insurance business, all banks, bankers, trust companies, saving banks, and savings associations (including savings and loan associations, building and loan associations, investment companies, and other persons carrying on a banking business), and all credit unions, pension funds, administrators, and guardians who are or may be authorized to invest in bonds or in other obligations of the State may properly and legally invest funds, including capital, in their control or belonging to them. The obligations are also hereby made securities that may be deposited with and may be received by all public officers and bodies of the State, all political subdivisions of the State, and public corporations for any purpose for which the deposit of bonds or other obligations of the State is authorized.
(Source: P.A. 92-547, eff. 6-13-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1E-125)
    (This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1E-165)
    Sec. 1E-125. Complete authority. This Article, without reference to any other law, shall be deemed full and complete authority for the issuance of Bonds and bond anticipation notes as provided in this Article.
(Source: P.A. 92-547, eff. 6-13-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1E-130)
    (This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1E-165)
    Sec. 1E-130. Reports.
    (a) The Authority, upon taking office and annually thereafter, shall prepare and submit to the Governor, General Assembly, and State Superintendent a report that includes the audited financial statement for the preceding fiscal year, an approved financial plan, and a statement of the major steps necessary to accomplish the objectives of the financial plan.
    (b) Annual reports shall be submitted on or before March 1 of each year.
    (c) The requirement for reporting to the General Assembly shall be satisfied by filing copies of the report as provided in Section 3.1 of the General Assembly Organization Act and by filing additional copies with the State Government Report Distribution Center for the General Assembly as required under subdivision (t) of Section 7 of the State Library Act.
(Source: P.A. 92-547, eff. 6-13-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1E-135)
    (This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1E-165)
    Sec. 1E-135. Audit of Authority. The Authority shall be subject to audit in the manner provided for the audit of State funds and accounts. A copy of the audit report shall be submitted to the State Superintendent, the Governor, the Speaker and Minority Leader of the House of Representatives, and the President and Minority Leader of the Senate.
(Source: P.A. 92-547, eff. 6-13-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1E-140)
    (This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1E-165)
    Sec. 1E-140. Assistance by State agencies, units of local government, and school districts. The district shall render such services to and permit the use of its facilities and resources by the Authority at no charge as may be requested by the Authority. Any State agency, unit of local government, or school district may, within its lawful powers and duties, render such services to the Authority as may be requested by the Authority. Upon request of the Authority, any State agency, unit of local government, or school district is authorized and empowered to loan to the Authority such officers and employees as the Authority may deem necessary in carrying out its functions and duties. Officers and employees so transferred shall not lose or forfeit their employment status or rights.
(Source: P.A. 92-547, eff. 6-13-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1E-145)
    (This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1E-165)
    Sec. 1E-145. Property of Authority exempt from taxation. The property of the Authority is exempt from taxation.
(Source: P.A. 92-547, eff. 6-13-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1E-150)
    (This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1E-165)
    Sec. 1E-150. Sanctions.
    (a) No member, officer, employee, or agent of the district may commit the district to any contract or other obligation or incur any liability on behalf of the district for any purpose if the amount of the contract, obligation, or liability is in excess of the amount authorized for that purpose then available under the financial plan and budget then in effect.
    (b) No member, officer, employee, or agent of the district may commit the district to any contract or other obligation on behalf of the district for the payment of money for any purpose required to be approved by the Authority unless the contract or other obligation has been approved by the Authority.
    (c) No member, officer, employee, or agent of the district may take any action in violation of any valid order of the Authority, may fail or refuse to take any action required by any such order, may prepare, present, certify, or report any information, including any projections or estimates, for the Authority or any of its agents that is false or misleading, or, upon learning that any such information is false or misleading, may fail promptly to advise the Authority or its agents.
    (d) In addition to any penalty or liability under any other law, any member, officer, employee, or agent of the district who violates subsection (a), (b), or (c) of this Section is subject to appropriate administrative discipline as may be imposed by the Authority, including, if warranted, suspension from duty without pay, removal from office, or termination of employment.
(Source: P.A. 92-547, eff. 6-13-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1E-155)
    (This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1E-165)
    Sec. 1E-155. Abolition of Authority. The Authority shall be abolished 10 years after its creation or one year after all its obligations issued under the provisions of this Article have been fully paid and discharged, whichever comes later. However, the State Board, upon recommendation of the Authority and if no obligations are outstanding, may abolish the Authority at any time after the Authority has been in existence for 3 years. Upon the abolition of the Authority, all of its records shall be transferred to the State Board and any property of the Authority shall pass to and be vested in the State Board.
(Source: P.A. 92-547, eff. 6-13-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1E-160)
    (This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1E-165)
    Sec. 1E-160. Limitations of actions after abolition; indemnification; legal representation.
    (a) Abolition of the Authority pursuant to Section 1E-155 of this Code shall bar any remedy available against the Authority, its members, employees, or agents for any right or claim existing or any liability incurred prior to the abolition unless the action or other proceeding is commenced prior to the expiration of 2 years after the date of the abolition.
    (b) The Authority may indemnify any member, officer, employee, or agent who was or is a party or is threatened to be made a party to any threatened, pending, or completed action, suit, or proceeding, whether civil, criminal, administrative, or investigative, by reason of the fact that he or she was a member, officer, employee, or agent of the Authority, against expenses (including attorney's fees, judgments, fines, and amounts paid in settlement actually and reasonably incurred by him or her in connection with the action, suit, or proceeding) if he or she acted in good faith and in a manner that he or she reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the best interests of the Authority and, with respect to any criminal action or proceeding, had no reasonable cause to believe his or her conduct was unlawful. The termination of any action, suit, or proceeding by judgment, order, settlement, or conviction or upon a plea of nolo contendere or its equivalent, shall not, of itself, create a presumption that the person did not act in good faith in a manner that he or she reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the best interest of the Authority and, with respect to any criminal action or proceeding, had reasonable cause to believe that his or her conduct was unlawful.
    To the extent that a member, officer, employee, or agent of the Authority has been successful, on the merits or otherwise, in the defense of any such action, suit, or proceeding referred to in this subsection (b) or in defense of any claim, issue, or matter therein, he or she shall be indemnified against expenses, including attorney's fees, actually and reasonably incurred by him or her in connection therewith. Any such indemnification shall be made by the Authority only as authorized in the specific case, upon a determination that indemnification of the member, officer, employee, or agent is proper in the circumstances because he or she has met the applicable standard of conduct. The determination shall be made (i) by the Authority by a majority vote of a quorum consisting of members who are not parties to the action, suit, or proceeding or (ii) if such a quorum is not obtainable or, even if obtainable, a quorum of disinterested members so directs, by independent legal counsel in a written opinion.
    Reasonable expenses incurred in defending an action, suit, or proceeding shall be paid by the Authority in advance of the final disposition of the action, suit, or proceeding, as authorized by the Authority in the specific case, upon receipt of an undertaking by or on behalf of the member, officer, employee, or agent to repay the amount, unless it is ultimately determined that he or she is entitled to be indemnified by the Authority as authorized in this Section.
    Any member, officer, employee, or agent against whom any action, suit, or proceeding is brought may employ his or her own attorney to appear on his or her behalf.
    The right to indemnification accorded by this Section shall not limit any other right to indemnification to which the member, officer, employee, or agent may be entitled. Any rights under this Section shall inure to the benefit of the heirs, executors, and administrators of any member, officer, employee, or agent of the Authority.
    The Authority may purchase and maintain insurance on behalf of any person who is or was a member, officer, employee, or agent of the Authority against any liability asserted against him or her and incurred by him or her in any such capacity or arising out of his or her status as such, whether or not the Authority would have the power to indemnify him or her against the liability under the provisions of this Section.
    The Authority shall be considered a State agency for purposes of receiving representation by the Attorney General. Members, officers, employees, and agents of the Authority shall be entitled to representation and indemnification under the State Employee Indemnification Act.
(Source: P.A. 92-547, eff. 6-13-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1E-165)
    (This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with this Section)
    Sec. 1E-165. Repeal. When the Authority established pursuant to this Article is abolished pursuant to Section 1E-155, this Article shall be repealed.
(Source: P.A. 97-429, eff. 8-16-11.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 1F heading)
ARTICLE 1F. DOWNSTATE SCHOOL FINANCE AUTHORITY
FOR ELEMENTARY DISTRICTS
(This Article scheduled to be repealed in accordance
with 105 ILCS 5/1F-165)

    (105 ILCS 5/1F-1)
(This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1F-165)
    Sec. 1F-1. Short title. This Article may be cited as the Downstate School Finance Authority for Elementary Districts Law.
(Source: P.A. 92-855, eff. 12-6-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1F-5)
(This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1F-165)
    Sec. 1F-5. Findings; purpose; intent.
    (a) The General Assembly finds all of the following:
        (1) A fundamental goal of the people of this State,
    	
as expressed in Section 1 of Article X of the Illinois Constitution, is the educational development of all persons to the limits of their capacities. When a board of education faces financial difficulties, continued operation of the public school system is threatened.
        (2) A sound financial structure is essential to the
    	
continued operation of any school system. It is vital to commercial, educational, and cultural interests that public schools remain in operation. To achieve that goal, public school systems must have effective access to the private market to borrow short and long term funds.
        (3) To promote the financial integrity of districts,
    	
as defined in this Article, it is necessary to provide for the creation of school finance authorities with the powers necessary to promote sound financial management and to ensure the continued operation of the public schools.
    (b) It is the purpose of this Article to provide a secure financial basis for the continued operation of public schools. The intention of the General Assembly, in creating this Article, is to establish procedures, provide powers, and impose restrictions to ensure the financial and educational integrity of the public schools, while leaving principal responsibility for the educational policies of public schools to the boards of education within the State, consistent with the requirements for satisfying the public policy and purpose set forth in this Article.
(Source: P.A. 92-855, eff. 12-6-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1F-10)
(This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1F-165)
    Sec. 1F-10. Definitions. As used in this Article:
    "Authority" means a School Finance Authority created under this Article.
    "Bonds" means bonds authorized to be issued by the Authority under Section 1F-65 of this Code.
    "Budget" means the annual budget of the district required under Section 17-1 of this Code, as in effect from time to time.
    "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Authority.
    "District" means any elementary school district having a population of not more than 500,000 that prior to December 1, 2002 has had a Financial Oversight Panel established for the district under Section 1B-4 of this Code following the district's petitioning of the State Board of Education for the creation of the Financial Oversight Panel.
    "Financial plan" means the financial plan of the district to be developed pursuant to this Article, as in effect from time to time.
    "Fiscal year" means the fiscal year of the district.
    "State Board" means the State Board of Education.
    "State Superintendent" means the State Superintendent of Education.
    "Obligations" means bonds and notes of the Authority.
(Source: P.A. 92-855, eff. 12-6-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1F-15)
(This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1F-165)
    Sec. 1F-15. Establishment of Authority; duties of district.
    (a) A Financial Oversight Panel created under Article 1B of this Code for a district may petition the State Board for the establishment of a School Finance Authority for the district. The petition shall cite the reasons why the creation of a School Finance Authority for the district is necessary. The State Board may grant the petition upon determining that the approval of the petition is in the best educational and financial interests of the district. The State Board may establish an Authority without a petition from a Financial Oversight Panel. In any event, an Authority may only be established by resolution of the State Board within 5 days after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 92nd General Assembly.
    (b) Upon establishment of the Authority, all of the following shall occur:
        (1) There is established a body both corporate and
    	
politic to be known as the "(Name of School District) School Finance Authority", which in this name shall exercise all authority vested in an Authority by this Article.
        (2) The Financial Oversight Panel is abolished, and
    	
all of its rights, property, assets, contracts, and liabilities shall pass to and be vested in the Authority.
        (3) The duties and obligations of the district under
    	
Article 1B of this Code shall be transferred and become duties and obligations owed by the district to the School Finance Authority.
    (c) In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this Article and the provisions of Article 1B of this Code, the provisions of this Article control.
(Source: P.A. 92-855, eff. 12-6-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1F-20)
(This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1F-165)
    Sec. 1F-20. Members of Authority; meetings.
    (a) Upon establishment of a School Finance Authority under Section 1F-15 of this Code, the State Superintendent shall within 15 days thereafter appoint 5 members to serve on a School Finance Authority for the district. Of the initial members, 2 shall be appointed to serve a term of 2 years and 3 shall be appointed to serve a term of 3 years. Thereafter, each member shall serve for a term of 3 years and until his or her successor has been appointed. The State Superintendent shall designate one of the members of the Authority to serve as its Chairperson. In the event of vacancy or resignation, the State Superintendent shall, within 10 days after receiving notice, appoint a successor to serve out that member's term. The State Superintendent may remove a member for incompetence, malfeasance, neglect of duty, or other just cause.
    Members of the Authority shall be selected primarily on the basis of their experience and education in financial management, with consideration given to persons knowledgeable in education finance. Two members of the Authority shall be residents of the school district that the Authority serves. A member of the Authority may not be a member of the district's school board or an employee of the district nor may a member have a direct financial interest in the district.
    Authority members shall be paid a stipend approved by the State Superintendent of not more than $100 per meeting and may be reimbursed by the State Board for travel and other necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties. Unless paid from bonds issued under Section 1F-65 of this Code, the amount reimbursed members for their expenses shall be charged to the school district as part of any emergency financial assistance and incorporated as a part of the terms and conditions for repayment of the assistance or shall be deducted from the district's general State aid or evidence-based funding as provided in Section 1B-8 of this Code.
    The Authority may elect such officers as it deems appropriate.
    (b) The first meeting of the Authority shall be held at the call of the Chairperson. The Authority shall prescribe the times and places for its meetings and the manner in which regular and special meetings may be called and shall comply with the Open Meetings Act.
    Three members of the Authority shall constitute a quorum. When a vote is taken upon any measure before the Authority, a quorum being present, a majority of the votes of the members voting on the measure shall determine the outcome.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1F-25)
(This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1F-165)
    Sec. 1F-25. General powers. The purposes of the Authority shall be to exercise financial control over the district and to furnish financial assistance so that the district can provide public education within the district's jurisdiction while permitting the district to meet its obligations to its creditors and the holders of its debt. Except as expressly limited by this Article, the Authority shall have all powers granted to a voluntary or involuntary Financial Oversight Panel and to a Financial Administrator under Article 1B of this Code and all other powers necessary to meet its responsibilities and to carry out its purposes and the purposes of this Article, including without limitation all of the following powers, provided that the Authority shall have no power to terminate any employee without following the statutory procedures for such terminations set forth in this Code:
        (1) To sue and to be sued.
        (2) To make, cancel, modify, and execute contracts,
    	
leases, subleases, and all other instruments or agreements necessary or convenient for the exercise of the powers and functions granted by this Article, subject to Section 1F-45 of this Code. The Authority may at a regular or special meeting find that the district has insufficient or inadequate funds with respect to any contract, other than collective bargaining agreements.
        (3) To purchase real or personal property necessary
    	
or convenient for its purposes; to execute and deliver deeds for real property held in its own name; and to sell, lease, or otherwise dispose of such of its property as, in the judgment of the Authority, is no longer necessary for its purposes.
        (4) To appoint officers, agents, and employees of the
    	
Authority, including a chief executive officer, a chief fiscal officer, and a chief educational officer; to define their duties and qualifications; and to fix their compensation and employee benefits.
        (5) To transfer to the district such sums of money as
    	
are not required for other purposes.
        (6) To borrow money, including without limitation
    	
accepting State loans, and to issue obligations pursuant to this Article; to fund, refund, or advance refund the same; to provide for the rights of the holders of its obligations; and to repay any advances.
        (6.5) To levy all property tax levies that otherwise
    	
could be levied by the district, and to make levies pursuant to Section 1F-62 of this Code. This levy or levies shall be exempt from the Truth in Taxation Law and the Cook County Truth in Taxation Law.
        (7) Subject to the provisions of any contract with or
    	
for the benefit of the holders of its obligations, to purchase or redeem its obligations.
        (8) To procure all necessary goods and services for
    	
the Authority in compliance with the purchasing laws and requirements applicable to the district.
        (9) To do any and all things necessary or convenient
    	
to carry out its purposes and exercise the powers given to it by this Article.
        (10) To recommend annexation, consolidation,
    	
dissolution, or reorganization of the district, in whole or in part, to the State Board if in the Authority's judgment the circumstances so require. No such proposal for annexation, consolidation, dissolution, or reorganization shall occur unless the Authority and the school boards of all other districts directly affected by the annexation, consolidation, dissolution, or reorganization have each approved by majority vote the annexation, consolidation, dissolution, or reorganization. Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, upon approval of the proposal by the State Board, the State Board and all other affected entities shall forthwith implement the proposal. When a dissolution and annexation becomes effective for purposes of administration and attendance, the positions of teachers in contractual continued service in the district being dissolved shall be transferred to the annexing district or districts, pursuant to the provisions of Section 24-12 of this Code. In the event that the territory is added to 2 or more districts, the decision on which positions shall be transferred to which annexing districts shall be made by giving consideration to the proportionate percentage of pupils transferred and the annexing districts' staffing needs, and the transfer of teachers in contractual continued service into positions shall be based upon the request of those teachers in contractual continued service in order of seniority in the dissolving district. The status of all teachers in contractual continued service transferred to an annexing district shall not be lost, and the board of the annexing district is subject to this Code with respect to teachers in contractual continued service who are transferred in the same manner as if the person were the annexing district's employee and had been its employee during the time the person was actually employed by the board of the dissolving district from which the position was transferred.
(Source: P.A. 92-855, eff. 12-6-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1F-30)
(This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1F-165)
    Sec. 1F-30. Chief executive officer. The Authority may appoint a chief executive officer who, under the direction of the Authority, shall supervise the Authority's staff, including the chief educational officer and the chief fiscal officer, and shall have ultimate responsibility for implementing the policies, procedures, directives, and decisions of the Authority.
(Source: P.A. 92-855, eff. 12-6-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1F-35)
(This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1F-165)
    Sec. 1F-35. Chief educational officer. The Authority may at a regular or special meeting find that cause exists to cancel the contract of the school district's superintendent who is serving at the time the Authority is established. If there is no superintendent, then the Authority shall, following consultation with the district, employ a chief educational officer for the district, who shall have all of the powers and duties of a school district superintendent under this Code and such other duties as may be assigned by the Authority in accordance with this Code. The chief educational officer shall report to the Authority or the chief executive officer appointed by the Authority.
    The district shall not thereafter employ a superintendent during the period that a chief educational officer is serving in the district. The chief educational officer shall hold a certificate with a superintendent endorsement issued under Article 21 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 92-855, eff. 12-6-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1F-40)
(This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1F-165)
    Sec. 1F-40. Chief fiscal officer. The Authority may appoint a chief fiscal officer who, under the direction of the Authority, shall have all of the powers and duties of the district's chief school business official and any other duties regarding budgeting, accounting, and other financial matters that are assigned by the Authority, in accordance with this Code. The district may not employ a chief school business official during the period that the chief fiscal officer is serving in the district. The chief fiscal officer may but is not required to hold a certificate with a chief school business official endorsement issued under Article 21 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 92-855, eff. 12-6-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1F-45)
(This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1F-165)
    Sec. 1F-45. Collective bargaining agreements. The Authority shall have the power to negotiate collective bargaining agreements with the district's employees in lieu of and on behalf of the district. Upon concluding bargaining, the district shall execute the agreements negotiated by the Authority, and the district shall be bound by and shall administer the agreements in all respects as if the agreements had been negotiated by the district itself.
(Source: P.A. 92-855, eff. 12-6-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1F-50)
(This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1F-165)
    Sec. 1F-50. Deposits and investments.
    (a) The Authority shall have the power to establish checking and whatever other banking accounts it may deem appropriate for conducting its affairs.
    (b) Subject to the provisions of any contract with or for the benefit of the holders of its obligations, the Authority may invest any funds not required for immediate use or disbursement, as provided in the Public Funds Investment Act.
(Source: P.A. 92-855, eff. 12-6-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1F-55)
(This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1F-165)
    Sec. 1F-55. Cash accounts and bank accounts.
    (a) The Authority shall require the district or any officer of the district, including the district's treasurer, to establish and maintain separate cash accounts and separate bank accounts in accordance with such rules, standards, and procedures as the Authority may prescribe.
    (b) The Authority shall have the power to assume exclusive administration of the cash accounts and bank accounts of the district, to establish and maintain whatever new cash accounts and bank accounts it may deem appropriate, and to withdraw funds from these accounts for the lawful expenditures of the district.
(Source: P.A. 92-855, eff. 12-6-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1F-60)
(This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1F-165)
    Sec. 1F-60. Financial, management, and budgetary structure. Upon direction of the Authority, the district shall reorganize the financial accounts, management, and budgetary systems of the district in whatever manner the Authority deems appropriate to achieve greater financial responsibility and to reduce financial inefficiency.
(Source: P.A. 92-855, eff. 12-6-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1F-62)
(This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1F-165)
    Sec. 1F-62. School District Emergency Financial Assistance Fund; grants and loans.
    (a) Moneys in the School District Emergency Financial Assistance Fund established under Section 1B-8 of this Code may be allocated and expended by the State Board as grants to provide technical and consulting services to school districts to assess their financial condition and by the Illinois Finance Authority for emergency financial assistance loans to a School Finance Authority that petitions for emergency financial assistance. An emergency financial assistance loan to a School Finance Authority or borrowing from sources other than the State shall not be considered as part of the calculation of a district's debt for purposes of the limitation specified in Section 19-1 of this Code. From the amount allocated to each School Finance Authority, the State Board shall identify a sum sufficient to cover all approved costs of the School Finance Authority. If the State Board and State Superintendent have not approved emergency financial assistance in conjunction with the appointment of a School Finance Authority, the Authority's approved costs shall be paid from deductions from the district's general State aid or evidence-based funding.
    The School Finance Authority may prepare and file with the State Superintendent a proposal for emergency financial assistance for the school district and for its operations budget. No expenditures shall be authorized by the State Superintendent until he or she has approved the proposal of the School Finance Authority, either as submitted or in such lesser amount determined by the State Superintendent.
    (b) The amount of an emergency financial assistance loan that may be allocated to a School Finance Authority under this Article, including moneys necessary for the operations of the School Finance Authority, and borrowing from sources other than the State shall not exceed, in the aggregate, $4,000 times the number of pupils enrolled in the district during the school year ending June 30 prior to the date of approval by the State Board of the petition for emergency financial assistance, as certified to the school board and the School Finance Authority by the State Superintendent. However, this limitation does not apply to borrowing by the district secured by amounts levied by the district prior to establishment of the School Finance Authority. An emergency financial assistance grant shall not exceed $1,000 times the number of such pupils. A district may receive both a loan and a grant.
    (c) The payment of a State emergency financial assistance grant or loan shall be subject to appropriation by the General Assembly. State emergency financial assistance allocated and paid to a School Finance Authority under this Article may be applied to any fund or funds from which the School Finance Authority is authorized to make expenditures by law.
    (d) Any State emergency financial assistance proposed by the School Finance Authority and approved by the State Superintendent may be paid in its entirety during the initial year of the School Finance Authority's existence or spread in equal or declining amounts over a period of years not to exceed the period of the School Finance Authority's existence. The State Superintendent shall not approve any loan to the School Finance Authority unless the School Finance Authority has been unable to borrow sufficient funds to operate the district.
    All loan payments made from the School District Emergency Financial Assistance Fund to a School Finance Authority shall be required to be repaid not later than the date the School Finance Authority ceases to exist, with simple interest over the term of the loan at a rate equal to 50% of the one-year Constant Maturity Treasury (CMT) yield as last published by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System before the date on which the School Finance Authority's loan is approved by the State Board.
    The School Finance Authority shall establish and the Illinois Finance Authority shall approve the terms and conditions of the loan, including the schedule of repayments. The schedule shall provide for repayments commencing July 1 of each year or upon each fiscal year's receipt of moneys from a tax levy for emergency financial assistance. Repayment shall be incorporated into the annual budget of the district and may be made from any fund or funds of the district in which there are moneys available. Default on repayment is subject to the Illinois Grant Funds Recovery Act. When moneys are repaid as provided in this Section, they shall not be made available to the School Finance Authority for further use as emergency financial assistance under this Article at any time thereafter. All repayments required to be made by a School Finance Authority shall be received by the State Board and deposited in the School District Emergency Financial Assistance Fund.
    In establishing the terms and conditions for the repayment obligation of the School Finance Authority, the School Finance Authority shall annually determine whether a separate local property tax levy is required to meet that obligation. The School Finance Authority shall provide for a separate tax levy for emergency financial assistance repayment purposes. This tax levy shall not be subject to referendum approval. The amount of the levy shall not exceed the amount necessary to meet the annual emergency financial repayment obligations of the district, including principal and interest, as established by the School Finance Authority.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1F-90)
(This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1F-165)
    Sec. 1F-90. Tax anticipation warrants. An Authority shall have the same power to issue tax anticipation warrants as a school board under Section 17-16 of this Code. Tax anticipation warrants are considered borrowing from sources other than the State and are subject to Section 1F-62 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 92-855, eff. 12-6-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1F-115)
(This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1F-165)
    Sec. 1F-115. State or district not liable on obligations. Obligations shall not be deemed to constitute (i) a debt or liability of the State, the district, or any political subdivision of the State or district other than the Authority or (ii) a pledge of the full faith and credit of the State, the district, or any political subdivision of the State or district other than the Authority but shall be payable solely from the funds and revenues provided for in this Article. The issuance of obligations shall not directly, indirectly, or contingently obligate the State, the district, or any political subdivision of the State or district other than the Authority to levy any form of taxation therefor or to make any appropriation for their payment. Nothing in this Section shall prevent or be construed to prevent the Authority from pledging its full faith and credit to the payment of obligations. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to authorize the Authority to create a debt of the State or the district within the meaning of the Constitution or laws of Illinois, and all obligations issued by the Authority pursuant to the provisions of this Article are payable and shall state that they are payable solely from the funds and revenues pledged for their payment in accordance with the resolution authorizing their issuance or any trust indenture executed as security therefor. The State or the district shall not in any event be liable for the payment of the principal of or interest on any obligations of the Authority or for the performance of any pledge, obligation, or agreement of any kind whatsoever that may be undertaken by the Authority. No breach of any such pledge, obligation, or agreement may impose any liability upon the State or the district or any charge upon their general credit or against their taxing power.
(Source: P.A. 92-855, eff. 12-6-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1F-120)
(This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1F-165)
    Sec. 1F-120. Obligations as legal investments. The obligations issued under the provisions of this Article are hereby made securities in which all public officers and bodies of this State, all political subdivisions of this State, all persons carrying on an insurance business, all banks, bankers, trust companies, savings banks, and savings associations (including savings and loan associations, building and loan associations, investment companies, and other persons carrying on a banking business), and all credit unions, pension funds, administrators, and guardians who are or may be authorized to invest in bonds or in other obligations of the State may properly and legally invest funds, including capital, in their control or belonging to them. The obligations are also hereby made securities that may be deposited with and may be received by all public officers and bodies of the State, all political subdivisions of the State, and public corporations for any purpose for which the deposit of bonds or other obligations of the State is authorized.
(Source: P.A. 92-855, eff. 12-6-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1F-130)
(This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1F-165)
    Sec. 1F-130. Reports.
    (a) The Authority, upon taking office and annually thereafter, shall prepare and submit to the Governor, General Assembly, and State Superintendent a report that includes the audited financial statement for the preceding fiscal year, an approved financial plan, and a statement of the major steps necessary to accomplish the objectives of the financial plan.
    (b) Annual reports shall be submitted on or before March 1 of each year.
    (c) The requirement for reporting to the General Assembly shall be satisfied by filing copies of the report as provided in Section 3.1 of the General Assembly Organization Act and by filing additional copies with the State Government Report Distribution Center for the General Assembly as required under subdivision (t) of Section 7 of the State Library Act.
(Source: P.A. 92-855, eff. 12-6-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1F-135)
(This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1F-165)
    Sec. 1F-135. Audit of Authority. The Authority shall be subject to audit in the manner provided for the audit of State funds and accounts. A copy of the audit report shall be submitted to the State Superintendent, the Governor, the Speaker and Minority Leader of the House of Representatives, and the President and Minority Leader of the Senate.
(Source: P.A. 92-855, eff. 12-6-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1F-140)
(This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1F-165)
    Sec. 1F-140. Assistance by State agencies, units of local government, and school districts. The district shall render such services to and permit the use of its facilities and resources by the Authority at no charge as may be requested by the Authority. Any State agency, unit of local government, or school district may, within its lawful powers and duties, render such services to the Authority as may be requested by the Authority. Upon request of the Authority, any State agency, unit of local government, or school district is authorized and empowered to loan to the Authority such officers and employees as the Authority may deem necessary in carrying out its functions and duties. Officers and employees so transferred shall not lose or forfeit their employment status or rights.
(Source: P.A. 92-855, eff. 12-6-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1F-145)
(This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1F-165)
    Sec. 1F-145. Property of Authority exempt from taxation. The property of the Authority is exempt from taxation.
(Source: P.A. 92-855, eff. 12-6-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1F-150)
(This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1F-165)
    Sec. 1F-150. Sanctions.
    (a) No member, officer, employee, or agent of the district may commit the district to any contract or other obligation or incur any liability on behalf of the district for any purpose if the amount of the contract, obligation, or liability is in excess of the amount authorized for that purpose then available under the financial plan and budget then in effect.
    (b) No member, officer, employee, or agent of the district may commit the district to any contract or other obligation on behalf of the district for the payment of money for any purpose required to be approved by the Authority unless the contract or other obligation has been approved by the Authority.
    (c) No member, officer, employee, or agent of the district may take any action in violation of any valid order of the Authority, may fail or refuse to take any action required by any such order, may prepare, present, certify, or report any information, including any projections or estimates, for the Authority or any of its agents that is false or misleading, or, upon learning that any such information is false or misleading, may fail promptly to advise the Authority or its agents.
    (d) In addition to any penalty or liability under any other law, any member, officer, employee, or agent of the district who violates subsection (a), (b), or (c) of this Section is subject to appropriate administrative discipline as may be imposed by the Authority, including, if warranted, suspension from duty without pay, removal from office, or termination of employment.
(Source: P.A. 92-855, eff. 12-6-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1F-155)
(This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1F-165)
    Sec. 1F-155. Abolition of Authority. The Authority shall be abolished 10 years after its creation or one year after all its obligations issued under the provisions of this Article have been fully paid and discharged, whichever comes later. However, the State Board, upon recommendation of the Authority and if no obligations are outstanding, may abolish the Authority at any time after the Authority has been in existence for 3 years. Upon the abolition of the Authority, all of its records shall be transferred to the State Board and any property of the Authority shall pass to and be vested in the State Board.
(Source: P.A. 92-855, eff. 12-6-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1F-160)
(This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1F-165)
    Sec. 1F-160. Limitations of actions after abolition; indemnification; legal representation.
    (a) Abolition of the Authority pursuant to Section 1F-155 of this Code shall bar any remedy available against the Authority, its members, employees, or agents for any right or claim existing or any liability incurred prior to the abolition unless the action or other proceeding is commenced prior to the expiration of 2 years after the date of the abolition.
    (b) The Authority may indemnify any member, officer, employee, or agent who was or is a party or is threatened to be made a party to any threatened, pending, or completed action, suit, or proceeding, whether civil, criminal, administrative, or investigative, by reason of the fact that he or she was a member, officer, employee, or agent of the Authority, against expenses (including attorney's fees, judgments, fines, and amounts paid in settlement actually and reasonably incurred by him or her in connection with the action, suit, or proceeding) if he or she acted in good faith and in a manner that he or she reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the best interests of the Authority and, with respect to any criminal action or proceeding, had no reasonable cause to believe his or her conduct was unlawful. The termination of any action, suit, or proceeding by judgment, order, settlement, or conviction or upon a plea of nolo contendere or its equivalent, shall not, of itself, create a presumption that the person did not act in good faith in a manner that he or she reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the best interest of the Authority and, with respect to any criminal action or proceeding, had reasonable cause to believe that his or her conduct was unlawful.
    To the extent that a member, officer, employee, or agent of the Authority has been successful, on the merits or otherwise, in the defense of any such action, suit, or proceeding referred to in this subsection (b) or in defense of any claim, issue, or matter therein, he or she shall be indemnified against expenses, including attorney's fees, actually and reasonably incurred by him or her in connection therewith. Any such indemnification shall be made by the Authority only as authorized in the specific case, upon a determination that indemnification of the member, officer, employee, or agent is proper in the circumstances because he or she has met the applicable standard of conduct. The determination shall be made (i) by the Authority by a majority vote of a quorum consisting of members who are not parties to the action, suit, or proceeding or (ii) if such a quorum is not obtainable or, even if obtainable, a quorum of disinterested members so directs, by independent legal counsel in a written opinion.
    Reasonable expenses incurred in defending an action, suit, or proceeding shall be paid by the Authority in advance of the final disposition of the action, suit, or proceeding, as authorized by the Authority in the specific case, upon receipt of an undertaking by or on behalf of the member, officer, employee, or agent to repay the amount, unless it is ultimately determined that he or she is entitled to be indemnified by the Authority as authorized in this Section.
    Any member, officer, employee, or agent against whom any action, suit, or proceeding is brought may employ his or her own attorney to appear on his or her behalf.
    The right to indemnification accorded by this Section shall not limit any other right to indemnification to which the member, officer, employee, or agent may be entitled. Any rights under this Section shall inure to the benefit of the heirs, executors, and administrators of any member, officer, employee, or agent of the Authority.
    The Authority may purchase and maintain insurance on behalf of any person who is or was a member, officer, employee, or agent of the Authority against any liability asserted against him or her and incurred by him or her in any such capacity or arising out of his or her status as such, whether or not the Authority would have the power to indemnify him or her against the liability under the provisions of this Section.
    The Authority shall be considered a State agency for purposes of receiving representation by the Attorney General. Members, officers, employees, and agents of the Authority shall be entitled to representation and indemnification under the State Employee Indemnification Act.
(Source: P.A. 92-855, eff. 12-6-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1F-165)
(This Section scheduled to be repealed in accordance with 105 ILCS 5/1F-165)
    Sec. 1F-165. Repeal. When the Authority established pursuant to this Article is abolished pursuant to Section 1F-155, this Article shall be repealed.
(Source: P.A. 97-429, eff. 8-16-11.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 1G heading)
ARTICLE 1G. MATHEMATICS AND SCIENCE
BLOCK GRANT PROGRAM

    (105 ILCS 5/1G-1)
    Sec. 1G-1. Purpose. The purpose of this Article is to permit greater flexibility and efficiency in the distribution and use of certain State funds available to local education agencies in order to ensure that students meet or exceed the Illinois Learning Standards in mathematics and science. The State Board of Education shall administer a Mathematics and Science Block Grant Program and award Program funds to eligible recipients upon application. As used in this Section, "school district" shall include those schools designated as "laboratory schools".
(Source: P.A. 93-50, eff. 7-1-03.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1G-5)
    Sec. 1G-5. Authorized Uses. Mathematics and Science Block Grant Program funds shall be used in the following manner consistent with application requirements established by the State Board of Education as provided in Section 1G-15 of this Article:
        (1) To expand learning opportunities in grades
    	
kindergarten through 8, to ensure that every student meets the Illinois Learning Standards for mathematics, as defined by the learning benchmarks and relevant performance standards for middle and junior high schools, by the end of eighth grade, including standards related to number sense, estimation and measurement, algebra and analytical methods, geometry, data analysis, and probability;
        (2) To expand learning opportunities in grades
    	
kindergarten through 8, to ensure that every student meets the Illinois Learning Standards for science, as defined by the learning benchmarks and relevant performance standards for middle and junior high schools, by the end of eighth grade, including standards related to inquiry and design; concepts and principles of science; and science, technology, and society;
        (3) To train and retrain teachers of grades
    	
kindergarten through 12 to be more proficient in the teaching of mathematics and science by providing professional development opportunities;
        (4) To improve curriculum, instruction, and
    	
assessment relevant to the Illinois Learning Standards for grades kindergarten through 12; and
        (5) To supply classrooms with materials and equipment
    	
related to the teaching and learning of mathematics and science.
(Source: P.A. 93-50, eff. 7-1-03.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1G-10)
    Sec. 1G-10. Allocation. Mathematics and Science Block Grant Program funds shall be distributed to school districts, subject to appropriation and based upon rules established by the State Board of Education. Distribution of moneys to school districts shall be made in semi-annual installment payments, one payment to be made on or before October 30, and one payment to be made prior to April 30 of each year.
(Source: P.A. 93-50, eff. 7-1-03.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1G-15)
    Sec. 1G-15. Application. Mathematics and Science Block Grant Program funds shall be made available to each eligible school district upon completion of an application process that is consistent with rules established by the State Board of Education. The application shall include the planned use of the funds.
(Source: P.A. 93-50, eff. 7-1-03.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1G-20)
    Sec. 1G-20. Rules. The State Board of Education shall adopt rules as may be necessary to implement the provisions of this Article.
(Source: P.A. 93-50, eff. 7-1-03.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 1H heading)
ARTICLE 1H. FINANCIAL OVERSIGHT PANELS
(Source: P.A. 97-429, eff. 8-16-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1H-1)
    Sec. 1H-1. Short title. This Article may be cited as the Financial Oversight Panel Law.
(Source: P.A. 97-429, eff. 8-16-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1H-5)
    Sec. 1H-5. Findings; purpose; intent.
    (a) The General Assembly finds all of the following:
        (1) A fundamental goal of the people of this State,
    	
as expressed in Section 1 of Article X of the Illinois Constitution, is the educational development of all persons to the limits of their capacities. When a board of education faces financial difficulties, continued operation of the public school system is threatened.
        (2) A sound financial structure is essential to the
    	
continued operation of any school system. It is vital to commercial, educational, and cultural interests that public schools remain in operation. To achieve that goal, public school systems must have effective access to the private market to borrow short and long term funds.
        (3) To promote the financial integrity of districts,
    	
as defined in this Article, it is necessary to provide for the creation of financial oversight panels with the powers necessary to promote sound financial management and to ensure the continued operation of the public schools.
    (b) It is the purpose of this Article to provide a secure financial basis for the continued operation of public schools. The intention of the General Assembly, in creating this Article, is to establish procedures, provide powers, and impose restrictions to ensure the financial and educational integrity of public school districts, while leaving principal responsibility for the educational policies of public schools to their boards of education, consistent with the requirements for satisfying the public policy and purpose set forth in this Article.
(Source: P.A. 97-429, eff. 8-16-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1H-10)
    Sec. 1H-10. Definitions. As used in this Article:
    "Budget" means the annual budget of the district required under Section 17-1 of this Code, as in effect from time to time.
    "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Panel.
    "District" means any school district having a population of not more than 500,000 that has had a Financial Oversight Panel established under this Article.
    "Financial plan" means the financial plan of the district to be developed pursuant to this Article, as in effect from time to time.
    "Fiscal year" means the fiscal year of the district.
    "Obligations" means notes or other short-term debts or liabilities of the Panel.
    "Panel" means a Financial Oversight Panel created under this Article.
    "State Board" means the State Board of Education.
    "State Superintendent" means the State Superintendent of Education.
(Source: P.A. 97-429, eff. 8-16-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1H-15)
    Sec. 1H-15. Establishment of Financial Oversight Panels; duties of district.
    (a) A school district may petition the State Board for the establishment of a Financial Oversight Panel for the district or the State Board may establish a Panel without a petition from the district. The petition shall cite the reasons why the creation of a Financial Oversight Panel for the district is necessary. In determining whether or not to place a district under a Panel, the State Board shall consider all of the following:
        (1) If a Panel is in the best educational and
    	
financial interests of the district.
        (2) If a Panel is in the best interest of other
    	
schools in the area and the educational welfare of all the pupils therein.
        (3) Whether the board of education has complied with
    	
the requirements of Section 1A-8 of this Code.
    (b) Upon establishment of a Financial Oversight Panel, all of the following shall occur:
        (1) There is established a body both corporate and
    	
politic to be known as the "(Name of School District) Financial Oversight Panel", which in this name shall exercise all authority vested in a Panel by this Article.
        (2) The powers and duties of a Financial Oversight
    	
Panel established pursuant to this Article shall include the duties and obligations of financial oversight panels established under Article 1B of this Code, in addition to any duties and obligations established under this Article. However, if there is any conflict between the provisions of this Article and the provisions of Article 1B of this Code, the provisions of this Article control.
        (3) The Financial Oversight Panel, the school board,
    	
and the district superintendent or chief executive officer shall develop goals and objectives to assist the district in obtaining financial stability. The goals and objectives must be developed as part of the financial plan that the school board is required to develop, adopt, and submit to the Panel in accordance with Section 1B-12 of this Code. The goals and objectives must be formally reviewed at agreed to intervals, but at least one time per year. Review shall include progress made and recommendations and modifications needed to achieve abolition of financial oversight provided for under Section 1H-115 of this Code.
    (c) Any school district having a Financial Oversight Panel established under Article 1B of this Code or any Financial Oversight Panel established under Article 1B may petition the State Board for the establishment of a Financial Oversight Panel under this Article and concurrent dissolution of the Article 1B Panel. All records, papers, books, funds, or other assets or liabilities belonging to the dissolving Financial Oversight Panel shall be transferred to the newly established Financial Oversight Panel.
(Source: P.A. 97-429, eff. 8-16-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1H-20)
    Sec. 1H-20. Members of Panel; meetings.
    (a) Upon establishment of a Financial Oversight Panel under Section 1H-15 of this Code, the State Superintendent shall within 15 working days thereafter appoint 5 members to serve on a Financial Oversight Panel for the district. Members appointed to the Panel shall serve at the pleasure of the State Superintendent. The State Superintendent shall designate one of the members of the Panel to serve as its Chairperson. In the event of vacancy or resignation, the State Superintendent shall, within 10 days after receiving notice, appoint a successor to serve out that member's term.
    (b) Members of the Panel shall be selected primarily on the basis of their experience and education in financial management, with consideration given to persons knowledgeable in education finance. Two members of the Panel shall be residents of the school district that the Panel serves. A member of the Panel may not be a member of the district's school board or an employee of the district nor may a member have a direct financial interest in the district.
    (c) Panel members may be reimbursed by the State Board for travel and other necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties. The amount reimbursed members for their expenses shall be charged to the school district as part of any emergency financial assistance and incorporated as a part of the terms and conditions for repayment of the assistance or shall be deducted from the district's general State aid or evidence-based funding as provided in Section 1H-65 of this Code.
    (d) With the exception of the chairperson, who shall be designated as provided in subsection (a) of this Section, the Panel may elect such officers as it deems appropriate.
    (e) The first meeting of the Panel shall be held at the call of the Chairperson. The Panel shall prescribe the times and places for its meetings and the manner in which regular and special meetings may be called and shall comply with the Open Meetings Act. The Panel shall also comply with the Freedom of Information Act.
    (f) Three members of the Panel shall constitute a quorum. A majority of members present is required to pass a measure.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1H-25)
    Sec. 1H-25. General powers.
    (a) The purposes of the Panel shall be to exercise financial control over the district and to furnish financial assistance so that the district can provide public education within the district's jurisdiction while permitting the district to meet its obligations to its creditors and the holders of its debt. Except as expressly limited by this Article, the Panel shall have all powers granted to a voluntary or involuntary Financial Oversight Panel and to a Financial Administrator under Article 1B of this Code and all other powers necessary to meet its responsibilities and to carry out its purposes and the purposes of this Article, including without limitation all of the following powers, provided that the Panel shall have no power to terminate an employee without following the statutory procedures for such terminations set forth in this Code:
        (1) To sue and to be sued.
        (2) To determine at a regular or special meeting that
    	
the district has insufficient or inadequate funds or other financial resources with respect to any contract (other than collective bargaining agreements), leases, subleases, and other instruments or agreements applicable to or binding upon the school board, and to make, cancel, modify, or execute contracts (other than collective bargaining agreements), leases, subleases, and all other instruments or agreements necessary, convenient, or otherwise beneficial to the district and consistent with the powers and functions granted by this Article or other applicable law.
        (3) To lease or purchase real or personal property
    	
necessary or convenient for its purposes; to execute and deliver deeds for real property held in its own name; and to sell, lease, or otherwise dispose of such of its property as, in the judgment of the Panel, is no longer necessary for its purposes.
        (4) To employ officers, agents, and employees of the
    	
Panel, to define their duties and qualifications, and to fix their compensation and benefits.
        (5) To transfer to the district such sums of money as
    	
are not required for other purposes.
        (6) To borrow money, including without limitation
    	
accepting State loans, and to issue obligations pursuant to this Article; to fund, refund, or advance refund the same; to provide for the rights of the holders of its obligations; and to repay any advances.
        (7) To levy all property tax levies that otherwise
    	
could be levied by the district if the district fails to certify and return the certificate of tax levy to the county clerk on or before the first Tuesday in November, and to make levies pursuant to Section 1H-65 of this Code.
        (8) Subject to the provisions of any contract with or
    	
for the benefit of the holders of its obligations, to purchase or redeem its obligations.
        (9) To procure all necessary goods and services for
    	
the Panel in compliance with the purchasing laws and requirements applicable to the district.
        (10) To do any and all things necessary or convenient
    	
to carry out its purposes and exercise the powers given to it by this Article.
        (11) To recommend any type of reorganization of the
    	
district, in whole or in part, pursuant to Article 7 or 11E of this Code or Section 10-22.22b or 10-22.22c of this Code to the General Assembly if in the Panel's judgment the circumstances so require.
    (b) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this Section, the Panel shall have no power to do any of the following:
        (1) Unilaterally cancel or modify any collective
    	
bargaining agreement in force upon the date of creation of the Panel.
        (2) Lease, sublease, buy, build, or otherwise acquire
    	
any additional school buildings or grounds for or on behalf of the district without prior approval by referendum held pursuant to Section 19-2 or 19-3 of this Code.
        (3) Authorize payments for or incur any debt for any
    	
additional school buildings or grounds as specified in subdivision (2) of this subsection (b) without prior approval via referendum pursuant to the provisions of Sections 19-2 through 19-7 of this Code, the provisions of Section 10-22.36 of this Code to the contrary notwithstanding.
(Source: P.A. 97-429, eff. 8-16-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1H-30)
    Sec. 1H-30. Employees. The Panel may employ individuals under this Section if it is so warranted. These individuals may include any of the following:
        (1) A chief executive officer who shall supervise the
    	
Panel's staff, including the chief educational officer and the chief fiscal officer, and shall have ultimate responsibility for implementing the policies, procedures, directives, and decisions of the Panel. The chief executive officer shall have the authority to determine the agenda and order of business at school board meetings, as needed in order to carry forward and implement the objectives and priorities of the school board and Financial Oversight Panel in the administration and management of the district. This individual is not required to hold any certificate issued under Article 21 of this Code. The chief executive officer shall have the powers and duties as assigned by the Panel in accordance with this Code.
        (2) A chief educational officer, who may be employed
    	
by the Panel if there is no superintendent in the district or if the Panel, at a regular or special meeting, finds that cause exists to cancel the contract of the district's superintendent who is serving at the time the Panel is established. Cancellation of an existing superintendent contract may be done only pursuant to the same requirements and in the same manner as the school board may cancel the contract. A chief educational officer employed under this subdivision (2) shall have the powers and duties of a school district superintendent under this Code and such other duties as may be assigned by the Panel in accordance with this Code.
        (3) A chief fiscal officer, who may be employed by
    	
the Panel. This individual shall be under the direction of the Panel or the chief executive officer employed by the Panel and shall have all of the powers and duties of the district's chief school business official and any other duties regarding budgeting, accounting, and other financial matters that are assigned by the Panel, in accordance with this Code.
        (4) A superintendent, who shall be under the
    	
direction of the Panel or the chief executive officer employed by the Panel and shall have all of the powers and duties of a school district superintendent under this Code assigned by the Panel and such other duties as may be assigned by the Panel in accordance with this Code.
        (5) A chief school business official, who shall have
    	
all of the powers and duties of a chief school business official under this Code assigned by the Panel and such other duties as may be assigned by the Panel in accordance with this Code.
    An individual employed by the Panel as a superintendent or a chief school business official under this Section must hold the appropriate certification for these positions. Individuals employed by the Panel as a chief executive officer, chief educational officer, or chief fiscal officer under this Section are not required to hold certification. A chief educational officer under this Section must not be employed by the Panel during a period a superintendent is employed by the district and a chief fiscal officer under this Section must not be employed by the Panel during a period a chief school business official is employed by the district.
    Individuals employed under subdivision (2), (3), (4), or (5) of this Section shall report to the Panel or to the chief executive officer under this Section if there is one.
(Source: P.A. 97-429, eff. 8-16-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1H-35)
    Sec. 1H-35. School treasurer.
    (a) In Class I county school units and in each district that forms part of a Class II county school unit but that has withdrawn from the jurisdiction and authority of the trustees of schools of the township in which the district is located and from the jurisdiction and authority of the township treasurer in the Class II county school unit, the Panel may, in its discretion, remove the treasurer appointed or elected by the school board of the district and appoint a new treasurer to succeed the removed treasurer as provided in Section 8-19 of this Code.
    (b) In the case of a district located in a Class II county school unit where such district is subject to the jurisdiction and authority of township trustees and the jurisdiction and authority of the township treasurer, the Panel may require production of bank reconciliations and other reports or statements as required under Sections 8-6 and 8-13 through 8-15 of this Code.
    (c) All school treasurers appointed or elected pursuant to this Section shall be subject to the provisions of Sections 8-2 through 8-20 and other applicable provisions of the School Code.
(Source: P.A. 97-429, eff. 8-16-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1H-45)
    Sec. 1H-45. Collective bargaining agreements. In conjunction with the district, the Panel shall have the power to negotiate collective bargaining agreements with the district's employees. Upon union ratification, the district and the Panel shall execute the agreements negotiated by the Panel, and the district shall be bound by and shall administer the agreements in all respects as if the agreements had been negotiated by the district itself.
(Source: P.A. 97-429, eff. 8-16-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1H-50)
    Sec. 1H-50. Deposits and investments.
    (a) The Panel shall have the power to establish checking and whatever other banking accounts it may deem appropriate for conducting its affairs.
    (b) Subject to the provisions of any contract with or for the benefit of the holders of its obligations, the Panel may invest any funds not required for immediate use or disbursement, as provided in the Public Funds Investment Act.
(Source: P.A. 97-429, eff. 8-16-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1H-55)
    Sec. 1H-55. Cash accounts and bank accounts.
    (a) The Panel shall require the district or any officer of the district, including the district's treasurer, to establish and maintain separate cash accounts and separate bank accounts in accordance with such rules, standards, and procedures as the Panel may prescribe.
    (b) The Panel shall have the power to assume exclusive administration of the cash accounts and bank accounts of the district, to establish and maintain whatever new cash accounts and bank accounts it may deem appropriate, and to withdraw funds from these accounts for the lawful expenditures of the district.
(Source: P.A. 97-429, eff. 8-16-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1H-60)
    Sec. 1H-60. Financial, management, and budgetary structure. Upon direction of the Panel, the district shall reorganize the financial accounts, management, and budgetary systems of the district in a manner consistent with rules adopted by the State Board regarding accounting, budgeting, financial reporting, and auditing as the Panel deems appropriate to remedy the conditions that led the Panel to be created and to achieve greater financial responsibility and to reduce financial inefficiency.
(Source: P.A. 97-429, eff. 8-16-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1H-65)
    Sec. 1H-65. School district emergency financial assistance; grants and loans. The Panel may prepare and file with the State Superintendent a proposal for emergency financial assistance for the school district and for the operations budget of the Panel, in accordance with Section 1B-8 of this Code. A school district may receive both a loan and a grant.
(Source: P.A. 97-429, eff. 8-16-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1H-70)
    Sec. 1H-70. Tax anticipation warrants, tax anticipation notes, revenue anticipation certificates or notes, general State aid or evidence-based funding anticipation certificates, and lines of credit. With the approval of the State Superintendent and provided that the district is unable to secure short-term financing after 3 attempts, a Panel shall have the same power as a district to do the following:
        (1) issue tax anticipation warrants under the
    	
provisions of Section 17-16 of this Code against taxes levied by either the school board or the Panel pursuant to Section 1H-25 of this Code;
        (2) issue tax anticipation notes under the provisions
    	
of the Tax Anticipation Note Act against taxes levied by either the school board or the Panel pursuant to Section 1H-25 of this Code;
        (3) issue revenue anticipation certificates or notes
    	
under the provisions of the Revenue Anticipation Act;
        (4) issue general State aid or evidence-based funding
    	
anticipation certificates under the provisions of Section 18-18 of this Code; and
        (5) establish and utilize lines of credit under the
    	
provisions of Section 17-17 of this Code.
    Tax anticipation warrants, tax anticipation notes, revenue anticipation certificates or notes, general State aid or evidence-based funding anticipation certificates, and lines of credit are considered borrowing from sources other than the State and are subject to Section 1H-65 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1H-75)
    Sec. 1H-75. Tax for emergency Financial Oversight Panel financial aid. If the Panel is unable to secure short-term borrowing pursuant to Section 1H-70 of this Code, the Panel:
        (1) based upon an original or amended budget filed by
    	
a Financial Oversight Panel and approved by the State Board of Education, may levy a one-time-only tax, in an amount not to exceed 75% of the amount expended by the school district subject to the oversight of the Panel in the immediately preceding year for educational, operations and maintenance, transportation, and municipal retirement purposes; as reflected in the most recently filed annual financial report, and as adjusted by the CPI most recently under the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law;
        (2) following approval by the State Board of
    	
Education, shall file a certificate of tax levy with the county clerk or clerks with whom the school district must file tax levies, such taxes to be extended against all the property of the school district upon the value of the taxable property within its territory, as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue; and
        (3) may issue warrants, or may provide a fund to meet
    	
the expenses by issuing and disposing of warrants, drawn against and in anticipation of the tax levied pursuant to this Section, for the payment of the necessary expenses of the district, either for transportation, educational, or all operations and maintenance purposes or for payments to the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund, as the case may be, to the extent of 75% of the total amount of the tax so levied. The warrants shall show upon their face that they are payable in the numerical order of their issuance solely from such taxes when collected, and shall be received by any collector of taxes in payment of the taxes against which they are issued, and such taxes shall be set apart and held for their payment; every warrant shall bear interest, payable only out of the taxes against which it is drawn, at a rate not exceeding the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, if issued before July 1, 1971 and if issued thereafter at the rate of not to exceed the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, from the date of its issuance until paid or until notice shall be given by publication in a newspaper or otherwise that the money for its payment is available and that it will be paid on presentation, unless a lower rate of interest is specified therein, in which case the interest shall be computed and paid at the lower rate.
(Source: P.A. 97-429, eff. 8-16-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1H-85)
    Sec. 1H-85. Obligations as legal investments. The obligations issued under the provisions of this Article are hereby made securities in which all public officers and bodies of this State, all political subdivisions of this State, all persons carrying on an insurance business, all banks, bankers, trust companies, savings banks, and savings associations (including savings and loan associations, building and loan associations, investment companies, and other persons carrying on a banking business), and all credit unions, pension funds, administrators, and guardians who are or may be authorized to invest in bonds or in other obligations of the State may properly and legally invest funds, including capital, in their control or belonging to them. The obligations are also hereby made securities that may be deposited with and may be received by all public officers and bodies of the State, all political subdivisions of the State, and public corporations for any purpose for which the deposit of bonds or other obligations of the State is authorized.
(Source: P.A. 97-429, eff. 8-16-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1H-90)
    Sec. 1H-90. Reports. The Panel, upon taking office and annually thereafter, shall prepare and submit to the State Superintendent a report that includes the audited financial statement for the preceding fiscal year prepared and audited in compliance with the provisions of Sections 3-7 and 3-15.1 of this Code, an approved financial plan, and a statement of the major steps necessary to accomplish the objectives of the financial plan. This report must be submitted annually by March 1 of each year and must detail information from the previous school year. The school board must be allowed to comment on the annual report of the Panel, and the comments of the school board shall be included as an appendix to such annual report of the Panel.
(Source: P.A. 97-429, eff. 8-16-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1H-95)
    Sec. 1H-95. Audit of Panel. The State Superintendent may require a separate audit of the Panel, otherwise the activities of the Panel must be included in the scope of the audit of the school district. A copy of the audit report covering the Panel must be submitted to the State Superintendent.
(Source: P.A. 97-429, eff. 8-16-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1H-100)
    Sec. 1H-100. Assistance by State agencies, units of local government, and school districts. The district shall render such services to and permit the use of its facilities and resources by the Panel at no charge as may be requested by the Panel. Any State agency, unit of local government, or school district may, within its lawful powers and duties, render such services to the Panel as may be requested by the Panel. Upon request of the Panel, any State agency, unit of local government, or school district is authorized and empowered to loan to the Panel such officers and employees as the Panel may deem necessary in carrying out its functions and duties. Officers and employees so transferred shall not lose or forfeit their employment status or rights.
(Source: P.A. 97-429, eff. 8-16-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1H-105)
    Sec. 1H-105. Property of Panel exempt from taxation. The property of the Panel is exempt from taxation.
(Source: P.A. 97-429, eff. 8-16-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1H-110)
    Sec. 1H-110. Sanctions.
    (a) No member, officer, employee, or agent of the district may commit the district to any contract or other obligation or incur any liability on behalf of the district for any purpose if the amount of the contract, obligation, or liability is in excess of the amount authorized for that purpose then available under the financial plan and budget then in effect.
    (b) No member, officer, employee, or agent of the district may commit the district to any contract or other obligation on behalf of the district for the payment of money for any purpose required to be approved by the Panel unless the contract or other obligation has been approved by the Panel.
    (c) No member, officer, employee, or agent of the district may take any action in violation of any valid order of the Panel, may fail or refuse to take any action required by any such order, may prepare, present, certify, or report any information, including any projections or estimates, for the Panel or any of its agents that is false or misleading, or, upon learning that any such information is false or misleading, may fail promptly to advise the Panel or its agents.
    (d) In addition to any penalty or liability under any other law, any member, officer, employee, or agent of the district who violates subsection (a), (b), or (c) of this Section is subject to appropriate administrative discipline as may be imposed by the Panel, including, if warranted, suspension from duty without pay, removal from office, or termination of employment.
(Source: P.A. 97-429, eff. 8-16-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1H-115)
    Sec. 1H-115. Abolition of Panel.
    (a) Except as provided in subsections (b), (c), (d), and (e) of this Section, the Panel shall be abolished 10 years after its creation.
    (b) The State Board, upon recommendation of the Panel or petition of the school board, may abolish the Panel at any time after the Panel has been in existence for 3 years if no obligations of the Panel are outstanding or remain undefeased and upon investigation and finding that:
        (1) none of the factors specified in Section 1A-8 of
    	
this Code remain applicable to the district; and
        (2) there has been substantial achievement of the
    	
goals and objectives established pursuant to the financial plan and required under Section 1H-15 of this Code.
    (c) The Panel of a district that otherwise meets all of the requirements for abolition of a Panel under subsection (b) of this Section, except for the fact that there are outstanding financial obligations of the Panel, may petition the State Board for reinstatement of all of the school board's powers and duties assumed by the Panel; and if approved by the State Board, then:
        (1) the Panel shall continue in operation, but its
    	
powers and duties shall be limited to those necessary to manage and administer its outstanding obligations;
        (2) the school board shall once again begin
    	
exercising all of the powers and duties otherwise allowed by statute; and
        (3) the Panel shall be abolished as provided in
    	
subsection (a) of this Section.
    (d) If the Panel of a district otherwise meets all of the requirements for abolition of a Panel under subsection (b) of this Section, except for outstanding obligations of the Panel, then the district may petition the State Board for abolition of the Panel if the district:
        (1) establishes an irrevocable trust fund, the
    	
purpose of which is to provide moneys to defease the outstanding obligations of the Panel; and
        (2) issues funding bonds pursuant to the provisions
    	
of Sections 19-8 and 19-9 of this Code.
    A district with a Panel that falls under this subsection (d) shall be abolished as provided in subsection (a) of this Section.
    (e) The duration of a Panel may be continued for more than 10 years after the date of its creation if the State Board extends the Panel's duration under paragraph (3) of subsection (e) of Section 18-8.15 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/1H-120)
    Sec. 1H-120. Indemnification; legal representation; limitations of actions after abolition.
    (a) The Panel may indemnify any member, officer, employee, or agent who was or is a party or is threatened to be made a party to any threatened, pending, or completed action, suit, or proceeding, whether civil, criminal, administrative, or investigative, by reason of the fact that he or she was a member, officer, employee, or agent of the Panel, against expenses (including attorney's fees, judgments, fines, and amounts paid in settlement actually and reasonably incurred by him or her in connection with the action, suit, or proceeding) if he or she acted in good faith and in a manner that he or she reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the best interests of the Panel and, with respect to any criminal action or proceeding, had no reasonable cause to believe his or her conduct was unlawful. The termination of any action, suit, or proceeding by judgment, order, settlement, or conviction or upon a plea of nolo contendere or its equivalent, shall not, of itself, create a presumption that the person did not act in good faith in a manner that he or she reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the best interests of the Panel and, with respect to any criminal action or proceeding, had reasonable cause to believe that his or her conduct was unlawful.
    To the extent that a member, officer, employee, or agent of the Panel has been successful, on the merits or otherwise, in the defense of any such action, suit, or proceeding referred to in this subsection (b) or in defense of any claim, issue, or matter therein, he or she shall be indemnified against expenses, including attorney's fees, actually and reasonably incurred by him or her in connection therewith. Any such indemnification shall be made by the Panel only as authorized in the specific case, upon a determination that indemnification of the member, officer, employee, or agent is proper in the circumstances because he or she has met the applicable standard of conduct. The determination shall be made (i) by the Panel by a majority vote of a quorum consisting of members who are not parties to the action, suit, or proceeding or (ii) if such a quorum is not obtainable or, even if obtainable, a quorum of disinterested members so directs, by independent legal counsel in a written opinion.
    Reasonable expenses incurred in defending an action, suit, or proceeding shall be paid by the Panel in advance of the final disposition of the action, suit, or proceeding, as authorized by the Panel in the specific case, upon receipt of an undertaking by or on behalf of the member, officer, employee, or agent to repay the amount, unless it is ultimately determined that he or she is entitled to be indemnified by the Panel as authorized in this Section.
    Any member, officer, employee, or agent against whom any action, suit, or proceeding is brought may employ his or her own attorney to appear on his or her behalf.
    The right to indemnification accorded by this Section shall not limit any other right to indemnification to which the member, officer, employee, or agent may be entitled. Any rights under this Section shall inure to the benefit of the heirs, executors, and administrators of any member, officer, employee, or agent of the Panel.
    The Panel may purchase and maintain insurance on behalf of any person who is or was a member, officer, employee, or agent of the Panel against any liability asserted against him or her and incurred by him or her in any such capacity or arising out of his or her status as such, whether or not the Panel could have the power to indemnify him or her against liability under the provisions of this Section.
    (b) The Panel shall be considered a State agency for purposes of receiving representation by the Attorney General. Members, officers, employees, and agents of the Panel shall be entitled to representation and indemnification under the State Employee Indemnification Act.
    (c) Abolition of the Panel pursuant to Section 1H-115 of this Code shall bar any remedy available against the Panel, its members, employees, or agents for any right or claim existing or any liability incurred prior to the abolition, unless the action or other proceeding is commenced prior to the expiration of 2 years after the date of the abolition.
(Source: P.A. 97-429, eff. 8-16-11.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 2 heading)
ARTICLE 2. STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION -
POWERS AND DUTIES

    (105 ILCS 5/2-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-2)
    Sec. 2-2. Oath - Bond. Before entering upon their duties the members of the State Board of Education shall take and subscribe the oath of office prescribed by the Constitution. Such oath shall be filed with the Secretary of State.
(Source: P.A. 90-372, eff. 7-1-98.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3)
    Sec. 2-3. Powers and duties. The State Board of Education shall have the powers and duties enumerated in the subsequent sections of this article, and may delegate its authority to the State Superintendent of Education as provided in Section 1A-4.
(Source: P.A. 81-1508.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.1)
    Sec. 2-3.1. Office - Records. To have an office at the seat of government, and to keep a record of all matters pertaining to the business of such office.
(Source: P.A. 81-1508.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.2)
    Sec. 2-3.2. Papers, reports, documents. To file all papers, reports and public documents transmitted to it by the school officers of the several counties, for each year separately; and to keep all other public documents, books and papers relative to schools, coming into its hands as State Board of Education.
(Source: P.A. 81-1508.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.2a)
    Sec. 2-3.2a. Electronic transmission and collection of data and funds. The State Board of Education may require that the transmission or collection of any document, record, form, claim, proposal, other data, or funds, between the State Board of Education and any entity doing business with the State Board of Education, be handled by electronic transmission or collection. The State Board shall establish standards for the electronic transmission and collection of data and funds, including data encryption standards, that must be used by all entities doing business with the State Board. These standards must comply with the Electronic Commerce Security Act.
(Source: P.A. 92-121, eff. 7-20-01.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.3)
    Sec. 2-3.3. Supervision of public schools.
    To supervise all the public schools in the State.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.4) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.4)
    Sec. 2-3.4. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31. Repealed by P.A. 89-159, eff. 1-1-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.5) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.5)
    Sec. 2-3.5. Assist county superintendents.
    To advise and assist county superintendents of schools, addressing to them from time to time circular letters relating to the best manner of conducting schools, constructing and furnishing schoolhouses, and examining and procuring competent teachers.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.6) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.6)
    Sec. 2-3.6. Rules and policies. To make rules, in accordance with the Illinois Administrative Procedure Act, that are necessary to carry into efficient and uniform effect all laws for establishing and maintaining free schools in the State. The State Board of Education may not adopt any rule or policy that alters the intent of the authorizing law or that supersedes federal or State law. The Board may not make policies affecting school districts that have the effect of rules without following the procedures of the Illinois Administrative Procedure Act.
(Source: P.A. 93-1036, eff. 9-14-04.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.7) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.7)
    Sec. 2-3.7. Legal adviser of school officers - Opinions. To be the legal adviser of school officers, and, when requested by any school officer, to give an opinion in writing upon any question arising under the school laws of the State.
(Source: P.A. 81-1508.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.7a) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.7a)
    Sec. 2-3.7a. Advisory committees and their composition. To create, form, or appoint task forces, study committees, blue ribbon panels, commissions, or any other type of organization, by whatever name designated, to study or examine educational policy issues, problems, or concerns. Any task force, study committee, blue ribbon panel, commission, or organization created or appointed by the State Board of Education or the State Superintendent of Education after this amendatory Act takes effect shall include parents or guardians of students involved in or directly affected by the issues, problems, or concerns under study. The parents or guardians appointed to comply with this Section shall not be employed by or administratively connected with any school system or institution of higher learning in Illinois, employed by any educational collective bargaining organization within Illinois, employed by any association of school boards or school administrative officers, employed by the State Board of Education, or members of any school board or board of school trustees of any public or private school, college, university, or technical institution within Illinois.
(Source: P.A. 87-916.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.8) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.8)
    Sec. 2-3.8. Hear and determine controversies. To hear and determine all controversies arising under the school laws of the State, coming to it by appeal from a regional superintendent of schools.
(Source: P.A. 81-1508.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.9) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.9)
    Sec. 2-3.9. Grant and suspend teachers' certificates.
    Subject to the provisions of Article 21, to grant certificates to such teachers as may be found qualified to receive them and to suspend the operation of any State certificate for immorality or other unprofessional conduct.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.10) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.10)
    Sec. 2-3.10. Visit charitable institutions. To visit such of the charitable institutions of the State as are educational in character, to examine their facilities for instruction, and to prescribe forms for such reports as it may desire from their superintendents.
(Source: P.A. 81-1508.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.11) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.11)
    Sec. 2-3.11. Report to Governor and General Assembly. To report to the Governor and General Assembly annually on or before January 14 the condition of the schools of the State using the most recently available data.
    Such annual report shall contain reports of the State Teacher Certification Board; the schools of the State charitable institutions; reports on driver education, special education, and transportation; and for such year the annual statistical reports of the State Board of Education, including the number and kinds of school districts; number of school attendance centers; number of men and women teachers; enrollment by grades; total enrollment; total days attendance; total days absence; average daily attendance; number of elementary and secondary school graduates; assessed valuation; tax levies and tax rates for various purposes; amount of teachers' orders, anticipation warrants, and bonds outstanding; and number of men and women teachers and total enrollment of private schools. The report shall give for all school districts receipts from all sources and expenditures for all purposes for each fund; the total operating expense, the per capita cost, and instructional expenditures; federal and state aids and reimbursements; new school buildings, and recognized schools; together with such other information and suggestions as the State Board of Education may deem important in relation to the schools and school laws and the means of promoting education throughout the state.
    In this Section, "instructional expenditures" means the annual expenditures of school districts properly attributable to expenditure functions defined in rules of the State Board of Education as: 1100 (Regular Education); 1200-1220 (Special Education); 1250 (Ed. Deprived/Remedial); 1400 (Vocational Programs); 1600 (Summer School); 1650 (Gifted); 1800 (Bilingual Programs); 1900 (Truant Alternative); 2110 (Attendance and Social Work Services); 2120 (Guidance Services); 2130 (Health Services); 2140 (Psychological Services); 2150 (Speech Pathology and Audiology Services); 2190 (Other Support Services Pupils); 2210 (Improvement of Instruction); 2220 (Educational Media Services); 2230 (Assessment and Testing); 2540 (Operation and Maintenance of Plant Services); 2550 (Pupil Transportation Service); 2560 (Food Service); 4110 (Payments for Regular Programs); 4120 (Payments for Special Education Programs); 4130 (Payments for Adult Education Programs); 4140 (Payments for Vocational Education Programs); 4170 (Payments for Community College Programs); 4190 (Other payments to in-state government units); and 4200 (Other payments to out of state government units).
(Source: P.A. 95-793, eff. 1-1-09; 96-734, eff. 8-25-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.11b)
    Sec. 2-3.11b. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 84-1419. Repealed by P.A. 94-875, eff. 7-1-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.11c)
    Sec. 2-3.11c. Teacher supply and demand report. Through January 1, 2009, to report annually, on or before January 1, on the relative supply and demand for education staff of the public schools to the Governor, to the General Assembly, and to institutions of higher education that prepare teachers, administrators, school service personnel, other certificated individuals, and other professionals employed by school districts or joint agreements. After the report due on January 1, 2009 is submitted, future reports shall be submitted once every 3 years, with the first report being submitted on or before January 1, 2012. The report shall contain the following information:
        (1) the relative supply and demand for teachers,
    	
administrators, and other certificated and non-certificated personnel by field, content area, and levels;
        (2) State and regional analyses of fields, content
    	
areas, and levels with an over-supply or under-supply of educators; and
        (3) projections of likely high demand and low demand
    	
for educators, in a manner sufficient to advise the public, individuals, and institutions regarding career opportunities in education.
(Source: P.A. 96-734, eff. 8-25-09; 97-256, eff. 1-1-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.11d)
    Sec. 2-3.11d. Data on tests required for teacher preparation and certification. Beginning with the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 94th General Assembly, to collect and maintain all of the following data for each institution of higher education engaged in teacher preparation in this State:
        (1) The number of individuals taking the test of
    	
basic skills under Section 21-1a of this Code.
        (2) The number of individuals passing the test of
    	
basic skills under Section 21-1a of this Code.
        (3) The total number of subject-matter tests
    	
attempted under Section 21-1a of this Code.
        (4) The total number of subject-matter tests passed
    	
under Section 21-1a of this Code.
The data regarding subject-matter tests shall be reported in sum, rather than by separately listing each subject, in order to better protect the identity of the test-takers.
    On or before August 1, 2007, the State Board of Education shall file with the General Assembly and the Governor and shall make available to the public a report listing the institutions of higher education engaged in teacher preparation in this State, along with the data listed in items (1) and (2) of this Section pertinent to each institution.
    On or before October 1, 2012 and every 3 years thereafter, the State Board of Education shall file with the General Assembly and the Governor and shall make available to the public a report listing the institutions of higher education engaged in teacher preparation in this State, along with the data listed in items (1) through (4) of this Section pertinent to each institution.
(Source: P.A. 96-1423, eff. 8-3-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.12) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.12)
    Sec. 2-3.12. School building code.
    (a) To prepare for school boards with the advice of the Department of Public Health, the Capital Development Board, and the State Fire Marshal a school building code that will conserve the health and safety and general welfare of the pupils and school personnel and others who use public school facilities.
    (b) Within 2 years after September 23, 1983, and every 10 years thereafter, or at such other times as the State Board of Education deems necessary or the regional superintendent so orders, each school board subject to the provisions of this Section shall again survey its school buildings and effectuate any recommendations in accordance with the procedures set forth herein.
        (1) An architect or engineer licensed in the State of
    	
Illinois is required to conduct the surveys under the provisions of this Section and shall make a report of the findings of the survey titled "safety survey report" to the school board.
        (2) The school board shall approve the safety survey
    	
report, including any recommendations to effectuate compliance with the code, and submit it to the Regional Superintendent.
        (3) The Regional Superintendent shall render a
    	
decision regarding approval or denial and submit the safety survey report to the State Superintendent of Education.
        (4) The State Superintendent of Education shall
    	
approve or deny the report including recommendations to effectuate compliance with the code and, if approved, issue a certificate of approval.
        (5) Upon receipt of the certificate of approval, the
    	
Regional Superintendent shall issue an order to effect any approved recommendations included in the report. The report shall meet all of the following requirements:
            (A) Items in the report shall be prioritized.
            (B) Urgent items shall be considered as those
        	
items related to life safety problems that present an immediate hazard to the safety of students.
            (C) Required items shall be considered as those
        	
items that are necessary for a safe environment but present less of an immediate hazard to the safety of students.
            (D) Urgent and required items shall reference a
        	
specific rule in the code authorized by this Section that is currently being violated or will be violated within the next 12 months if the violation is not remedied.
        (6) The school board of each district so surveyed
    	
and receiving a report of needed recommendations to be made to maintain standards of safety and health of the pupils enrolled shall effectuate the correction of urgent items as soon as achievable to ensure the safety of the students, but in no case more than one year after the date of the State Superintendent of Education's approval of the recommendation.
        (7) Required items shall be corrected in a timely
    	
manner, but in no case more than 5 years from the date of the State Superintendent of Education's approval of the recommendation.
        (8) Once each year the school board shall submit a
    	
report of progress on completion of any recommendations to effectuate compliance with the code.
    (c) As soon as practicable, but not later than 2 years after January 1, 1993, the State Board of Education shall combine the document known as "Efficient and Adequate Standards for the Construction of Schools" with the document known as "Building Specifications for Health and Safety in Public Schools" together with any modifications or additions that may be deemed necessary. The combined document shall be known as the "Health/Life Safety Code for Public Schools" and shall be the governing code for all facilities that house public school students or are otherwise used for public school purposes, whether such facilities are permanent or temporary and whether they are owned, leased, rented, or otherwise used by the district. Facilities owned by a school district but that are not used to house public school students or are not used for public school purposes shall be governed by separate provisions within the code authorized by this Section.
    (d) The 10 year survey cycle specified in this Section shall continue to apply based upon the standards contained in the "Health/Life Safety Code for Public Schools", which shall specify building standards for buildings that are constructed prior to January 1, 1993 and for buildings that are constructed after that date.
    (e) The "Health/Life Safety Code for Public Schools" shall be the governing code for public schools; however, the provisions of this Section shall not preclude inspection of school premises and buildings pursuant to Section 9 of the Fire Investigation Act, provided that the provisions of the "Health/Life Safety Code for Public Schools", or such predecessor document authorized by this Section as may be applicable are used, and provided that those inspections are coordinated with the Regional Superintendent having jurisdiction over the public school facility.
    (e-5) After the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 98th General Assembly, all new school building construction governed by the "Health/Life Safety Code for Public Schools" must include in its design and construction a storm shelter that meets the minimum requirements of the ICC/NSSA Standard for the Design and Construction of Storm Shelters (ICC-500), published jointly by the International Code Council and the National Storm Shelter Association. Nothing in this subsection (e-5) precludes the design engineers, architects, or school district from applying a higher life safety standard than the ICC-500 for storm shelters.
    (f) Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit the State Fire Marshal or a qualified fire official to whom the State Fire Marshal has delegated his or her authority from conducting a fire safety check in a public school.
    (g) The Regional Superintendent shall address any violations that are not corrected in a timely manner pursuant to subsection (b) of Section 3-14.21 of this Code.
    (h) Any agency having jurisdiction beyond the scope of the applicable document authorized by this Section may issue a lawful order to a school board to effectuate recommendations, and the school board receiving the order shall certify to the Regional Superintendent and the State Superintendent of Education when it has complied with the order.
    (i) The State Board of Education is authorized to adopt any rules that are necessary relating to the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this Section.
    (j) The code authorized by this Section shall apply only to those school districts having a population of less than 500,000 inhabitants.
    (k) In this Section, a "qualified fire official" means an individual that meets the requirements of rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal in cooperation with the State Board of Education to administer this Section. These rules shall be based on recommendations made by the task force established under Section 2-3.137 (now repealed) of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 98-883, eff. 1-1-15; 99-30, eff. 7-10-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.12a)
    Sec. 2-3.12a. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 91-89, eff. 7-9-99. Repealed internally, eff. 12-31-99.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.13)
    Sec. 2-3.13. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 81-1508. Repealed by P.A. 96-734, eff. 8-25-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.13a) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.13a)
    Sec. 2-3.13a. School records; transferring students.
    (a) The State Board of Education shall establish and implement rules requiring all of the public schools and all private or nonpublic elementary and secondary schools located in this State, whenever any such school has a student who is transferring to any other public elementary or secondary school located in this or in any other state, to forward within 10 days of notice of the student's transfer an unofficial record of that student's grades to the school to which such student is transferring. Each public school at the same time also shall forward to the school to which the student is transferring the remainder of the student's school student records as required by the Illinois School Student Records Act. In addition, if a student is transferring from a public school, whether located in this or any other state, from which the student has been suspended or expelled for knowingly possessing in a school building or on school grounds a weapon as defined in the Gun Free Schools Act (20 U.S.C. 8921 et seq.), for knowingly possessing, selling, or delivering in a school building or on school grounds a controlled substance or cannabis, or for battering a staff member of the school, and if the period of suspension or expulsion has not expired at the time the student attempts to transfer into another public school in the same or any other school district: (i) any school student records required to be transferred shall include the date and duration of the period of suspension or expulsion; and (ii) with the exception of transfers into the Department of Juvenile Justice school district, the student shall not be permitted to attend class in the public school into which he or she is transferring until the student has served the entire period of the suspension or expulsion imposed by the school from which the student is transferring, provided that the school board may approve the placement of the student in an alternative school program established under Article 13A of this Code. A school district may adopt a policy providing that if a student is suspended or expelled for any reason from any public or private school in this or any other state, the student must complete the entire term of the suspension or expulsion before being admitted into the school district. This policy may allow placement of the student in an alternative school program established under Article 13A of this Code, if available, for the remainder of the suspension or expulsion. Each public school and each private or nonpublic elementary or secondary school in this State shall within 10 days after the student has paid all of his or her outstanding fines and fees and at its own expense forward an official transcript of the scholastic records of each student transferring from that school in strict accordance with the provisions of this Section and the rules established by the State Board of Education as herein provided.
    (b) The State Board of Education shall develop a one-page standard form that Illinois school districts are required to provide to any student who is moving out of the school district and that contains the information about whether or not the student is "in good standing" and whether or not his or her medical records are up-to-date and complete. As used in this Section, "in good standing" means that the student is not being disciplined by a suspension or expulsion, but is entitled to attend classes. No school district is required to admit a new student who is transferring from another Illinois school district unless he or she can produce the standard form from the student's previous school district enrollment. No school district is required to admit a new student who is transferring from an out-of-state public school unless the parent or guardian of the student certifies in writing that the student is not currently serving a suspension or expulsion imposed by the school from which the student is transferring.
    (c) The State Board of Education shall, by rule, establish a system to provide for the accurate tracking of transfer students. This system shall, at a minimum, require that a student be counted as a dropout in the calculation of a school's or school district's annual student dropout rate unless the school or school district to which the student transferred (known hereafter in this subsection (c) as the transferee school or school district) sends notification to the school or school district from which the student transferred (known hereafter in this subsection (c) as the transferor school or school district) documenting that the student has enrolled in the transferee school or school district. This notification must occur on or before July 31 following the school year during which the student withdraws from the transferor school or school district or the student shall be counted in the calculation of the transferor school's or school district's annual student dropout rate. A request by the transferee school or school district to the transferor school or school district seeking the student's academic transcripts or medical records shall be considered without limitation adequate documentation of enrollment. Each transferor school or school district shall keep documentation of such transfer students for the minimum period provided in the Illinois School Student Records Act. All records indicating the school or school district to which a student transferred are subject to the Illinois School Student Records Act.
(Source: P.A. 96-1423, eff. 8-3-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.14) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.14)
    Sec. 2-3.14. Representative government.
    To put into effect the provisions of Sections 27-3 and 27-4 relative to representative government.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.15) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.15)
    Sec. 2-3.15. Designation of statistics. To designate the reports relating to public schools which school officers are required to submit to the county superintendent of schools. In Class I county school units, and in each school district which forms a part of a Class II county school unit but which is not subject to the jurisdiction of the trustees of schools of any township in which such school district is located, all financial reports shall be signed by the teacher, principal or superintendent of schools.
    Any person who makes a false affidavit or knowingly swears or affirms falsely to any matter or thing required by the terms of this Act to be sworn or affirmed is guilty of perjury.
(Source: P.A. 86-1441; 87-473.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.16)
    Sec. 2-3.16. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.17) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.17)
    Sec. 2-3.17. Information furnished by regional superintendents. To require the regional superintendent of schools to furnish the State Board with such information as it may desire to include in its report to the General Assembly.
(Source: P.A. 81-1508.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.17a) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.17a)
    Sec. 2-3.17a. Financial audits by Auditor General. The Auditor General shall annually cause an audit to be made, as of June 30th of each year, of the financial statements of all accounts, funds and other moneys in the care, custody or control of the regional superintendent of schools of each educational service region in the State and of each educational service center established under Section 2-3.62 of this Code other than an educational service center serving a school district in a city having a population exceeding 500,000. The audit shall be conducted in accordance with Generally Accepted Governmental Auditing Standards and shall include an examination of supporting books and records and a representative sample of vouchers for distributions and expenditures. On February 15 of each year, the Auditor General shall notify the Legislative Audit Commission in writing of the completion or of the reasons for the noncompletion of each audit required by this Section to be made as of the preceding June 30. An audit report shall be prepared for each audit made pursuant to this Section, and all such audit reports shall be kept on file in the office of the Auditor General. Within 60 days after each audit report required to be prepared under this Section is completed, the Auditor General: (i) shall furnish a copy of such audit report to each member of the General Assembly whose legislative or representative district includes any part of the educational service region served by the regional superintendent of schools with respect to whose financial statements that audit report was prepared or any part of the area served by the educational service center that is the subject of the audit; and (ii) shall publish in a newspaper published in that educational service region or area served by the educational service center that is the subject of the audit a notice that the audit report has been prepared and is available for inspection during regular business hours at the office of the regional superintendent of schools of that educational service region or at the administrative office of the educational service center. Each audit shall be made in such manner as to determine, and each audit report shall be prepared in such manner as to state:
        (1) The balances on hand of all accounts, funds and
    	
other moneys in the care, custody or control of the regional superintendent of schools or educational service center at the beginning of the fiscal year being audited;
        (2) the amount of funds received during the fiscal
    	
year by source;
        (3) the amount of funds distributed or otherwise paid
    	
by the regional superintendent of schools or educational service center to each school treasurer in his or her educational service region or area, including the purpose of such distribution or payment and the fund or account from which such distribution or payment is made;
        (4) the amounts paid or otherwise disbursed by the
    	
regional superintendent of schools or educational service center -- other than the amounts distributed or paid by the regional superintendent of schools or educational service center to school treasurers as described in paragraph (3) above -- for all other purposes and expenditures, including the fund or account from which such payments or disbursements are made and the purpose thereof; and
        (5) the balances on hand of all accounts, funds and
    	
other moneys in the care, custody or control of the regional superintendent of schools or educational service center at the end of the fiscal year being audited.
    The Auditor General shall adopt rules and regulations relative to the time and manner by which the regional superintendent of schools or educational service center shall present for inspection or make available to the Auditor General, or to the agents designated by the Auditor General to make an audit and prepare an audit report pursuant to this Section, all financial statements, books, records, vouchers for distributions and expenditures, and records of accounts, funds and other moneys in the care, custody or control of the regional superintendent of schools or educational service center and required for purposes of making such audit and preparing an audit and preparing an audit report. All rules and regulations adopted by the State Board of Education under this Section before the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 92nd General Assembly shall continue in effect as the rules and regulations of the Auditor General, until they are modified or abolished by the Auditor General.
    The Auditor General shall require the regional superintendent of schools of each educational service region or administrator of each educational service center to promptly implement all recommendations based on audit findings resulting from a violation of law made in audits prepared pursuant to this Section, unless the Auditor General, upon review, determines, with regard to any such finding, that implementation of the recommendation is not appropriate.
(Source: P.A. 92-544, eff. 6-12-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.17b)
    Sec. 2-3.17b. School Funds; payment to school districts, other education agencies, and providers. To prepare and send vouchers to the State Comptroller for the payment of funds due school districts, other education agencies, and providers of services for programs administered by the State Board of Education from the State school funds.
(Source: P.A. 88-641, eff. 9-9-94.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.19) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.19)
    Sec. 2-3.19. Reports by trustees.
    To require the trustees of schools of each township to make, at any time, a report similar to that required of trustees of schools on or before July 15 next preceding each regular session of the General Assembly.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.20) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.20)
    Sec. 2-3.20. Reports-Special charter districts.
    To require annual reports from the authorities maintaining schools by authority of special charters.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.21)
    Sec. 2-3.21. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31. Repealed by P.A. 95-793, eff. 1-1-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.22) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.22)
    Sec. 2-3.22. Withholding school funds or compensation of regional superintendent of schools. To require the State Comptroller to withhold from the regional superintendent of schools the amount due the regional superintendent of schools for his compensation, until the reports, statements, books, vouchers and other records provided for in Sections 2-3.17, 2-3.17a and 3-15.8 have been furnished.
(Source: P.A. 88-641, eff. 9-9-94.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.23) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.23)
    Sec. 2-3.23. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 90-372, eff. 7-1-98. Repealed internally, eff. 7-1-98.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.24) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.24)
    Sec. 2-3.24. Withholding funds from school officer or teacher. To require the Comptroller, regional superintendent of schools, trustees, township treasurer, directors or other school officer to withhold from any township, district, officer or teacher any part of the common school, township or other school fund until such treasurer, officer or teacher has made all schedules, reports and returns required of him by this Act and until such officer has executed and filed all official bonds and accounted for all common school, township or other school funds which have come into his hands.
(Source: P.A. 88-641, eff. 9-9-94.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.25) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.25)
    Sec. 2-3.25. Standards for schools.
    (a) To determine for all types of schools conducted under this Act efficient and adequate standards for the physical plant, heating, lighting, ventilation, sanitation, safety, equipment and supplies, instruction and teaching, curriculum, library, operation, maintenance, administration and supervision, and to issue, refuse to issue or revoke certificates of recognition for schools or school districts pursuant to standards established hereunder; to determine and establish efficient and adequate standards for approval of credit for courses given and conducted by schools outside of the regular school term.
    (a-5) On or before July 1, 2021, the State Board of Education must adopt revised social science learning standards that are inclusive and reflective of all individuals in this country.
    (b) Whenever it appears that a secondary or unit school district may be unable to offer courses enabling students in grades 9 through 12 to meet the minimum preparation and admission requirements for public colleges and universities adopted by the Board of Higher Education, the State Board of Education shall assist the district in reviewing and analyzing its existing curriculum with particular reference to the educational needs of all pupils of the district and the sufficiency of existing and future revenues and payments available to the district for development of a curriculum which will provide maximum educational opportunity to pupils of the district. The review and analysis may consider achievement of this goal not only through implementation of traditional classroom methods but also through development of and participation in joint educational programs with other school districts or institutions of higher education, or alternative programs employing modern technological methods including but not limited to the use of television, telephones, computers, radio and other electronic devices.
(Source: P.A. 101-654, eff. 3-8-21.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.25a) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.25a)
    Sec. 2-3.25a. "School district" defined; additional standards.
    (a) For the purposes of State accountability in this Section and Sections 3.25b, 3.25c, 3.25e, and 3.25f of this Code, "school district" includes other public entities responsible for administering public schools, such as cooperatives, joint agreements, charter schools, special charter districts, regional offices of education, local agencies, and the Department of Human Services.
    (b) In addition to the standards established pursuant to Section 2-3.25, the State Board of Education shall develop recognition standards for student performance and school improvement for all school districts and their individual schools. The State Board of Education is prohibited from having separate performance standards for students based on race or ethnicity.
    The accountability measure shall be outlined in the State Plan that the State Board of Education submits to the federal Department of Education pursuant to the federal Every Student Succeeds Act. If the federal Every Student Succeeds Act ceases to require a State Plan, the State Board of Education shall develop a written plan in consultation with the Balanced Accountability Committee created under subsection (b-5) of this Section.
    (b-5) The Balanced Accountability Measure Committee is created and shall consist of the following individuals: a representative of a statewide association representing regional superintendents of schools, a representative of a statewide association representing principals, a representative of an association representing principals in a city having a population exceeding 500,000, a representative of a statewide association representing school administrators, a representative of a statewide professional teachers' organization, a representative of a different statewide professional teachers' organization, an additional representative from either statewide professional teachers' organization, a representative of a professional teachers' organization in a city having a population exceeding 500,000, a representative of a statewide association representing school boards, and a representative of a school district organized under Article 34 of this Code. The head of each association or entity listed in this paragraph shall appoint its respective representative. The State Superintendent of Education, in consultation with the Committee, may appoint no more than 2 additional individuals to the Committee, which individuals shall serve in an advisory role and must not have voting or other decision-making rights.
    The Balanced Accountability Measure Committee shall meet no less than 4 times per year to discuss the accountability standards set forth in the State Plan pursuant to the federal Every Student Succeeds Act and to provide stakeholder feedback and recommendations to the State Board of Education with regard to the State Plan, which the State Board shall take into consideration. Upon completion of the 2019-2020 school year, the Balanced Accountability Measure Committee shall assess the implementation of the State Plan and, if necessary, make recommendations to the State Board for any changes. The Committee shall consider accountability recommendations made by the Illinois P-20 Council established under Section 22-45 of this Code, the Illinois Early Learning Council created under the Illinois Early Learning Council Act, and any other stakeholder group established by the State Board in relation to the federal Every Student Succeeds Act. The State Board shall provide to the Committee an annual report with data and other information collected from entities identified by the State Board as learning partners, including, but not limited to, data and information on the learning partners' effectiveness, geographic distribution, and cost to serve as part of a comprehensive statewide system of support.
    The State Board of Education, in collaboration with the Balanced Accountability Measure Committee set forth in this subsection (b-5), shall adopt rules that further implementation in accordance with the requirements of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 99-84, eff. 1-1-16; 99-193, eff. 7-30-15; 99-642, eff. 7-28-16; 99-657, eff. 7-28-16; 100-1046, eff. 8-23-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.25b) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.25b)
    Sec. 2-3.25b. Recognition levels. The State Board of Education shall, consistent with adopted recognition standards, provide for levels of recognition or nonrecognition. The State Board of Education shall promulgate rules governing the procedures whereby school districts may appeal a recognition level.
    The State Board of Education shall have the authority to collect from schools and school districts the information, data, test results, student performance and school improvement indicators as may be necessary to implement and carry out the purposes of this Act. Schools and school districts that fail to submit accurate data within the State Board of Education's timeframes may have federal funds withheld.
(Source: P.A. 96-734, eff. 8-25-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.25c) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.25c)
    Sec. 2-3.25c. Rewards. The State Board of Education shall implement a system of rewards for school districts, and the schools themselves, through a process that recognizes (i) high-poverty, high-performing schools that are closing achievement gaps and excelling in academic achievement; (ii) schools that have sustained high performance; (iii) schools that have substantial growth performance over the 3 years immediately preceding the year in which recognition is awarded; and (iv) schools that have demonstrated the most progress, in comparison to schools statewide, in closing the achievement gap among various subgroups of students in the 3 years immediately preceding the year in which recognition is awarded.
(Source: P.A. 99-193, eff. 7-30-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.25d)
    Sec. 2-3.25d. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 99-193, eff. 7-30-15. Repealed by P.A. 100-1046, eff. 8-23-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.25d-5)
    Sec. 2-3.25d-5. Priority and focus districts.
    (a) Beginning in 2015, school districts designated as priority districts shall be those that have one or more priority schools. "Priority school" is defined as:
        (1) a school that is among the lowest performing 5%
    	
of schools in this State based on a 3-year average, with respect to the performance of the "all students" group for the percentage of students deemed proficient in English/language arts and mathematics combined, and demonstrates a lack of progress as defined by the State Board of Education;
        (2) a beginning secondary school that has an
    	
average graduation rate of less than 60% over the last 3 school years; or
        (3) a school receiving a school improvement grant
    	
under Section 1003(g) of the federal Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965.
    The State Board of Education shall work with a priority district to perform a district needs assessment to determine the district's core functions that are areas of strength and weakness, unless the district is already undergoing a national accreditation process. The results from the district needs assessment shall be used by the district to identify goals and objectives for the district's improvement. The district needs assessment shall include a study of district functions, such as district finance, governance, student engagement, instruction practices, climate, community involvement, and continuous improvement.
    (b) Beginning in 2015, districts designated as focus districts shall be those that have one or more focus schools. "Focus school" means a school that is contributing to the achievement gaps in this State and is defined as:
        (1) a school that has one or more subgroups in
    	
which the average student performance is at or below the State average for the lowest 10% of student performance in that subgroup; or
        (2) a school with an average graduation rate of
    	
less than 60% and not identified for priority.
(Source: P.A. 99-193, eff. 7-30-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.25e)
    Sec. 2-3.25e. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 93-470, eff. 8-8-03. Repealed by P.A. 94-875, eff. 7-1-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.25e-5)
    Sec. 2-3.25e-5. Two years as priority school; full-year school plan.
    (a) In this Section, "school" means any of the following named public schools or their successor name:
        (1) Dirksen Middle School in Dolton School District
    	
149.
        (2) Diekman Elementary School in Dolton School
    	
District 149.
        (3) Caroline Sibley Elementary School in Dolton
    	
School District 149.
        (4) Berger-Vandenberg Elementary School in Dolton
    	
School District 149.
        (5) Carol Moseley Braun School in Dolton School
    	
District 149.
        (6) New Beginnings Learning Academy in Dolton School
    	
District 149.
        (7) McKinley Junior High School in South Holland
    	
School District 150.
        (8) Greenwood Elementary School in South Holland
    	
School District 150.
        (9) McKinley Elementary School in South Holland
    	
School District 150.
        (10) Eisenhower School in South Holland School
    	
District 151.
        (11) Madison School in South Holland School District
    	
151.
        (12) Taft School in South Holland School District 151.
        (13) Wolcott School in Thornton School District 154.
        (14) Memorial Junior High School in Lansing School
    	
District 158.
        (15) Oak Glen Elementary School in Lansing School
    	
District 158.
        (16) Lester Crawl Primary Center in Lansing School
    	
District 158.
        (17) Brookwood Junior High School in Brookwood School
    	
District 167.
        (18) Brookwood Middle School in Brookwood School
    	
District 167.
        (19) Hickory Bend Elementary School in Brookwood
    	
School District 167.
        (20) Medgar Evers Primary Academic Center in Ford
    	
Heights School District 169.
        (21) Nathan Hale Elementary School in Sunnybrook
    	
School District 171.
        (22) Ira F. Aldridge Elementary School in City of
    	
Chicago School District 299.
        (23) William E.B. DuBois Elementary School in City of
    	
Chicago School District 299.
    (b) If, after 2 years following its identification as a priority school under Section 2-3.25d-5 of this Code, a school remains a priority school, then, subject to federal appropriation money being available, the State Board of Education shall allow the school board to opt into the process of operating that school on a pilot, full-year school plan, approved by the State Board of Education, upon expiration of its teachers' current collective bargaining agreement until the expiration of the next collective bargaining agreement. A school board must notify the State Board of Education of its intent to opt into the process of operating a school on a pilot, full-year school plan.
(Source: P.A. 98-1155, eff. 1-9-15; 99-193, eff. 7-30-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.25f) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.25f)
    Sec. 2-3.25f. State interventions.
    (a) The State Board of Education shall provide technical assistance to assist with the development and implementation of School and District Improvement Plans.
    Schools or school districts that fail to make reasonable efforts to implement an approved Improvement Plan may suffer loss of State funds by school district, attendance center, or program as the State Board of Education deems appropriate.
    (a-5) (Blank).
    (b) Beginning in 2017, if, after 3 years following its identification as a priority district under Section 2-3.25d-5 of this Code, a district does not make progress as measured by a reduction in achievement gaps commensurate with the targets in this State's approved accountability plan with the U.S. Department of Education, then the State Board of Education may (i) change the recognition status of the school district or school to nonrecognized or (ii) authorize the State Superintendent of Education to direct the reassignment of pupils or direct the reassignment or replacement of school district personnel. If a school district is nonrecognized in its entirety, it shall automatically be dissolved on July 1 following that nonrecognition and its territory realigned with another school district or districts by the regional board of school trustees in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 7-11 of the School Code. The effective date of the nonrecognition of a school shall be July 1 following the nonrecognition.
    (b-5) The State Board of Education shall also develop a system to provide assistance and resources to lower performing school districts. At a minimum, the State Board shall identify school districts to receive priority services, to be known as priority districts under Section 2-3.25d-5 of this Code. The school district shall provide the exclusive bargaining representative with a 5-day notice that the district has been identified as a priority district. In addition, the State Board may, by rule, develop other categories of low-performing schools and school districts to receive services.
    Based on the results of the district needs assessment under Section 2-3.25d-5 of this Code, the State Board of Education shall work with the district to provide technical assistance and professional development, in partnership with the district, to implement a continuous improvement plan that would increase outcomes for students. The plan for continuous improvement shall be based on the results of the district needs assessment and shall be used to determine the types of services that are to be provided to each priority district. Potential services for a district may include monitoring adult and student practices, reviewing and reallocating district resources, developing a district leadership team, providing access to curricular content area specialists, and providing online resources and professional development.
    The State Board of Education may require priority districts identified as having deficiencies in one or more core functions of the district needs assessment to undergo an accreditation process as provided in subsection (d) of Section 2-3.25f-5 of this Code.
    (c) All federal requirements apply to schools and school districts utilizing federal funds under Title I, Part A of the federal Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965.
(Source: P.A. 98-1155, eff. 1-9-15; 99-193, eff. 7-30-15; 99-203, eff. 7-30-15; 99-642, eff. 7-28-16.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.25f-5)
    Sec. 2-3.25f-5. Independent Authority.
    (a) The General Assembly finds all of the following:
        (1) A fundamental goal of the people of this State,
    	
as expressed in Section 1 of Article X of the Illinois Constitution, is the educational development of all persons to the limits of their capacities. When a school board faces governance difficulties, continued operation of the public school system is threatened.
        (2) Sound school board governance, academic
    	
achievement, and sound financial structure are essential to the continued operation of any school system. It is vital to commercial, educational, and cultural interests that public schools remain in operation. To achieve that goal, public school systems must have effective leadership.
        (3) To promote the sound operation of districts, as
    	
defined in this Section, it may be necessary to provide for the creation of independent authorities with the powers necessary to promote sound governance, sound academic planning, and sound financial management and to ensure the continued operation of the public schools.
        (4) It is the purpose of this Section to provide for
    	
a sound basis for the continued operation of public schools. The intention of the General Assembly, in creating this Section, is to establish procedures, provide powers, and impose restrictions to ensure the educational integrity of public school districts.
    (b) As used in this Section:
    "Board" means a school board of a district.
    "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Independent Authority.
    "District" means any school district having a population of not more than 500,000.
    "State Board" means the State Board of Education.
    "State Superintendent" means the State Superintendent of Education.
    (c) The State Board has the power to direct the State Superintendent to remove a board. Boards may be removed when the criteria provided for in subsection (d) of this Section are met. At no one time may the State Board remove more than 4 school boards and establish Independent Authorities pursuant to subsection (e) of this Section.
    If the State Board proposes to direct the State Superintendent to remove a board from a district, board members shall receive individual written notice of the intended removal. Written notice must be provided at least 30 calendar days before a hearing is held by the State Board. This notice shall identify the basis for proposed removal.
    Board members are entitled to a hearing, during which time each board member shall have the opportunity to respond individually, both orally and through written comments, to the basis laid out in the notice. Written comments must be submitted to the State Board on or before the hearing.
    Board members are entitled to be represented by counsel at the hearing, but counsel must not be paid with district funds, unless the State Board decides that the board will not be removed and then the board members may be reimbursed for all reasonable attorney's fees by the district.
    The State Board shall make a final decision on removal immediately following the hearing or at its next regularly scheduled or special meeting. In no event may the decision be made later than the next regularly scheduled meeting.
    The State Board shall issue a final written decision. If the State Board directs the State Superintendent to remove the board, the State Superintendent shall do so within 30 days after the written decision. Following the removal of the board, the State Superintendent shall establish an Independent Authority pursuant to subsection (e) of this Section.
    If there is a financial oversight panel operating in the district pursuant to Article 1B or 1H of this Code, the State Board may, at its discretion, abolish the panel.
    (d) The State Board may require priority districts, as defined in subsection (b-5) of Section 2-3.25f of this Code, to seek accreditation through an independent accreditation organization chosen by the State Board and paid for by the State. The State Board may direct the State Superintendent to remove board members pursuant to subsection (c) of this Section in any district in which the district is unable to obtain accreditation in whole or in part due to reasons specifically related to school board governance. When determining if a district has failed to meet the standards for accreditation specifically related to school board governance, the accreditation entity shall take into account the overall academic, fiscal, and operational condition of the district and consider whether the board has failed to protect district assets, to direct sound administrative and academic policy, to abide by basic governance principles, including those set forth in district policies, and to conduct itself with professionalism and care and in a legally, ethically, and financially responsible manner. When considering if a board has failed in these areas, the accreditation entity shall consider some or all of the following factors:
        (1) Failure to protect district assets by, without
    	
limitation, incidents of fiscal fraud or misappropriation of district funds; acts of neglecting the district's building conditions; a failure to meet regularly scheduled, payroll-period obligations when due; a failure to abide by competitive bidding laws; a failure to prevent an audit finding of material internal control weaknesses; a failure to comply with required accounting principles; a failure to develop and implement a comprehensive, risk-management plan; a failure to provide financial information or cooperate with the State Superintendent; or a failure to file an annual financial report, an annual budget, a deficit reduction plan, or other financial information as required by law.
        (2) Failure to direct sound administrative and
    	
academic policy by, without limitation, hiring staff who do not meet minimal certification requirements for the positions being filled or who do not meet the customary qualifications held by those occupying similar positions in other school districts; a failure to avoid conflicts of interest as it relates to hiring or other contractual obligations; a failure to provide minimum graduation requirements and curricular requirements of the School Code and regulations; a failure to provide a minimum school term as required by law; or a failure to adopt and implement policies and practices that promote conditions that support student learning, effective instruction, and assessment that produce equitable and challenging learning experiences for all students.
        (3) Failure to abide by basic governance principles
    	
by, without limitation, a failure to comply with the mandated oath of office; a failure to adopt and abide by sound local governance policies; a failure to abide by the principle that official action by the board occurs only through a duly-called and legally conducted meeting of the board; a failure to abide by majority decisions of the board; a failure to protect the privacy of students; a failure to ensure that board decisions and actions are in accordance with defined roles and responsibilities; or a failure of the board to protect, support, and respect the autonomy of a system to accomplish goals for improvement in student learning and instruction and to manage day-to-day operations of the school system and its schools, including maintaining the distinction between the board's roles and responsibilities and those of administrative leadership.
        (4) Failure to conduct itself in a legally,
    	
ethically, and financially responsible manner by, without limitation, a failure to act in accordance with the Constitution of the United States of America and the Constitution of the State of Illinois and within the scope of State and federal laws; laws, including a failure to comply with provisions of the School Code, the Open Meetings Act, and the Freedom of Information Act and federal and State laws that protect the rights of protected categories of students; a failure to comply with all district policies and procedures and all State rules; or a failure to comply with the governmental entities provisions of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act, including the gift ban and prohibited political activities provisions.
    (e) Upon removal of the board, the State Superintendent shall establish an Independent Authority. Upon establishment of an Independent Authority, there is established a body both corporate and politic to be known as the "(Name of the School District) Independent Authority", which in this name shall exercise all of the authority vested in an Independent Authority by this Section and by the name may sue and be sued in all courts and places where judicial proceedings are had.
    (f) Upon establishment of an Independent Authority under subsection (e) of this Section, the State Superintendent shall, within 30 working days thereafter and in consultation with State and locally elected officials, appoint 5 or 7 members to serve on an Independent Authority for the district. Members appointed to the Independent Authority shall serve at the pleasure of the State Superintendent. The State Superintendent shall designate one of the members of the Independent Authority to serve as its chairperson. In the event of vacancy or resignation, the State Superintendent shall, within 15 working days after receiving notice, appoint a successor to serve out that member's term. If the State Board has abolished a financial oversight panel pursuant to subsection (c) of this Section, the State Superintendent may appoint former members of the panel to the Independent Authority. These members may serve as part of the 5 or 7 members or may be appointed in addition to the 5 or 7 members, with the Independent Authority not to exceed 9 members in total.
    Members of the Independent Authority must be selected primarily on the basis of their experience and knowledge in education policy and governance, with consideration given to persons knowledgeable in the operation of a school district. A member of the Independent Authority must be a registered voter as provided in the general election law, must not be a school trustee, and must not be a child sex offender as defined in Section 11-9.3 of the Criminal Code of 2012. A majority of the members of the Independent Authority must be residents of the district that the Independent Authority serves. A member of the Independent Authority may not be an employee of the district, nor may a member have a direct financial interest in the district.
    Independent Authority members may be reimbursed by the district for travel if they live more than 25 miles away from the district's headquarters and other necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties. The amount reimbursed members for their expenses must be charged to the school district.
    With the exception of the Chairperson, the Independent Authority may elect such officers as it deems appropriate.
    The first meeting of the Independent Authority must be held at the call of the Chairperson. The Independent Authority shall prescribe the times and places for its meetings and the manner in which regular and special meetings may be called and shall comply with the Open Meetings Act.
    All Independent Authority members must complete the training required of school board members under Section 10-16a of this Code.
    (g) The purpose of the Independent Authority is to operate the district. The Independent Authority shall have all of the powers and duties of a board and all other powers necessary to meet its responsibilities and to carry out its purpose and the purposes of this Section and that may be requisite or proper for the maintenance, operation, and development of any school or schools under the jurisdiction of the Independent Authority. This grant of powers does not release an Independent Authority from any duty imposed upon it by this Code or any other law.
    The Independent Authority shall have no power to unilaterally cancel or modify any collective bargaining agreement in force upon the date of creation of the Independent Authority.
    (h) The Independent Authority may prepare and file with the State Superintendent a proposal for emergency financial assistance for the school district and for the operations budget of the Independent Authority, in accordance with Section 1B-8 of this Code. A district may receive both a loan and a grant.
    (i) An election for board members must not be held in a district upon the establishment of an Independent Authority and is suspended until the next regularly scheduled school board election that takes place no less than 2 years following the establishment of the Independent Authority. For this first election, 3 school board members must be elected to serve out terms of 4 years and until successors are elected and have qualified. Members of the Independent Authority are eligible to run for election in the district, provided that they meet all other eligibility requirements of Section 10-10 of this Code. Following this election, the school board shall consist of the newly elected members and any remaining members of the Independent Authority. The majority of this board must be residents of the district. The State Superintendent must appoint new members who are residents to the Independent Authority if necessary to maintain this majority. At the next school board election, 4 school board members must be elected to serve out terms of 4 years and until successors are elected and have qualified. For purposes of these first 2 elections, the school board members must be elected at-large. In districts where board members were previously elected using an alternative format pursuant to Article 9 of this Code, following these first 2 elections, the voting shall automatically revert back to the original form. Following the election, any remaining Independent Authority members shall serve in the district as an oversight panel until such time as the district meets the governance standards necessary to achieve accreditation. If some or all of the Independent Authority members have been elected to the board, the State Superintendent may, in his or her discretion, appoint new members to the Independent Authority pursuant to subsection (f) of this Section. The school board shall get approval of all actions by the Independent Authority during the time the Independent Authority serves as an oversight panel.
    Board members who were removed pursuant to subsection (c) of this Section are ineligible to run for school board in the district for 10 years following the abolition of the Independent Authority pursuant to subsection (l) of this Section. However, board members who were removed pursuant to subsection (c) of this Section and were appointed to the Independent Authority by the State Superintendent are eligible to run for school board in the district.
    (j) The Independent Authority, upon its members taking office and annually thereafter and upon request, shall prepare and submit to the State Superintendent a report on the state of the district, including without limitation the academic improvement and financial situation of the district. This report must be submitted annually on or before March 1 of each year. The State Superintendent shall provide copies of any and all reports to the regional office of education for the district and to the State Senator and Representative representing the area where the district is located.
    (k) The district shall render such services to and permit the use of its facilities and resources by the Independent Authority at no charge as may be requested by the Independent Authority. Any State agency, unit of local government, or school district may, within its lawful powers and duties, render such services to the Independent Authority as may be requested by the Independent Authority.
    (l) An Independent Authority must be abolished when the district, following the election of the full board, meets the governance standards necessary to achieve accreditation status by an independent accreditation agency chosen by the State Board. The abolition of the Independent Authority shall be done by the State Board and take place within 30 days after the determination of the accreditation agency.
    Upon abolition of the Independent Authority, all powers and duties allowed by this Code to be exercised by a school board shall be transferred to the elected school board.
    (m) The Independent Authority must be indemnified through insurance purchased by the district. The district shall purchase insurance through which the Independent Authority is to be indemnified.
    The district retains the duty to represent and to indemnify Independent Authority members following the abolition of the Independent Authority for any cause of action or remedy available against the Independent Authority, its members, its employees, or its agents for any right or claim existing or any liability incurred prior to the abolition.
    The insurance shall indemnify and protect districts, Independent Authority members, employees, volunteer personnel authorized in Sections 10-22.34, 10-22.34a, and 10-22.34b of this Code, mentors of certified or licensed staff as authorized in Article 21A and Sections 2-3.53a, 2-3.53b, and 34-18.33 of this Code, and student teachers against civil rights damage claims and suits, constitutional rights damage claims and suits, and death and bodily injury and property damage claims and suits, including defense thereof, when damages are sought for negligent or wrongful acts alleged to have been committed in the scope of employment, under the direction of the Independent Authority, or related to any mentoring services provided to certified or licensed staff of the district. Such indemnification and protection shall extend to persons who were members of an Independent Authority, employees of an Independent Authority, authorized volunteer personnel, mentors of certified or licensed staff, or student teachers at the time of the incident from which a claim arises. No agent may be afforded indemnification or protection unless he or she was a member of an Independent Authority, an employee of an Independent Authority, an authorized volunteer, a mentor of certified or licensed staff, or a student teacher at the time of the incident from which the claim arises.
    (n) The State Board may adopt rules as may be necessary for the administration of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 98-1155, eff. 1-9-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.25g) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.25g)
    Sec. 2-3.25g. Waiver or modification of mandates within the School Code and administrative rules and regulations.
    (a) In this Section:
        "Board" means a school board or the governing board
    	
or administrative district, as the case may be, for a joint agreement.
        "Eligible applicant" means a school district, joint
    	
agreement made up of school districts, or regional superintendent of schools on behalf of schools and programs operated by the regional office of education.
        "Implementation date" has the meaning set forth in
    	
Section 24A-2.5 of this Code.
        "State Board" means the State Board of Education.
    (b) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this School Code or any other law of this State to the contrary, eligible applicants may petition the State Board of Education for the waiver or modification of the mandates of this School Code or of the administrative rules and regulations promulgated by the State Board of Education. Waivers or modifications of administrative rules and regulations and modifications of mandates of this School Code may be requested when an eligible applicant demonstrates that it can address the intent of the rule or mandate in a more effective, efficient, or economical manner or when necessary to stimulate innovation or improve student performance. Waivers of mandates of the School Code may be requested when the waivers are necessary to stimulate innovation or improve student performance or when the applicant demonstrates that it can address the intent of the mandate of the School Code in a more effective, efficient, or economical manner. Waivers may not be requested from laws, rules, and regulations pertaining to special education, teacher educator licensure, teacher tenure and seniority, or Section 5-2.1 of this Code or from compliance with the Every Student Succeeds Act (Public Law 114-95). Eligible applicants may not seek a waiver or seek a modification of a mandate regarding the requirements for (i) student performance data to be a significant factor in teacher or principal evaluations or (ii) teachers and principals to be rated using the 4 categories of "excellent", "proficient", "needs improvement", or "unsatisfactory". On September 1, 2014, any previously authorized waiver or modification from such requirements shall terminate.
    (c) Eligible applicants, as a matter of inherent managerial policy, and any Independent Authority established under Section 2-3.25f-5 of this Code may submit an application for a waiver or modification authorized under this Section. Each application must include a written request by the eligible applicant or Independent Authority and must demonstrate that the intent of the mandate can be addressed in a more effective, efficient, or economical manner or be based upon a specific plan for improved student performance and school improvement. Any eligible applicant requesting a waiver or modification for the reason that intent of the mandate can be addressed in a more economical manner shall include in the application a fiscal analysis showing current expenditures on the mandate and projected savings resulting from the waiver or modification. Applications and plans developed by eligible applicants must be approved by the board or regional superintendent of schools applying on behalf of schools or programs operated by the regional office of education following a public hearing on the application and plan and the opportunity for the board or regional superintendent to hear testimony from staff directly involved in its implementation, parents, and students. The time period for such testimony shall be separate from the time period established by the eligible applicant for public comment on other matters.
    (c-5) If the applicant is a school district, then the district shall post information that sets forth the time, date, place, and general subject matter of the public hearing on its Internet website at least 14 days prior to the hearing. If the district is requesting to increase the fee charged for driver education authorized pursuant to Section 27-24.2 of this Code, the website information shall include the proposed amount of the fee the district will request. All school districts must publish a notice of the public hearing at least 7 days prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the school district that sets forth the time, date, place, and general subject matter of the hearing. Districts requesting to increase the fee charged for driver education shall include in the published notice the proposed amount of the fee the district will request. If the applicant is a joint agreement or regional superintendent, then the joint agreement or regional superintendent shall post information that sets forth the time, date, place, and general subject matter of the public hearing on its Internet website at least 14 days prior to the hearing. If the joint agreement or regional superintendent is requesting to increase the fee charged for driver education authorized pursuant to Section 27-24.2 of this Code, the website information shall include the proposed amount of the fee the applicant will request. All joint agreements and regional superintendents must publish a notice of the public hearing at least 7 days prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in each school district that is a member of the joint agreement or that is served by the educational service region that sets forth the time, date, place, and general subject matter of the hearing, provided that a notice appearing in a newspaper generally circulated in more than one school district shall be deemed to fulfill this requirement with respect to all of the affected districts. Joint agreements or regional superintendents requesting to increase the fee charged for driver education shall include in the published notice the proposed amount of the fee the applicant will request. The eligible applicant must notify either electronically or in writing the affected exclusive collective bargaining agent and those State legislators representing the eligible applicant's territory of its intent to seek approval of a waiver or modification and of the hearing to be held to take testimony from staff. The affected exclusive collective bargaining agents shall be notified of such public hearing at least 7 days prior to the date of the hearing and shall be allowed to attend such public hearing. The eligible applicant shall attest to compliance with all of the notification and procedural requirements set forth in this Section.
    (d) A request for a waiver or modification of administrative rules and regulations or for a modification of mandates contained in this School Code shall be submitted to the State Board of Education within 15 days after approval by the board or regional superintendent of schools. The application as submitted to the State Board of Education shall include a description of the public hearing. Following receipt of the waiver or modification request, the State Board shall have 45 days to review the application and request. If the State Board fails to disapprove the application within that 45-day period, the waiver or modification shall be deemed granted. The State Board may disapprove any request if it is not based upon sound educational practices, endangers the health or safety of students or staff, compromises equal opportunities for learning, or fails to demonstrate that the intent of the rule or mandate can be addressed in a more effective, efficient, or economical manner or have improved student performance as a primary goal. Any request disapproved by the State Board may be appealed to the General Assembly by the eligible applicant as outlined in this Section.
    A request for a waiver from mandates contained in this School Code shall be submitted to the State Board within 15 days after approval by the board or regional superintendent of schools. The application as submitted to the State Board of Education shall include a description of the public hearing. The description shall include, but need not be limited to, the means of notice, the number of people in attendance, the number of people who spoke as proponents or opponents of the waiver, a brief description of their comments, and whether there were any written statements submitted. The State Board shall review the applications and requests for completeness and shall compile the requests in reports to be filed with the General Assembly. The State Board shall file reports outlining the waivers requested by eligible applicants and appeals by eligible applicants of requests disapproved by the State Board with the Senate and the House of Representatives before each March 1 and October 1.
    The report shall be reviewed by a panel of 4 members consisting of:
        (1) the Speaker of the House of Representatives;
        (2) the Minority Leader of the House of
    	
Representatives;
        (3) the President of the Senate; and
        (4) the Minority Leader of the Senate.
The State Board of Education may provide the panel recommendations on waiver requests. The members of the panel shall review the report submitted by the State Board of Education and submit to the State Board of Education any notice of further consideration to any waiver request within 14 days after the member receives the report. If 3 or more of the panel members submit a notice of further consideration to any waiver request contained within the report, the State Board of Education shall submit the waiver request to the General Assembly for consideration. If less than 3 panel members submit a notice of further consideration to a waiver request, the waiver may be approved, denied, or modified by the State Board. If the State Board does not act on a waiver request within 10 days, then the waiver request is approved. If the waiver request is denied by the State Board, it shall submit the waiver request to the General Assembly for consideration.
    The General Assembly may disapprove any waiver request submitted to the General Assembly pursuant to this subsection (d) in whole or in part within 60 calendar days after each house of the General Assembly next convenes after the waiver request is submitted by adoption of a resolution by a record vote of the majority of members elected in each house. If the General Assembly fails to disapprove any waiver request or appealed request within such 60-day period, the waiver or modification shall be deemed granted. Any resolution adopted by the General Assembly disapproving a report of the State Board in whole or in part shall be binding on the State Board.
    (e) An approved waiver or modification may remain in effect for a period not to exceed 5 school years and may be renewed upon application by the eligible applicant. However, such waiver or modification may be changed within that 5-year period by a board or regional superintendent of schools applying on behalf of schools or programs operated by the regional office of education following the procedure as set forth in this Section for the initial waiver or modification request. If neither the State Board of Education nor the General Assembly disapproves, the change is deemed granted.
    (f) (Blank).
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17; 100-782, eff. 1-1-19; 101-81, eff. 7-12-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.25h) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.25h)
    Sec. 2-3.25h. Technical assistance; State support services. Schools, school districts, local school councils, school improvement panels, and any Independent Authority established under Section 2-3.25f-5 of this Code may receive technical assistance that the State Board of Education shall make available. Such technical assistance shall include without limitation assistance in the areas of curriculum evaluation, the instructional process, student performance, school environment, staff effectiveness, school and community relations, parental involvement, resource management, leadership, data analysis processes and tools, school improvement plan guidance and feedback, information regarding scientifically based research-proven curriculum and instruction, and professional development opportunities for teachers and administrators.
(Source: P.A. 98-1155, eff. 1-9-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.25i) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.25i)
    Sec. 2-3.25i. Rules. The State Board of Education shall promulgate rules and regulations necessary to implement the provisions of Public Act 87-559 and this amendatory Act of the 93rd General Assembly. The State Board of Education may waive any of its rules or regulations which conflict with Public Act 87-559 or this amendatory Act of the 93rd General Assembly except those requirements for special education and teacher certification.
(Source: P.A. 93-470, eff. 8-8-03.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.25j) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.25j)
    Sec. 2-3.25j. Implementation. Commencing with the 1992-93 school year and thereafter the provisions of this amendatory Act and any rules adopted hereunder shall be implemented on a schedule identified by the State Board of Education and incorporated as an integral part of the recognition process of the State Board of Education.
(Source: P.A. 93-470, eff. 8-8-03.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.25k)
    Sec. 2-3.25k. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 89-398, eff. 8-20-95. Repealed by P.A. 93-470, eff. 8-8-03.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.25m)
    Sec. 2-3.25m. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 93-470, eff. 8-8-03. Repealed by P.A. 99-193, eff. 7-30-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.25n)
    Sec. 2-3.25n. Every Student Succeeds Act; requirements and construction.
    (a) The federal Every Student Succeeds Act requires that each state develop and implement a single, statewide accountability system applicable to all schools and school districts.
    (b) As provided in the federal Every Student Succeeds Act, nothing in this amendatory Act of the 93rd General Assembly shall be construed to alter or otherwise affect the rights, remedies, and procedures afforded school district or school employees under federal, State, or local law (including applicable rules, regulations, or court orders) or under the terms of collective bargaining agreements, memoranda of understanding, or other agreements between such employees and their employers.
    (c) The State Board of Education may identify a school district as eligible for targeted and comprehensive services under the federal Every Student Succeeds Act.
(Source: P.A. 100-1046, eff. 8-23-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.25o)
    Sec. 2-3.25o. Registration and recognition of non-public elementary and secondary schools.
    (a) Findings. The General Assembly finds and declares (i) that the Constitution of the State of Illinois provides that a "fundamental goal of the People of the State is the educational development of all persons to the limits of their capacities" and (ii) that the educational development of every school student serves the public purposes of the State. In order to ensure that all Illinois students and teachers have the opportunity to enroll and work in State-approved educational institutions and programs, the State Board of Education shall provide for the voluntary registration and recognition of non-public elementary and secondary schools.
    (b) Registration. All non-public elementary and secondary schools in the State of Illinois may voluntarily register with the State Board of Education on an annual basis. Registration shall be completed in conformance with procedures prescribed by the State Board of Education. Information required for registration shall include assurances of compliance (i) with federal and State laws regarding health examination and immunization, attendance, length of term, and nondiscrimination and (ii) with applicable fire and health safety requirements.
    (c) Recognition. All non-public elementary and secondary schools in the State of Illinois may voluntarily seek the status of "Non-public School Recognition" from the State Board of Education. This status may be obtained by compliance with administrative guidelines and review procedures as prescribed by the State Board of Education. The guidelines and procedures must recognize that some of the aims and the financial bases of non-public schools are different from public schools and will not be identical to those for public schools, nor will they be more burdensome. The guidelines and procedures must also recognize the diversity of non-public schools and shall not impinge upon the noneducational relationships between those schools and their clientele.
    (c-5) Prohibition against recognition. A non-public elementary or secondary school may not obtain "Non-public School Recognition" status unless the school requires all certified and non-certified applicants for employment with the school, after July 1, 2007, to authorize a fingerprint-based criminal history records check as a condition of employment to determine if such applicants have been convicted of any of the enumerated criminal or drug offenses set forth in Section 21B-80 of this Code or have been convicted, within 7 years of the application for employment, of any other felony under the laws of this State or of any offense committed or attempted in any other state or against the laws of the United States that, if committed or attempted in this State, would have been punishable as a felony under the laws of this State.
    Authorization for the check shall be furnished by the applicant to the school, except that if the applicant is a substitute teacher seeking employment in more than one non-public school, a teacher seeking concurrent part-time employment positions with more than one non-public school (as a reading specialist, special education teacher, or otherwise), or an educational support personnel employee seeking employment positions with more than one non-public school, then only one of the non-public schools employing the individual shall request the authorization. Upon receipt of this authorization, the non-public school shall submit the applicant's name, sex, race, date of birth, social security number, fingerprint images, and other identifiers, as prescribed by the Department of State Police, to the Department of State Police.
    The Department of State Police and Federal Bureau of Investigation shall furnish, pursuant to a fingerprint-based criminal history records check, records of convictions, forever and hereafter, until expunged, to the president or principal of the non-public school that requested the check. The Department of State Police shall charge that school a fee for conducting such check, which fee must be deposited into the State Police Services Fund and must not exceed the cost of the inquiry. Subject to appropriations for these purposes, the State Superintendent of Education shall reimburse non-public schools for fees paid to obtain criminal history records checks under this Section.
    A non-public school may not obtain recognition status unless the school also performs a check of the Statewide Sex Offender Database, as authorized by the Sex Offender Community Notification Law, for each applicant for employment, after July 1, 2007, to determine whether the applicant has been adjudicated a sex offender.
    Any information concerning the record of convictions obtained by a non-public school's president or principal under this Section is confidential and may be disseminated only to the governing body of the non-public school or any other person necessary to the decision of hiring the applicant for employment. A copy of the record of convictions obtained from the Department of State Police shall be provided to the applicant for employment. Upon a check of the Statewide Sex Offender Database, the non-public school shall notify the applicant as to whether or not the applicant has been identified in the Sex Offender Database as a sex offender. Any information concerning the records of conviction obtained by the non-public school's president or principal under this Section for a substitute teacher seeking employment in more than one non-public school, a teacher seeking concurrent part-time employment positions with more than one non-public school (as a reading specialist, special education teacher, or otherwise), or an educational support personnel employee seeking employment positions with more than one non-public school may be shared with another non-public school's principal or president to which the applicant seeks employment. Any unauthorized release of confidential information may be a violation of Section 7 of the Criminal Identification Act.
    No non-public school may obtain recognition status that knowingly employs a person, hired after July 1, 2007, for whom a Department of State Police and Federal Bureau of Investigation fingerprint-based criminal history records check and a Statewide Sex Offender Database check has not been initiated or who has been convicted of any offense enumerated in Section 21B-80 of this Code or any offense committed or attempted in any other state or against the laws of the United States that, if committed or attempted in this State, would have been punishable as one or more of those offenses. No non-public school may obtain recognition status under this Section that knowingly employs a person who has been found to be the perpetrator of sexual or physical abuse of a minor under 18 years of age pursuant to proceedings under Article II of the Juvenile Court Act of 1987.
    In order to obtain recognition status under this Section, a non-public school must require compliance with the provisions of this subsection (c-5) from all employees of persons or firms holding contracts with the school, including, but not limited to, food service workers, school bus drivers, and other transportation employees, who have direct, daily contact with pupils. Any information concerning the records of conviction or identification as a sex offender of any such employee obtained by the non-public school principal or president must be promptly reported to the school's governing body.
    Prior to the commencement of any student teaching experience or required internship (which is referred to as student teaching in this Section) in any non-public elementary or secondary school that has obtained or seeks to obtain recognition status under this Section, a student teacher is required to authorize a fingerprint-based criminal history records check. Authorization for and payment of the costs of the check must be furnished by the student teacher to the chief administrative officer of the non-public school where the student teaching is to be completed. Upon receipt of this authorization and payment, the chief administrative officer of the non-public school shall submit the student teacher's name, sex, race, date of birth, social security number, fingerprint images, and other identifiers, as prescribed by the Department of State Police, to the Department of State Police. The Department of State Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation shall furnish, pursuant to a fingerprint-based criminal history records check, records of convictions, forever and hereinafter, until expunged, to the chief administrative officer of the non-public school that requested the check. The Department of State Police shall charge the school a fee for conducting the check, which fee must be passed on to the student teacher, must not exceed the cost of the inquiry, and must be deposited into the State Police Services Fund. The school shall further perform a check of the Statewide Sex Offender Database, as authorized by the Sex Offender Community Notification Law, and of the Statewide Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth Database, as authorized by the Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth Registration Act, for each student teacher. No school that has obtained or seeks to obtain recognition status under this Section may knowingly allow a person to student teach for whom a criminal history records check, a Statewide Sex Offender Database check, and a Statewide Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth Database check have not been completed and reviewed by the chief administrative officer of the non-public school.
    A copy of the record of convictions obtained from the Department of State Police must be provided to the student teacher. Any information concerning the record of convictions obtained by the chief administrative officer of the non-public school is confidential and may be transmitted only to the chief administrative officer of the non-public school or his or her designee, the State Superintendent of Education, the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board, or, for clarification purposes, the Department of State Police or the Statewide Sex Offender Database or Statewide Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth Database. Any unauthorized release of confidential information may be a violation of Section 7 of the Criminal Identification Act.
    No school that has obtained or seeks to obtain recognition status under this Section may knowingly allow a person to student teach who has been convicted of any offense that would subject him or her to license suspension or revocation pursuant to Section 21B-80 of this Code or who has been found to be the perpetrator of sexual or physical abuse of a minor under 18 years of age pursuant to proceedings under Article II of the Juvenile Court Act of 1987.
    (d) Public purposes. The provisions of this Section are in the public interest, for the public benefit, and serve secular public purposes.
    (e) Definition. For purposes of this Section, a non-public school means any non-profit, non-home-based, and non-public elementary or secondary school that is in compliance with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and attendance at which satisfies the requirements of Section 26-1 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 99-21, eff. 1-1-16; 99-30, eff. 7-10-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.26) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.26)
    Sec. 2-3.26. Federal funds. For the purpose of promoting and coordinating school programs for which federal allotments are available, to cooperate with the United States Department of Health, Education and Welfare in the establishment of such standards as may be deemed necessary by the State Board of Education, and to accept and expend federal funds made available for such purpose.
(Source: P.A. 81-1508.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.27) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.27)
    Sec. 2-3.27. Budgets and accounting practices-Forms and procedures.
    To formulate and approve forms, procedure and regulations for school district accounts and budgets required by this Act reflecting the gross amount of income and expenses, receipts and disbursements and extending a net surplus or deficit on operating items, to advise and assist the officers of any district in respect to budgets and accounting practices and in the formulation and use of such books, records and accounts or other forms as may be required to comply with the provisions of this Act; to publish and keep current pamphlets or manuals in looseleaf form relating to budgetary and accounting procedure or similar topics; to make all rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry into effect the provisions of this Act relating to budgetary procedure and accounting, such rules and regulations to include but not to be limited to the establishment of a decimal classification of accounts; to confer with various district, county and State officials or take such other action as may be reasonably required to carry out the provisions of this Act relating to budgets and accounting.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.28) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.28)
    Sec. 2-3.28. Rules and regulations of budget and accounting systems. To prescribe rules and regulations defining what shall constitute a budget and accounting system required under this Act. The rules and regulations shall prescribe the minimum extent of verification, the type of audit, the extent of the audit report and shall require compliance with statutory requirements and standards and such requirements as the State Board of Education deems necessary for an adequate budget and accounting system.
(Source: P.A. 81-1508.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.30) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.30)
    Sec. 2-3.30. Census for special education. To require on or before December 22 of each year reports as to the census of all children 3 years of age through 21 years of age inclusive of the types described in definitions under the rules authorized in Section 14-1.02 who were receiving special education and related services on December 1 of the current school year.
    To require an annual report, on or before December 22 of each year, from the Department of Corrections containing a census of all children 3 years of age through 21 years of age inclusive of the types described in Section 14-1.02 who were receiving special education services on December 1 of the current school year within State facilities. Such report shall be submitted pursuant to rules and regulations issued by the State Board of Education.
(Source: P.A. 95-793, eff. 1-1-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.31) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.31)
    Sec. 2-3.31. Data Division. To maintain a Data Division staffed with competent, full-time persons whose duty it shall be to secure, compile, catalog, publish and preserve information and data relative to the public school system of Illinois, making such comparison as will assist the General Assembly in determining the priorities of educational programs to be of value to the public school system of Illinois and of other states.
(Source: P.A. 96-734, eff. 8-25-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.32) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.32)
    Sec. 2-3.32. Auditing department. To maintain a division of audits whose duty it shall be to establish a system to perform audits, on a sample basis, of claims for state moneys relative to the public school system of Illinois.
(Source: P.A. 98-739, eff. 7-16-14.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.33) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.33)
    Sec. 2-3.33. Recomputation of claims. To recompute within 3 years from the final date for filing of a claim any claim for general State aid reimbursement to any school district and one year from the final date for filing of a claim for evidence-based funding if the claim has been found to be incorrect and to adjust subsequent claims accordingly, and to recompute and adjust any such claims within 6 years from the final date for filing when there has been an adverse court or administrative agency decision on the merits affecting the tax revenues of the school district. However, no such adjustment shall be made regarding equalized assessed valuation unless the district's equalized assessed valuation is changed by greater than $250,000 or 2%. Any adjustments for claims recomputed for the 2016-2017 school year and prior school years shall be applied to the apportionment of evidence-based funding in Section 18-8.15 of this Code beginning in the 2017-2018 school year and thereafter. However, the recomputation of a claim for evidence-based funding for a school district shall not require the recomputation of claims for all districts, and the State Board of Education shall only make recomputations of evidence-based funding for those districts where an adjustment is required.
    Except in the case of an adverse court or administrative agency decision, no recomputation of a State aid claim shall be made pursuant to this Section as a result of a reduction in the assessed valuation of a school district from the assessed valuation of the district reported to the State Board of Education by the Department of Revenue under Section 18-8.05 or 18-8.15 of this Code unless the requirements of Section 16-15 of the Property Tax Code and Section 2-3.84 of this Code are complied with in all respects.
    This paragraph applies to all requests for recomputation of a general State aid or evidence-based funding claim received after June 30, 2003. In recomputing a general State aid or evidence-based funding claim that was originally calculated using an extension limitation equalized assessed valuation under paragraph (3) of subsection (G) of Section 18-8.05 of this Code or Section 18-8.15 of this Code, a qualifying reduction in equalized assessed valuation shall be deducted from the extension limitation equalized assessed valuation that was used in calculating the original claim.
    From the total amount of general State aid or evidence-based funding to be provided to districts, adjustments as a result of recomputation under this Section together with adjustments under Section 2-3.84 must not exceed $25 million, in the aggregate for all districts under both Sections combined, of the general State aid or evidence-based funding appropriation in any fiscal year; if necessary, amounts shall be prorated among districts. If it is necessary to prorate claims under this paragraph, then that portion of each prorated claim that is approved but not paid in the current fiscal year may be resubmitted as a valid claim in the following fiscal year.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.33a)
    Sec. 2-3.33a. Audit adjustments prohibited; alternative education program. The State Board of Education shall not make audit adjustments to general State aid claims paid in fiscal years 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, and 2003 based upon the claimant's failure to provide a minimum of 5 clock hours of daily instruction to students in an alternative education program or based upon the claimant's provision of service to non-resident students in an alternative education program without charging tuition, provided that the non-resident students were enrolled in the alternative education program on or before April 1, 2000.
(Source: P.A. 91-844, eff. 6-22-00; 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.34)
    Sec. 2-3.34. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 1959. Repealed by P.A. 94-108, eff. 7-1-05.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.35)
    Sec. 2-3.35. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 92-651, eff. 7-11-02. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.36) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.36)
    Sec. 2-3.36. Gifts, grants, legacies. To accept and expend gifts, grants or legacies from any source when made for educational purposes if such purposes have been authorized in advance by resolution of the General Assembly.
(Source: P.A. 83-388.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.37)
    Sec. 2-3.37. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 78-505. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.38)
    Sec. 2-3.38. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 80-1403. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.39) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.39)
    Sec. 2-3.39. Department of Transitional Bilingual Education. To establish a Department of Transitional Bilingual Education. In selecting staff for the Department of Transitional Bilingual Education the State Board of Education shall give preference to persons who are natives of foreign countries where languages to be used in transitional bilingual education programs are the predominant languages. The Department of Transitional Bilingual Education has the power and duty to:
        (1) Administer and enforce the provisions of Article
    	
14C of this Code including the power to promulgate any necessary rules and regulations.
        (2) Study, review, and evaluate all available
    	
resources and programs that, in whole or in part, are or could be directed towards meeting the language capability needs of child English learners and adult English learners residing in the State.
        (3) Gather information about the theory and practice
    	
of bilingual education in this State and elsewhere, and encourage experimentation and innovation in the field of bilingual education.
        (4) Provide for the maximum practical involvement of
    	
parents of bilingual children, transitional bilingual education teachers, representatives of community groups, educators, and laymen knowledgeable in the field of bilingual education in the formulation of policy and procedures relating to the administration of Article 14C of this Code.
        (5) Consult with other public departments and
    	
agencies, including but not limited to the Department of Community Affairs, the Department of Public Welfare, the Division of Employment Security, the Commission Against Discrimination, and the United States Department of Health, Education, and Welfare in connection with the administration of Article 14C of this Code.
        (6) Make recommendations in the areas of preservice
    	
and in-service training for transitional bilingual education teachers, curriculum development, testing and testing mechanisms, and the development of materials for transitional bilingual education programs.
        (7) Undertake any further activities which may assist
    	
in the full implementation of Article 14C of this Code and to make an annual report to the General Assembly to include an evaluation of the program, the need for continuing such a program, and recommendations for improvement.
        The requirement for reporting to the General Assembly
    	
shall be satisfied by filing copies of the report as required by Section 3.1 of the General Assembly Organization Act, and filing such additional copies with the State Government Report Distribution Center for the General Assembly as is required under paragraph (t) of Section 7 of the State Library Act.
(Source: P.A. 99-30, eff. 7-10-15; 100-1148, eff. 12-10-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.40)
    Sec. 2-3.40. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 86-553. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.41) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.41)
    Sec. 2-3.41. Chronic truants and truancy prevention. The State Board of Education is empowered to enter into contracts with public or private agencies for the provision of educational services to chronic truants and for the prevention of truancy including training and developmental assistance provided an appropriation is made specifically for such purpose.
(Source: P.A. 84-1420.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.42) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.42)
    Sec. 2-3.42. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 90-372, eff. 7-1-98. Repealed internally, eff. 7-1-98.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.43)
    Sec. 2-3.43. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 83-287. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.44.) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.44)
    Sec. 2-3.44. Ethnic school program standards. To establish minimum standards for foreign language instruction in ethnic schools. Such standards shall seek to insure that the level of foreign language instruction in the ethnic school is at least as high as the level of foreign language instruction in public high schools. An ethnic school is a part time private school which teaches the foreign language of a particular ethnic group as well as the culture, geography, history and other aspects of a particular ethnic group.
(Source: P.A. 83-1362.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.45) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.45)
    Sec. 2-3.45. Approval of ethnic schools instruction. To approve ethnic schools programs for the purpose of teaching a foreign language if such programs meet the minimum standards established for such programs by the State Board of Education. The Board shall consider for approval only those ethnic schools which voluntarily apply to the Board for approval.
(Source: P.A. 83-1362.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.47) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.47)
    Sec. 2-3.47. The State Board of Education shall annually submit a budget recommendation to the Governor and General Assembly that contains recommendations for funding for pre-school through grade 12.
(Source: P.A. 98-739, eff. 7-16-14.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.47a)
    Sec. 2-3.47a. Strategic plan.
    (a) The State Board of Education shall develop and maintain a continuing 5-year comprehensive strategic plan for elementary and secondary education. The strategic plan shall include without limitation all of the following topic areas:
        (1) Service and support to school districts to
    	
improve student performance.
        (2) Equity, adequacy, and predictability of
    	
educational opportunities and resources for all schools.
        (3) Program development and improvements, including
    	
financial planning and support services.
        (4) Efficient means of delivering services to
    	
schools on a regional basis.
        (5) Assistance to students at risk of academic
    	
failure and the use of proven support programs and services to close the achievement gap.
        (6) Educational research and development and access
    	
and training in the use of a centralized student achievement data system.
        (7) Recommendations for streamlining the School Code
    	
to eliminate laws that interfere with local control, taking into account those foundational standards that have already been established.
        (8) Streamlining certification of teachers and
    	
administrators to provide quality personnel and ongoing professional development.
        (9) Support services to enhance the capacity of
    	
school districts to meet federal and State statutory standards.
        (10) Enhanced technology for use in administration,
    	
classroom, and nontraditional educational settings.
        (11) Recognition of successful, exemplary schools.
        (12) The unique needs of rural school districts.
        (13) School reorganization issues.
        (14) Attraction and retention of qualified teachers.
        (15) Additional duties that should be assigned to
    	
regional offices of education and regional administrative service centers to support local control of school districts and eliminate any duplication and inefficiency.
The State Board of Education shall consult with the educational community, hold public hearings, and receive input from all interested groups in drafting the strategic plan.
    (b) To meet the requirements of this Section, the State Board of Education shall issue to the Governor and General Assembly a preliminary report within 6 months after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 93rd General Assembly and a final 5-year strategic plan within one year after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 93rd General Assembly. Thereafter, the strategic plan shall be updated and issued to the Governor and General Assembly on or before July 1 of each year.
(Source: P.A. 93-1036, eff. 9-14-04.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.48) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.48)
    Sec. 2-3.48. Evaluation institutes. To conduct such inservice institutes on evaluation of certified personnel as are necessary to make such training available to all public school district administrators who evaluate other certified personnel. To report to the employing school board the absence of any administrator registered for such training but not in attendance.
(Source: P.A. 84-972.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.49) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.49)
    Sec. 2-3.49. Review of evaluation plans. To review evaluation plans submitted by school districts and make public its comments thereon. To reject as unacceptable any plan in which evaluation is to be conducted by administrators who lack the training described in Section 24A-3.
(Source: P.A. 84-972.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.50) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.50)
    Sec. 2-3.50. Conduct of evaluations. To supply a consulting teacher, as defined in subsection (g) of Section 24A-5, to a district requiring one under the mandates of that Section, and to conduct an evaluation of school district personnel when so required by Section 24A-6.
(Source: P.A. 84-972.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.51) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.51)
    Sec. 2-3.51. Reading Improvement Block Grant Program. To improve the reading and study skills of children from kindergarten through sixth grade in school districts. The State Board of Education is authorized to administer a Reading Improvement Block Grant Program. As used in this Section:
    "School district" includes those schools designated as "laboratory schools".
    "Scientifically based reading research" means the application of rigorous, systematic, and objective procedures to obtain valid knowledge relevant to reading development, reading instruction, and reading difficulties. The term includes research that employs systematic, empirical methods that draw on observation or experiment, involves rigorous data analysis that is adequate to test the stated hypotheses and to justify the general conclusions drawn, relies on measurements or observational methods that provide valid data across evaluators and observers and across multiple measurements and observations, and has been accepted by peer-reviewed journal or approved by a panel of independent experts through a comparably rigorous, objective and scientific review.
    (a) Funds for the Reading Improvement Block Grant Program shall be distributed to school districts on the following basis: 70% of monies shall be awarded on the prior year's best 3 months average daily attendance and 30% shall be distributed on the number of economically disadvantaged (E.C.I.A. Chapter I) pupils in the district, provided that the State Board may distribute an amount not to exceed 2% of the monies appropriated for the Reading Improvement Block Grant Program for the purpose of providing teacher training and re-training in the teaching of reading. Program funds shall be distributed to school districts in 2 semi-annual installments, one payment on or before October 30, and one payment prior to April 30, of each year. The State Board shall promulgate rules and regulations necessary for the implementation of this program. Programs provided with grant funds shall not replace quality classroom reading instruction, but shall instead supplement such instruction.
    (a-5) Reading Improvement Block Grant Program funds shall be used by school districts in the following manner:
        (1) to hire reading specialists, reading teachers,
    	
and reading aides in order to provide early reading intervention in kindergarten through grade 2 and programs of continued reading support for students in grades 3 through 6;
        (2) in kindergarten through grade 2, to establish
    	
short-term tutorial early reading intervention programs for children who are at risk of failing to learn to read; these programs shall (i) focus on scientifically based research and best practices with proven long-term results, (ii) identify students in need of help no later than the middle of first grade, (iii) provide ongoing training for teachers in the program, (iv) focus instruction on strengthening a student's phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, and comprehension skills, (v) provide a means to document and evaluate student growth, and (vi) provide properly trained staff;
        (3) to continue direct reading instruction for grades
    	
3 through 6;
        (4) in grades 3 through 6, to establish programs of
    	
support for students who demonstrate a need for continued assistance in learning to read and in maintaining reading achievement; these programs shall (i) focus on scientifically based research and best practices with proven long-term results, (ii) provide ongoing training for teachers and other staff members in the program, (iii) focus instruction on strengthening a student's phonics, fluency, and comprehension skills in grades 3 through 6, (iv) provide a means to evaluate and document student growth, and (v) provide properly trained staff;
        (5) in grades K through 6, to provide classroom
    	
reading materials for students; each district may allocate up to 25% of the funds for this purpose; and
        (6) to provide a long-term professional development
    	
program for classroom teachers, administrators, and other appropriate staff; the program shall (i) focus on scientifically based research and best practices with proven long-term results, (ii) provide a means to evaluate student progress in reading as a result of the training, (iii) and be provided by approved staff development providers.
    (a-10) Reading Improvement Block Grant Program funds shall be made available to each eligible school district submitting an approved application developed by the State Board beginning with the 1998-99 school year. Applications shall include a proposed assessment method or methods for measuring the reading growth of students who receive direct instruction as a result of the funding and the impact of staff development activities on student growth in reading. Such methods may include the reading portion of the assessments required under Section 2-3.64a-5 of this Code. At the end of each school year the district shall report performance of progress results to the State Board. Districts not demonstrating performance progress using an approved assessment method shall not be eligible for funding in the third or subsequent years until such progress is established.
    (a-15) The State Superintendent of Education, in cooperation with the school districts participating in the program, shall annually report to the leadership of the General Assembly on the results of the Reading Improvement Block Grant Program and the progress being made on improving the reading skills of students in kindergarten through the sixth grade.
    (b) (Blank).
    (c) (Blank).
    (d) Grants under the Reading Improvement Program shall be awarded provided there is an appropriation for the program, and funding levels for each district shall be prorated according to the amount of the appropriation.
    (e) (Blank).
    (f) (Blank).
(Source: P.A. 98-972, eff. 8-15-14.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.51a)
    Sec. 2-3.51a. Continued Reading Improvement Block Grant Program. To improve the reading and study skills of children from seventh through twelfth grade in school districts. The State Board of Education is authorized to administer a Continued Reading Improvement Block Grant Program. As used in this Section, "school district" includes those schools designated as laboratory schools.
    (a) Funds for the Continued Reading Improvement Block Grant Program shall be distributed to school districts on the following basis: 70% of moneys shall be awarded on the prior year's best 3 months average daily attendance and 30% shall be distributed on the number of economically disadvantaged (E.C.I.A. Chapter I) pupils in the district, provided that the State Board may distribute an amount not to exceed 2% of the moneys appropriated for the Continued Reading Improvement Block Grant Program for the purpose of providing teacher training and re-training in the teaching of reading. Program funds shall be distributed to school districts in 2 semi-annual installments, one payment on or before October 30 and one payment prior to April 30 of each year. The State Board shall adopt any rules necessary for the implementation of this program.
    (b) Continued Reading Improvement Block Grant Program funds shall be used by school districts in the following manner to support students in grades 7 through 12 who are reading significantly below grade level:
        (1) to continue direct reading instruction for grades
    	
7 through 12, focusing on the application of reading skills for understanding informational text;
        (2) to focus on and to commit time and resources to
    	
the reading of rich literature;
        (3) to conduct intense vocabulary, spelling, and
    	
related writing programs that promote better understanding of language and words;
        (4) to provide professional development based on
    	
scientifically based research and best practices and delivered by providers approved by the State Board of Education; and
        (5) to increase the availability of reading
    	
specialists and teacher aides trained in research-based reading intervention or improvement practices or both.
    (c) Continued Reading Improvement Block Grant Program funds shall be made available to each eligible school district submitting an approved application developed by the State Board, beginning with the 2003-2004 school year. Applications shall include a proposed assessment method or methods for measuring student reading skills. Such methods may include the reading portion of State tests. At the end of each school year the district shall report assessment results to the State Board. Districts not demonstrating performance progress using an approved assessment method shall not be eligible for funding in the third or subsequent years until such progress is established.
    (d) The State Superintendent of Education, in cooperation with the school districts participating in the program, shall annually report to the leadership of the General Assembly on the results of the Continued Reading Improvement Block Grant Program and the progress being made on improving the reading skills of students in grades 7 through 12.
    (e) Grants under the Continued Reading Improvement Block Grant Program shall be awarded provided there is an appropriation for the program, and funding levels for each district shall be prorated according to the amount of the appropriation. Funding for the program established under Section 2-3.51 of this Code shall not be reduced in order to fund the Continued Reading Improvement Block Grant Program.
(Source: P.A. 93-53, eff. 7-1-03.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.51.5)
    Sec. 2-3.51.5. School Safety and Educational Improvement Block Grant Program. To improve the level of education and safety of students from kindergarten through grade 12 in school districts and State-recognized, non-public schools. The State Board of Education is authorized to fund a School Safety and Educational Improvement Block Grant Program.
    (1) For school districts, the program shall provide funding for school safety, textbooks and software, electronic textbooks and the technological equipment necessary to gain access to and use electronic textbooks, teacher training and curriculum development, school improvements, school report cards under Section 10-17a, and criminal history records checks under Sections 10-21.9 and 34-18.5. For State-recognized, non-public schools, the program shall provide funding for secular textbooks and software, criminal history records checks, and health and safety mandates to the extent that the funds are expended for purely secular purposes. A school district or laboratory school as defined in Section 18-8, 18-8.05, or 18-8.15 is not required to file an application in order to receive the categorical funding to which it is entitled under this Section. Funds for the School Safety and Educational Improvement Block Grant Program shall be distributed to school districts and laboratory schools based on the prior year's best 3 months average daily attendance. Funds for the School Safety and Educational Improvement Block Grant Program shall be distributed to State-recognized, non-public schools based on the average daily attendance figure for the previous school year provided to the State Board of Education. The State Board of Education shall develop an application that requires State-recognized, non-public schools to submit average daily attendance figures. A State-recognized, non-public school must submit the application and average daily attendance figure prior to receiving funds under this Section. The State Board of Education shall promulgate rules and regulations necessary for the implementation of this program.
    (2) Distribution of moneys to school districts and State-recognized, non-public schools shall be made in 2 semi-annual installments, one payment on or before October 30, and one payment prior to April 30, of each fiscal year.
    (3) Grants under the School Safety and Educational Improvement Block Grant Program shall be awarded provided there is an appropriation for the program, and funding levels for each district shall be prorated according to the amount of the appropriation.
    (4) The provisions of this Section are in the public interest, are for the public benefit, and serve secular public purposes.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.52)
    Sec. 2-3.52. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 84-126. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.52A) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.52A)
    Sec. 2-3.52A. Pilot programs. The State Board of Education may, pursuant to the federal Every Student Succeeds Act and appropriations for such purposes, establish educator preparation pilot programs. Such programs shall be conducted in accordance with rules adopted by the State Board of Education. Such rules shall provide for, but not be limited to, advisory councils and annual reports on the progress of the pilot programs.
(Source: P.A. 100-1046, eff. 8-23-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.53) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.53)
    Sec. 2-3.53. Administrators' Academy. The State Board of Education shall cause to be established an Illinois Administrators' Academy. This Academy shall develop programs which provide for development of skills in the areas of instructional staff development, school improvement, school accountability, effective communication skills, public school relations, evaluation of personnel, including documentation of employee performance and remediation of unsatisfactory employee performance.
    By January 1, 1986, the State Board of Education shall establish a schedule by which administrators throughout Illinois must receive training through the Academy.
(Source: P.A. 87-1076.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.53a)
    Sec. 2-3.53a. New principal mentoring program.
    (a) Beginning on July 1, 2007, and subject to an annual appropriation by the General Assembly, to establish a new principal mentoring program for new principals. Any individual who is first hired as a principal on or after July 1, 2007 shall participate in a new principal mentoring program for the duration of his or her first year as a principal and must complete the program in accordance with the requirements established by the State Board of Education by rule or, for a school district created by Article 34 of this Code, in accordance with the provisions of Section 34-18.27 of this Code. School districts created by Article 34 are not subject to the requirements of subsection (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), or (g) of this Section. Any individual who is first hired as a principal on or after July 1, 2008 may participate in a second year of mentoring if it is determined by the State Superintendent of Education that sufficient funding exists for such participation. The new principal mentoring program shall match an experienced principal who meets the requirements of subsection (b) of this Section with each new principal in order to assist the new principal in the development of his or her professional growth and to provide guidance.
    (b) Any individual who has been a principal in Illinois for 3 or more years and who has demonstrated success as an instructional leader, as determined by the State Board by rule, is eligible to apply to be a mentor under a new principal mentoring program. Mentors shall complete mentoring training by entities approved by the State Board and meet any other requirements set forth by the State Board and by the school district employing the mentor.
    (c) The State Board shall certify an entity or entities approved to provide training of mentors.
    (d) A mentor shall be assigned to a new principal based on (i) similarity of grade level or type of school, (ii) learning needs of the new principal, and (iii) geographical proximity of the mentor to the new principal. The principal, in collaboration with the mentor, shall identify areas for improvement of the new principal's professional growth, including, but not limited to, each of the following:
        (1) Analyzing data and applying it to practice.
        (2) Aligning professional development and
    	
instructional programs.
        (3) Building a professional learning community.
        (4) Observing classroom practices and providing
    	
feedback.
        (5) Facilitating effective meetings.
        (6) Developing distributive leadership practices.
        (7) Facilitating organizational change.
The mentor shall not be required to provide an evaluation of the new principal on the basis of the mentoring relationship.
    (e) On or before July 1, 2008 and on or after July 1 of each year thereafter, the State Board shall facilitate a review and evaluate the mentoring training program in collaboration with the approved providers. Each new principal and his or her mentor must complete a verification form developed by the State Board in order to certify their completion of a new principal mentoring program.
    (f) The requirements of this Section do not apply to any individual who has previously served as an assistant principal in Illinois acting under an administrative certificate for 5 or more years and who is hired, on or after July 1, 2007, as a principal by the school district in which the individual last served as an assistant principal, although such an individual may choose to participate in this program or shall be required to participate by the school district.
    (g) The State Board may adopt any rules necessary for the implementation of this Section.
    (h) On an annual basis, the State Superintendent of Education shall determine whether appropriations are likely to be sufficient to require operation of the mentoring program for the coming year. In doing so, the State Superintendent of Education shall first determine whether it is likely that funds will be sufficient to require operation of the mentoring program for individuals in their first year as principal and shall then determine whether it is likely that funds will be sufficient to require operation of the mentoring program for individuals in their second year as principal.
(Source: P.A. 96-373, eff. 8-13-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.53b)
    Sec. 2-3.53b. New superintendent mentoring program.
    (a) Beginning on July 1, 2009 and subject to an annual appropriation by the General Assembly, to establish a new superintendent mentoring program for new superintendents. Any individual who begins serving as a superintendent in this State on or after July 1, 2009 and has not previously served as a school district superintendent in this State shall participate in the new superintendent mentoring program for the duration of his or her first 2 school years as a superintendent and must complete the program in accordance with the requirements established by the State Board of Education by rule. The new superintendent mentoring program shall match an experienced superintendent who meets the requirements of subsection (b) of this Section with each new superintendent in his or her first 2 school years in that position in order to assist the new superintendent in the development of his or her professional growth and to provide guidance during the new superintendent's first 2 school years of service.
    (b) Any individual who has actively served as a school district superintendent in this State for 3 or more years and who has demonstrated success as an instructional leader, as determined by the State Board of Education by rule, is eligible to apply to be a mentor under the new superintendent mentoring program. Mentors shall complete mentoring training through a provider selected by the State Board of Education and shall meet any other requirements set forth by the State Board and by the school district employing the mentor.
    (c) Under the new superintendent mentoring program, a provider selected by the State Board of Education shall assign a mentor to a new superintendent based on (i) similarity of grade level or type of school district, (ii) learning needs of the new superintendent, and (iii) geographical proximity of the mentor to the new superintendent. The new superintendent, in collaboration with the mentor, shall identify areas for improvement of the new superintendent's professional growth, including, but not limited to, each of the following:
        (1) Analyzing data and applying it to practice.
        (2) Aligning professional development and
    	
instructional programs.
        (3) Building a professional learning community.
        (4) Effective school board relations.
        (5) Facilitating effective meetings.
        (6) Developing distributive leadership practices.
        (7) Facilitating organizational change.
    The mentor must not be required to provide an evaluation of the new superintendent on the basis of the mentoring relationship.
    (d) From January 1, 2010 until May 15, 2010 and from January 1 until May 15 each year thereafter, each mentor and each new superintendent shall complete a survey of progress of the new superintendent on a form developed by the school district. On or before September 1, 2010 and on or before September 1 of each year thereafter, the provider selected by the State Board of Education shall submit a detailed annual report to the State Board of how the appropriation for the new superintendent mentoring program was spent, details on each mentor-mentee relationship, and a qualitative evaluation of the outcomes. The provider shall develop a verification form that each new superintendent and his or her mentor must complete and submit to the provider to certify completion of each year of the new superintendent mentoring program by July 15 immediately following the school year just completed.
    (e) The requirements of this Section do not apply to any individual who has previously served as an assistant superintendent in a school district in this State acting under an administrative certificate for 5 or more years and who, on or after July 1, 2009, begins serving as a superintendent in the school district where he or she had served as an assistant superintendent immediately prior to being named superintendent, although such an individual may choose to participate in the new superintendent mentoring program or may be required to participate by the school district. The requirements of this Section do not apply to any superintendent or chief executive officer of a school district organized under Article 34 of this Code.
    (f) The State Board may adopt any rules that are necessary for the implementation of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 96-62, eff. 7-23-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.54)
    Sec. 2-3.54. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 84-1308. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.55)
    Sec. 2-3.55. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 85-1046. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.55A)
    Sec. 2-3.55A. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 85-322. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.56) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.56)
    Sec. 2-3.56. Evaluation institutes. To conduct as a part of the Administrators' Academy such inservice institutes on evaluation of certified personnel as are necessary to make such training available to all public school district administrators who evaluate other certified personnel. To report to the employing school board the absence of any administrator registered for such training but not in attendance.
(Source: P.A. 84-126.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.57) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.57)
    Sec. 2-3.57. Review of evaluation plans. To review evaluation plans submitted by school districts and make public its comments thereon. To reject as unacceptable any plan in which evaluation is to be conducted by administrators who lack the training described in Section 24A-3.
(Source: P.A. 84-126.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.58) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.58)
    Sec. 2-3.58. Conduct of evaluations. To supply a consulting teacher, as defined in subsection (g) of Section 24A-5, to a district requiring one under the mandates of that Section, and to conduct an evaluation of school district personnel when so required by Section 24A-6.
(Source: P.A. 84-126.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.59) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.59)
    Sec. 2-3.59. Staff development programs. School districts, cooperatives or joint agreements with a governing board or board of control, administrative agents for educational service centers, and regional superintendents acting on behalf of such entities shall conduct staff development programs and may contract with not-for-profit organizations to conduct summer staff development program institutes which specify outcome goals, including the improvement of specific instructional competencies, and which conform to locally developed plans.
(Source: P.A. 94-875, eff. 7-1-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.60)
    Sec. 2-3.60. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 84-1283. Repealed by P.A. 99-30, eff. 7-10-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.61)
    Sec. 2-3.61. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 93-21, eff. 7-1-03. Repealed by P.A. 95-793, eff. 1-1-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.61a)
    Sec. 2-3.61a. 21st Century Community Learning Center Grant Program.
    (a) The State Board of Education shall be the designated agency responsible for the administration of programs under Part I of Subchapter X of Chapter 70 of the federal Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965.
    (b) The State Board of Education shall establish and implement a 21st Century Community Learning Center Grant Program, in accordance with federal guidelines, to provide grants to support whole child-focused after-school programs that are aligned with the regular academic programs of a school and the academic needs of students. These grants shall be used to help those students who attend high-poverty, low-performing schools meet State and local performance standards in core academic subjects and, if applicable, increase school day attendance and improve social-emotional skills and to offer opportunities for families of participating students to have meaningful engagement in their children's education that are linked to learning and healthy development outcomes. If appropriate, external stakeholder feedback shall be gathered and used to inform the grant application.
    The State Board of Education shall award grants to eligible applicants that are of sufficient size and scope to implement effective after-school programs, to ensure reasonable success of achieving the goals identified in the grant application, and to offer those activities that are necessary to achieve these goals and performance indicators and measures with a direct link to student achievement.
    (c) Using State funds, subject to appropriation, and any federal funds received for this purpose, the State Board of Education may establish any other grant programs that are necessary to establish high-quality, academically based, after-school programs that include family-centered education activities.
    (d) The State Board of Education may adopt any rules necessary to implement this Section.
(Source: P.A. 100-1046, eff. 8-23-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.62) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.62)
    Sec. 2-3.62. Educational service centers.
    (a) A regional network of educational service centers shall be established by the State Board of Education to coordinate and combine existing services in a manner which is practical and efficient and to provide new services to schools as provided in this Section. Services to be made available by such centers shall include the planning, implementation and evaluation of:
        (1) (blank);
        (2) computer technology education;
        (3) mathematics, science and reading resources for
    	
teachers including continuing education, inservice training and staff development.
    The centers may provide training, technical assistance, coordination and planning in other program areas such as school improvement, school accountability, financial planning, consultation, and services, career guidance, early childhood education, alcohol/drug education and prevention, family life - sex education, electronic transmission of data from school districts to the State, alternative education and regional special education, and telecommunications systems that provide distance learning. Such telecommunications systems may be obtained through the Department of Central Management Services pursuant to Section 405-270 of the Department of Central Management Services Law (20 ILCS 405/405-270). The programs and services of educational service centers may be offered to private school teachers and private school students within each service center area provided public schools have already been afforded adequate access to such programs and services.
    Upon the abolition of the office, removal from office, disqualification for office, resignation from office, or expiration of the current term of office of the regional superintendent of schools, whichever is earlier, the chief administrative officer of the centers serving that portion of a Class II county school unit outside of a city of 500,000 or more inhabitants shall have and exercise, in and with respect to each educational service region having a population of 2,000,000 or more inhabitants and in and with respect to each school district located in any such educational service region, all of the rights, powers, duties, and responsibilities theretofore vested by law in and exercised and performed by the regional superintendent of schools for that area under the provisions of this Code or any other laws of this State.
    The State Board of Education shall promulgate rules and regulations necessary to implement this Section. The rules shall include detailed standards which delineate the scope and specific content of programs to be provided by each Educational Service Center, as well as the specific planning, implementation and evaluation services to be provided by each Center relative to its programs. The Board shall also provide the standards by which it will evaluate the programs provided by each Center.
    (b) Centers serving Class 1 county school units shall be governed by an 11-member board, 3 members of which shall be public school teachers nominated by the local bargaining representatives to the appropriate regional superintendent for appointment and no more than 3 members of which shall be from each of the following categories, including but not limited to superintendents, regional superintendents, school board members and a representative of an institution of higher education. The members of the board shall be appointed by the regional superintendents whose school districts are served by the educational service center. The composition of the board will reflect the revisions of this amendatory Act of 1989 as the terms of office of current members expire.
    (c) The centers shall be of sufficient size and number to assure delivery of services to all local school districts in the State.
    (d) From monies appropriated for this program the State Board of Education shall provide grants paid from the Personal Property Tax Replacement Fund to qualifying Educational Service Centers applying for such grants in accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the State Board of Education to implement this Section.
    (e) The governing authority of each of the 18 regional educational service centers shall appoint a family life - sex education advisory board consisting of 2 parents, 2 teachers, 2 school administrators, 2 school board members, 2 health care professionals, one library system representative, and the director of the regional educational service center who shall serve as chairperson of the advisory board so appointed. Members of the family life - sex education advisory boards shall serve without compensation. Each of the advisory boards appointed pursuant to this subsection shall develop a plan for regional teacher-parent family life - sex education training sessions and shall file a written report of such plan with the governing board of their regional educational service center. The directors of each of the regional educational service centers shall thereupon meet, review each of the reports submitted by the advisory boards and combine those reports into a single written report which they shall file with the Citizens Council on School Problems prior to the end of the regular school term of the 1987-1988 school year.
    (f) The 14 educational service centers serving Class I county school units shall be disbanded on the first Monday of August, 1995, and their statutory responsibilities and programs shall be assumed by the regional offices of education, subject to rules and regulations developed by the State Board of Education. The regional superintendents of schools elected by the voters residing in all Class I counties shall serve as the chief administrators for these programs and services.
(Source: P.A. 98-24, eff. 6-19-13; 98-647, eff. 6-13-14; 99-30, eff. 7-10-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.62a)
    Sec. 2-3.62a. Regional services. The State Board of Education is granted the power to provide the following regional services, either through a regional administrative technology center or otherwise:
        (1) Coordinate the delivery of educational resources
    	
and support services statewide, including assistance in complying with State and federal law.
        (2) Issue annual report cards, in conjunction with
    	
school report cards under Section 10-17a of this Code and in cooperation with school districts, for regional offices of education, grading without limitation all of the following:
            (A) The efficiency and effectiveness of school
        	
districts served resulting from technical assistance and program support.
            (B) The regional delivery of quality services.
            (C) School district satisfaction.
            (D) Delivery of support services that enhance
        	
student performance.
        (3) Direct services provided to assist schools
    	
designated as not meeting Illinois learning and federal student performance standards.
        (4) Support programs and services to close the
    	
achievement gap.
        (5) Assist school districts in pooling
    	
administrative or other services and facilitate cooperation among school districts that may be able to achieve economies of scale through shared services. The State Board of Education may exercise this power in cooperation with regional superintendents of schools. The State Board shall not have the power to require a school district to enter into a shared service agreement.
(Source: P.A. 93-1036, eff. 9-14-04.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.63) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.63)
    Sec. 2-3.63. Local learning objectives and assessment. Each school district may set student learning objectives which meet or exceed goals established by the State and to also establish local goals for excellence in education. If established, such objectives and goals shall be disseminated to the public along with information on the degree to which they are being achieved, and if not, what appropriate actions are being taken. As part of its local assessment system each district shall identify the grade levels used to document progress to parents, the community, and the State in all the fundamental learning areas described in Section 27-1.
(Source: P.A. 94-875, eff. 7-1-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.64)
    Sec. 2-3.64. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-86, eff. 1-1-12. Repealed by P.A. 98-972, eff. 8-15-14.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.64a)
    Sec. 2-3.64a. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 90-789, eff. 8-14-98. Repealed by P.A. 98-972, eff. 8-15-14.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.64a-5)
    Sec. 2-3.64a-5. State goals and assessment.
    (a) For the assessment and accountability purposes of this Section, "students" includes those students enrolled in a public or State-operated elementary school, secondary school, or cooperative or joint agreement with a governing body or board of control, a charter school operating in compliance with the Charter Schools Law, a school operated by a regional office of education under Section 13A-3 of this Code, or a public school administered by a local public agency or the Department of Human Services.
    (b) The State Board of Education shall establish the academic standards that are to be applicable to students who are subject to State assessments under this Section. The State Board of Education shall not establish any such standards in final form without first providing opportunities for public participation and local input in the development of the final academic standards. Those opportunities shall include a well-publicized period of public comment and opportunities to file written comments.
    (c) Beginning no later than the 2014-2015 school year, the State Board of Education shall annually assess all students enrolled in grades 3 through 8 in English language arts and mathematics.
    Beginning no later than the 2017-2018 school year, the State Board of Education shall annually assess all students in science at one grade in grades 3 through 5, at one grade in grades 6 through 8, and at one grade in grades 9 through 12.
    The State Board of Education shall annually assess schools that operate a secondary education program, as defined in Section 22-22 of this Code, in English language arts and mathematics. The State Board of Education shall administer no more than 3 assessments, per student, of English language arts and mathematics for students in a secondary education program. One of these assessments shall be recognized by this State's public institutions of higher education, as defined in the Board of Higher Education Act, for the purpose of student application or admissions consideration. The assessment administered by the State Board of Education for the purpose of student application to or admissions consideration by institutions of higher education must be administered on a school day during regular student attendance hours.
    Students who do not take the State's final accountability assessment or its approved alternate assessment may not receive a regular high school diploma unless the student is exempted from taking the State assessments under subsection (d) of this Section because the student is enrolled in a program of adult and continuing education, as defined in the Adult Education Act, or the student is identified by the State Board of Education, through rules, as being exempt from the assessment.
    The State Board of Education shall not assess students under this Section in subjects not required by this Section.
    Districts shall inform their students of the timelines and procedures applicable to their participation in every yearly administration of the State assessments. The State Board of Education shall establish periods of time in each school year during which State assessments shall occur to meet the objectives of this Section.
    The requirements of this subsection do not apply if the State Board of Education has received a waiver from the administration of assessments from the U.S. Department of Education.
    (d) Every individualized educational program as described in Article 14 shall identify if the State assessment or components thereof require accommodation for the student. The State Board of Education shall develop rules governing the administration of an alternate assessment that may be available to students for whom participation in this State's regular assessments is not appropriate, even with accommodations as allowed under this Section.
    Students receiving special education services whose individualized educational programs identify them as eligible for the alternative State assessments nevertheless shall have the option of also taking this State's regular final accountability assessment, which shall be administered in accordance with the eligible accommodations appropriate for meeting these students' respective needs.
    All students determined to be English learners shall participate in the State assessments. The scores of those students who have been enrolled in schools in the United States for less than 12 months may not be used for the purposes of accountability. Any student determined to be an English learner shall receive appropriate assessment accommodations, including language supports, which shall be established by rule. Approved assessment accommodations must be provided until the student's English language skills develop to the extent that the student is no longer considered to be an English learner, as demonstrated through a State-identified English language proficiency assessment.
    (e) The results or scores of each assessment taken under this Section shall be made available to the parents of each student.
    In each school year, the scores attained by a student on the final accountability assessment must be placed in the student's permanent record pursuant to rules that the State Board of Education shall adopt for that purpose in accordance with Section 3 of the Illinois School Student Records Act. In each school year, the scores attained by a student on the State assessments administered in grades 3 through 8 must be placed in the student's temporary record.
    (f) All schools shall administer the State's academic assessment of English language proficiency to all children determined to be English learners.
    (g) All schools in this State that are part of the sample drawn by the National Center for Education Statistics, in collaboration with their school districts and the State Board of Education, shall administer the academic assessments under the National Assessment of Educational Progress carried out under Section 411(b)(2) of the federal National Education Statistics Act of 1994 (20 U.S.C. 9010) if the U.S. Secretary of Education pays the costs of administering the assessments.
    (h) (Blank).
    (i) For the purposes of this subsection (i), "academically based assessments" means assessments consisting of questions and answers that are measurable and quantifiable to measure the knowledge, skills, and ability of students in the subject matters covered by the assessments. All assessments administered pursuant to this Section must be academically based assessments. The scoring of academically based assessments shall be reliable, valid, and fair and shall meet the guidelines for assessment development and use prescribed by the American Psychological Association, the National Council on Measurement in Education, and the American Educational Research Association.
    The State Board of Education shall review the use of all assessment item types in order to ensure that they are valid and reliable indicators of student performance aligned to the learning standards being assessed and that the development, administration, and scoring of these item types are justifiable in terms of cost.
    (j) The State Superintendent of Education shall appoint a committee of no more than 21 members, consisting of parents, teachers, school administrators, school board members, assessment experts, regional superintendents of schools, and citizens, to review the State assessments administered by the State Board of Education. The Committee shall select one of its members as its chairperson. The Committee shall meet on an ongoing basis to review the content and design of the assessments (including whether the requirements of subsection (i) of this Section have been met), the time and money expended at the local and State levels to prepare for and administer the assessments, the collective results of the assessments as measured against the stated purpose of assessing student performance, and other issues involving the assessments identified by the Committee. The Committee shall make periodic recommendations to the State Superintendent of Education and the General Assembly concerning the assessments.
    (k) The State Board of Education may adopt rules to implement this Section.
(Source: P.A. 100-7, eff. 7-1-17; 100-222, eff. 8-18-17; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18; 100-1046, eff. 8-23-18; 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.64a-10)
    Sec. 2-3.64a-10. Kindergarten assessment.
    (a) For the purposes of this Section, "kindergarten" includes both full-day and half-day kindergarten programs.
    (b) Beginning no later than the 2021-2022 school year, the State Board of Education shall annually assess all public school students entering kindergarten using a common assessment tool, unless the State Board determines that a student is otherwise exempt. The common assessment tool must assess multiple developmental domains, including literacy, language, mathematics, and social and emotional development. The assessment must be valid, reliable, and developmentally appropriate to formatively assess a child's development and readiness for kindergarten.
    (c) Results from the assessment may be used by the school to understand the child's development and readiness for kindergarten, to tailor instruction, and to measure the child's progress over time. Assessment results may also be used to identify a need for the professional development of teachers and early childhood educators and to inform State-level and district-level policies and resource allocation.
    The school shall make the assessment results available to the child's parent or guardian.
    The assessment results may not be used (i) to prevent a child from enrolling in kindergarten or (ii) as the sole measure used in determining the grade promotion or retention of a student.
    (d) On an annual basis, the State Board shall report publicly, at a minimum, data from the assessment for the State overall and for each school district. The State Board's report must disaggregate data by race and ethnicity, household income, students who are English learners, and students who have an individualized education program.
    (e) The State Superintendent of Education shall appoint a committee of no more than 21 members, consisting of parents, teachers, school administrators, assessment experts, and regional superintendents of schools, to review, on an ongoing basis, the content and design of the assessment, the collective results of the assessment as measured against kindergarten-readiness standards, and other issues involving the assessment as identified by the committee.
    The committee shall make periodic recommendations to the State Superintendent of Education and the General Assembly concerning the assessments.
    (f) The State Board may adopt rules to implement and administer this Section.
(Source: P.A. 101-654, eff. 3-8-21.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.64b)
    Sec. 2-3.64b. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 96-109, eff. 7-30-09. Repealed by P.A. 99-30, eff. 7-10-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.64c)
    Sec. 2-3.64c. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 98-1075, eff. 8-26-14. Repealed internally, eff. 6-1-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.65)
    Sec. 2-3.65. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 84-126. Repealed by P.A. 95-793, eff. 1-1-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.65a)
    Sec. 2-3.65a. Arts and foreign language education grant program. There is created an arts and foreign language education grant program to fund arts education and foreign language education programs in the public schools, subject to appropriation to the State Board of Education. The grants shall be for the purpose of supporting arts and foreign language education in the schools, with an emphasis on ensuring that art and foreign language courses are available as part of a school's core curriculum. The State Board of Education shall enter into an agreement with the Illinois Arts Council to cooperate in administering and awarding grants under the program.
(Source: P.A. 94-835, eff. 6-6-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.66) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.66)
    Sec. 2-3.66. Truants' alternative and optional education programs. To establish projects to offer modified instructional programs or other services designed to prevent students from dropping out of school, including programs pursuant to Section 2-3.41, and to serve as a part time or full time option in lieu of regular school attendance and to award grants to local school districts, educational service regions or community college districts from appropriated funds to assist districts in establishing such projects. The education agency may operate its own program or enter into a contract with another not-for-profit entity to implement the program. The projects shall allow dropouts, up to and including age 21, potential dropouts, including truants, uninvolved, unmotivated and disaffected students, as defined by State Board of Education rules and regulations, to enroll, as an alternative to regular school attendance, in an optional education program which may be established by school board policy and is in conformance with rules adopted by the State Board of Education. Truants' Alternative and Optional Education programs funded pursuant to this Section shall be planned by a student, the student's parents or legal guardians, unless the student is 18 years or older, and school officials and shall culminate in an individualized optional education plan. Such plan shall focus on academic or vocational skills, or both, and may include, but not be limited to, evening school, summer school, community college courses, adult education, preparation courses for high school equivalency testing, vocational training, work experience, programs to enhance self concept and parenting courses. School districts which are awarded grants pursuant to this Section shall be authorized to provide day care services to children of students who are eligible and desire to enroll in programs established and funded under this Section, but only if and to the extent that such day care is necessary to enable those eligible students to attend and participate in the programs and courses which are conducted pursuant to this Section. School districts and regional offices of education may claim general State aid under Section 18-8.05 or evidence-based funding under Section 18-8.15 for students enrolled in truants' alternative and optional education programs, provided that such students are receiving services that are supplemental to a program leading to a high school diploma and are otherwise eligible to be claimed for general State aid under Section 18-8.05 or evidence-based funding under Section 18-8.15, as applicable.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.66a) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.66a)
    Sec. 2-3.66a. WECE program. The State Board of Education is authorized to develop and establish a work experience and career exploration program. Such program, if established as authorized by this Section shall be designed to provide career related classroom instruction and cooperative work experience for 14 and 15 year old potential dropouts who are full time students in the regular school program. Participation in any work experience and career exploration program established under this Section shall provide school credit for successful completion of the class and paid work experience. The purpose of the program shall be to help academically disadvantaged students with the following special services: (1) basic education development and enrichment leading to improved self-image; (2) career education coupled with work training experiences, not exceeding 23 hours per week, provided by the private sector; and (3) motivation leading to continuation in school after age 16.
    The State Board of Education is authorized to fund school district work experience and career exploration programs, with priority being given to those school districts which have annual dropout rate data and unemployment rates greater than the Statewide average for the previous year.
    Funds for a work experience and career exploration program established under this Section shall be distributed to eligible school districts based on relative ability to pay factors and upon the number of economically disadvantaged students (E.C.I.A. Chapter I pupils) in the districts. The State Board of Education shall promulgate rules and regulations necessary for implementation and continuation of any work experience and career exploration program established as authorized by this Section.
    From funds distributed for purposes of this Section, the State Board of Education is authorized to approve applications from qualifying school districts to help meet each such district's costs of employing teacher coordinators, teacher coordinators' travel expenses, student transportation costs and added training costs to employers.
    Each person employed as a teacher coordinator pursuant to this Section shall possess one year (2,000 hours) of employment in an occupation or occupations directly related to those career or employment areas with respect to which classroom instruction or cooperative work experience is to be provided under the program, and 6 semester hours of formal coursework in the area of organization and administration of work experience and career exploration education, including techniques of coordinating on-the-job experiences and individualized instructional methodology.
    Each work experience and career exploration program shall be limited to a minimum of 12 students and a maximum of 25 students per full-time teacher coordinator. Student limitation is based on the need for individual instruction and supervision time equivalent to one-half hour or more per week per student. Also, each qualified teacher coordinator shall be required to provide a minimum of 200 minutes of instruction per week on general and specific topics related to careers and employment.
    School district applications for participation in a work experience and career exploration program established under this Section shall be approved by the State Board of Education.
(Source: P.A. 86-1441.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.66b)
    Sec. 2-3.66b. IHOPE Program.
    (a) There is established the Illinois Hope and Opportunity Pathways through Education (IHOPE) Program. The State Board of Education shall implement and administer the IHOPE Program. The goal of the IHOPE Program is to develop a comprehensive system in this State to re-enroll significant numbers of high school dropouts in programs that will enable them to earn their high school diploma.
    (b) The IHOPE Program shall award grants, subject to appropriation for this purpose, to educational service regions and a school district organized under Article 34 of this Code from appropriated funds to assist in establishing instructional programs and other services designed to re-enroll high school dropouts. From any funds appropriated for the IHOPE Program, the State Board of Education may use up to 5% for administrative costs, including the performance of a program evaluation and the hiring of staff to implement and administer the program.
    The IHOPE Program shall provide incentive grant funds for regional offices of education and a school district organized under Article 34 of this Code to develop partnerships with school districts, public community colleges, and community groups to build comprehensive plans to re-enroll high school dropouts in their regions or districts.
    Programs funded through the IHOPE Program shall allow high school dropouts, up to and including age 21 notwithstanding Section 26-2 of this Code, to re-enroll in an educational program in conformance with rules adopted by the State Board of Education. Programs may include without limitation comprehensive year-round programming, evening school, summer school, community college courses, adult education, vocational training, work experience, programs to enhance self-concept, and parenting courses. Any student in the IHOPE Program who wishes to earn a high school diploma must meet the prerequisites to receiving a high school diploma specified in Section 27-22 of this Code and any other graduation requirements of the student's district of residence. Any student who successfully completes the requirements for his or her graduation shall receive a diploma identifying the student as graduating from his or her district of residence.
    (c) In order to be eligible for funding under the IHOPE Program, an interested regional office of education or a school district organized under Article 34 of this Code shall develop an IHOPE Plan to be approved by the State Board of Education. The State Board of Education shall develop rules for the IHOPE Program that shall set forth the requirements for the development of the IHOPE Plan. Each Plan shall involve school districts, public community colleges, and key community programs that work with high school dropouts located in an educational service region or the City of Chicago before the Plan is sent to the State Board for approval. No funds may be distributed to a regional office of education or a school district organized under Article 34 of this Code until the State Board has approved the Plan.
    (d) A regional office of education or a school district organized under Article 34 of this Code may operate its own program funded by the IHOPE Program or enter into a contract with other not-for-profit entities, including school districts, public community colleges, and not-for-profit community-based organizations, to operate a program.
    A regional office of education or a school district organized under Article 34 of this Code that receives an IHOPE grant from the State Board of Education may provide funds under a sub-grant, as specified in the IHOPE Plan, to other not-for-profit entities to provide services according to the IHOPE Plan that was developed. These other entities may include school districts, public community colleges, or not-for-profit community-based organizations or a cooperative partnership among these entities.
    (e) In order to distribute funding based upon the need to ensure delivery of programs that will have the greatest impact, IHOPE Program funding must be distributed based upon the proportion of dropouts in the educational service region or school district, in the case of a school district organized under Article 34 of this Code, to the total number of dropouts in this State. This formula shall employ the dropout data provided by school districts to the State Board of Education.
    A regional office of education or a school district organized under Article 34 of this Code may claim State aid under Section 18-8.05 or 18-8.15 of this Code for students enrolled in a program funded by the IHOPE Program, provided that the State Board of Education has approved the IHOPE Plan and that these students are receiving services that are meeting the requirements of Section 27-22 of this Code for receipt of a high school diploma and are otherwise eligible to be claimed for general State aid under Section 18-8.05 of this Code or evidence-based funding under Section 18-8.15 of this Code, including provisions related to the minimum number of days of pupil attendance pursuant to Section 10-19 of this Code and the minimum number of daily hours of school work required under Section 10-19.05 and any exceptions thereto as defined by the State Board of Education in rules.
    (f) IHOPE categories of programming may include the following:
        (1) Full-time programs that are comprehensive,
    	
year-round programs.
        (2) Part-time programs combining work and study
    	
scheduled at various times that are flexible to the needs of students.
        (3) Online programs and courses in which students
    	
take courses and complete on-site, supervised tests that measure the student's mastery of a specific course needed for graduation. Students may take courses online and earn credit or students may prepare to take supervised tests for specific courses for credit leading to receipt of a high school diploma.
        (4) Dual enrollment in which students attend high
    	
school classes in combination with community college classes or students attend community college classes while simultaneously earning high school credit and eventually a high school diploma.
    (g) In order to have successful comprehensive programs re-enrolling and graduating low-skilled high school dropouts, programs funded through the IHOPE Program shall include all of the following components:
        (1) Small programs (70 to 100 students) at a
    	
separate school site with a distinct identity. Programs may be larger with specific need and justification, keeping in mind that it is crucial to keep programs small to be effective.
        (2) Specific performance-based goals and outcomes
    	
and measures of enrollment, attendance, skills, credits, graduation, and the transition to college, training, and employment.
        (3) Strong, experienced leadership and teaching
    	
staff who are provided with ongoing professional development.
        (4) Voluntary enrollment.
        (5) High standards for student learning, integrating
    	
work experience, and education, including during the school year and after school, and summer school programs that link internships, work, and learning.
        (6) Comprehensive programs providing extensive
    	
support services.
        (7) Small teams of students supported by full-time
    	
paid mentors who work to retain and help those students graduate.
        (8) A comprehensive technology learning center with
    	
Internet access and broad-based curriculum focusing on academic and career subject areas.
        (9) Learning opportunities that incorporate action
    	
into study.
    (h) Programs funded through the IHOPE Program must report data to the State Board of Education as requested. This information shall include, but is not limited to, student enrollment figures, attendance information, course completion data, graduation information, and post-graduation information, as available.
    (i) Rules must be developed by the State Board of Education to set forth the fund distribution process to regional offices of education and a school district organized under Article 34 of this Code, the planning and the conditions upon which an IHOPE Plan would be approved by State Board, and other rules to develop the IHOPE Program.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17; 101-12, eff. 7-1-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.67)
    Sec. 2-3.67. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 84-126. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.68)
    Sec. 2-3.68. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 85-1440. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.69) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.69)
    Sec. 2-3.69. Tutoring services. The State Board of Education shall adopt rules and regulations defining basic requirements which must be met by students of institutions of higher education who are selected by such institutions to furnish tutoring services under the Educational Partnership Act, as now or hereafter amended.
(Source: P.A. 84-1308.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.70)
    Sec. 2-3.70. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 89-507, eff. 7-1-97. Repealed by P.A. 98-739, eff. 7-16-14.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.71) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.71)
    Sec. 2-3.71. Grants for preschool educational programs.
    (a) Preschool program.
        (1) The State Board of Education shall implement and
    	
administer a grant program under the provisions of this subsection which shall consist of grants to public school districts and other eligible entities, as defined by the State Board of Education, to conduct voluntary preschool educational programs for children ages 3 to 5 which include a parent education component. A public school district which receives grants under this subsection may subcontract with other entities that are eligible to conduct a preschool educational program. These grants must be used to supplement, not supplant, funds received from any other source.
        (2) (Blank).
        (3) Except as otherwise provided under this
    	
subsection (a), any teacher of preschool children in the program authorized by this subsection shall hold a Professional Educator License with an early childhood education endorsement.
        (3.5) Beginning with the 2018-2019 school year and
    	
until the 2023-2024 school year, an individual may teach preschool children in an early childhood program under this Section if he or she holds a Professional Educator License with an early childhood education endorsement or with short-term approval for early childhood education or he or she pursues a Professional Educator License and holds any of the following:
            (A) An ECE Credential Level of 5 awarded by the
        	
Department of Human Services under the Gateways to Opportunity Program developed under Section 10-70 of the Department of Human Services Act.
            (B) An Educator License with Stipulations with a
        	
transitional bilingual educator endorsement and he or she has (i) passed an early childhood education content test or (ii) completed no less than 9 semester hours of postsecondary coursework in the area of early childhood education.
        (4) (Blank).
        (4.5) The State Board of Education shall provide the
    	
primary source of funding through appropriations for the program. Such funds shall be distributed to achieve a goal of "Preschool for All Children" for the benefit of all children whose families choose to participate in the program. Based on available appropriations, newly funded programs shall be selected through a process giving first priority to qualified programs serving primarily at-risk children and second priority to qualified programs serving primarily children with a family income of less than 4 times the poverty guidelines updated periodically in the Federal Register by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services under the authority of 42 U.S.C. 9902(2). For purposes of this paragraph (4.5), at-risk children are those who because of their home and community environment are subject to such language, cultural, economic and like disadvantages to cause them to have been determined as a result of screening procedures to be at risk of academic failure. Such screening procedures shall be based on criteria established by the State Board of Education.
        Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph (4.5),
    	
grantees under the program must enter into a memorandum of understanding with the appropriate local Head Start agency. This memorandum must be entered into no later than 3 months after the award of a grantee's grant under the program, except that, in the case of the 2009-2010 program year, the memorandum must be entered into no later than the deadline set by the State Board of Education for applications to participate in the program in fiscal year 2011, and must address collaboration between the grantee's program and the local Head Start agency on certain issues, which shall include without limitation the following:
            (A) educational activities, curricular
        	
objectives, and instruction;
            (B) public information dissemination and access
        	
to programs for families contacting programs;
            (C) service areas;
            (D) selection priorities for eligible children to
        	
be served by programs;
            (E) maximizing the impact of federal and State
        	
funding to benefit young children;
            (F) staff training, including opportunities for
        	
joint staff training;
            (G) technical assistance;
            (H) communication and parent outreach for smooth
        	
transitions to kindergarten;
            (I) provision and use of facilities,
        	
transportation, and other program elements;
            (J) facilitating each program's fulfillment of
        	
its statutory and regulatory requirements;
            (K) improving local planning and collaboration;
        	
and
            (L) providing comprehensive services for the
        	
neediest Illinois children and families.
    If the appropriate local Head Start agency is unable or
    	
unwilling to enter into a memorandum of understanding as required under this paragraph (4.5), the memorandum of understanding requirement shall not apply and the grantee under the program must notify the State Board of Education in writing of the Head Start agency's inability or unwillingness. The State Board of Education shall compile all such written notices and make them available to the public.
        (5) The State Board of Education shall develop and
    	
provide evaluation tools, including tests, that school districts and other eligible entities may use to evaluate children for school readiness prior to age 5. The State Board of Education shall require school districts and other eligible entities to obtain consent from the parents or guardians of children before any evaluations are conducted. The State Board of Education shall encourage local school districts and other eligible entities to evaluate the population of preschool children in their communities and provide preschool programs, pursuant to this subsection, where appropriate.
        (6) The State Board of Education shall report to the
    	
General Assembly by November 1, 2018 and every 2 years thereafter on the results and progress of students who were enrolled in preschool educational programs, including an assessment of which programs have been most successful in promoting academic excellence and alleviating academic failure. The State Board of Education shall assess the academic progress of all students who have been enrolled in preschool educational programs.
        On or before November 1 of each fiscal year in which
    	
the General Assembly provides funding for new programs under paragraph (4.5) of this Section, the State Board of Education shall report to the General Assembly on what percentage of new funding was provided to programs serving primarily at-risk children, what percentage of new funding was provided to programs serving primarily children with a family income of less than 4 times the federal poverty level, and what percentage of new funding was provided to other programs.
        (7) Due to evidence that expulsion practices in the
    	
preschool years are linked to poor child outcomes and are employed inconsistently across racial and gender groups, early childhood programs receiving State funds under this subsection (a) shall prohibit expulsions. Planned transitions to settings that are able to better meet a child's needs are not considered expulsion under this paragraph (7).
            (A) When persistent and serious challenging
        	
behaviors emerge, the early childhood program shall document steps taken to ensure that the child can participate safely in the program; including observations of initial and ongoing challenging behaviors, strategies for remediation and intervention plans to address the behaviors, and communication with the parent or legal guardian, including participation of the parent or legal guardian in planning and decision-making.
            (B) The early childhood program shall, with
        	
parental or legal guardian consent as required, utilize a range of community resources, if available and deemed necessary, including, but not limited to, developmental screenings, referrals to programs and services administered by a local educational agency or early intervention agency under Parts B and C of the federal Individual with Disabilities Education Act, and consultation with infant and early childhood mental health consultants and the child's health care provider. The program shall document attempts to engage these resources, including parent or legal guardian participation and consent attempted and obtained. Communication with the parent or legal guardian shall take place in a culturally and linguistically competent manner.
            (C) If there is documented evidence that all
        	
available interventions and supports recommended by a qualified professional have been exhausted and the program determines in its professional judgment that transitioning a child to another program is necessary for the well-being of the child or his or her peers and staff, with parent or legal guardian permission, both the current and pending programs shall create a transition plan designed to ensure continuity of services and the comprehensive development of the child. Communication with families shall occur in a culturally and linguistically competent manner.
            (D) Nothing in this paragraph (7) shall preclude
        	
a parent's or legal guardian's right to voluntarily withdraw his or her child from an early childhood program. Early childhood programs shall request and keep on file, when received, a written statement from the parent or legal guardian stating the reason for his or her decision to withdraw his or her child.
            (E) In the case of the determination of a serious
        	
safety threat to a child or others or in the case of behaviors listed in subsection (d) of Section 10-22.6 of this Code, the temporary removal of a child from attendance in group settings may be used. Temporary removal of a child from attendance in a group setting shall trigger the process detailed in subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) of this paragraph (7), with the child placed back in a group setting as quickly as possible.
            (F) Early childhood programs may utilize and the
        	
State Board of Education, the Department of Human Services, and the Department of Children and Family Services shall recommend training, technical support, and professional development resources to improve the ability of teachers, administrators, program directors, and other staff to promote social-emotional development and behavioral health, to address challenging behaviors, and to understand trauma and trauma-informed care, cultural competence, family engagement with diverse populations, the impact of implicit bias on adult behavior, and the use of reflective practice techniques. Support shall include the availability of resources to contract with infant and early childhood mental health consultants.
            (G) Beginning on July 1, 2018, early childhood
        	
programs shall annually report to the State Board of Education, and, beginning in fiscal year 2020, the State Board of Education shall make available on a biennial basis, in an existing report, all of the following data for children from birth to age 5 who are served by the program:
                (i) Total number served over the course of
            	
the program year and the total number of children who left the program during the program year.
                (ii) Number of planned transitions to another
            	
program due to children's behavior, by children's race, gender, disability, language, class/group size, teacher-child ratio, and length of program day.
                (iii) Number of temporary removals of a child
            	
from attendance in group settings due to a serious safety threat under subparagraph (E) of this paragraph (7), by children's race, gender, disability, language, class/group size, teacher-child ratio, and length of program day.
                (iv) Hours of infant and early childhood
            	
mental health consultant contact with program leaders, staff, and families over the program year.
            (H) Changes to services for children with an
        	
individualized education program or individual family service plan shall be construed in a manner consistent with the federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Act.
        The State Board of Education, in consultation with
    	
the Governor's Office of Early Childhood Development and the Department of Children and Family Services, shall adopt rules to administer this paragraph (7).
    (b) (Blank).
    (c) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Section, grantees may serve children ages 0 to 12 of essential workers if the Governor has declared a disaster due to a public health emergency pursuant to Section 7 of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act. For the purposes of this subsection, essential workers include those outlined in Executive Order 20-8 and school employees. The State Board of Education shall adopt rules to administer this subsection.
(Source: P.A. 100-105, eff. 1-1-18; 100-645, eff. 7-27-18; 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.71a) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.71a)
    Sec. 2-3.71a. Grants for early childhood parental training programs. The State Board of Education shall implement and administer a grant program consisting of grants to public school districts and other eligible entities, as defined by the State Board of Education, to conduct early childhood parental training programs for the parents of children in the period of life from birth to kindergarten. A public school district that receives grants under this Section may contract with other eligible entities to conduct an early childhood parental training program. These grants must be used to supplement, not supplant, funds received from any other source. A school board or other eligible entity shall employ appropriately qualified personnel for its early childhood parental training program, including but not limited to certified teachers, counselors, psychiatrists, psychologists and social workers.
    (a) As used in this Section, "parental training" means and includes instruction in the following:
        (1) Child growth and development, including prenatal
    	
development.
        (2) Childbirth and child care.
        (3) Family structure, function and management.
        (4) Prenatal and postnatal care for mothers and
    	
infants.
        (5) Prevention of child abuse.
        (6) The physical, mental, emotional, social, economic
    	
and psychological aspects of interpersonal and family relationships.
        (7) Parenting skill development.
    The programs shall include activities that require substantial participation and interaction between parent and child.
    (b) The Board shall annually award funds through a grant approval process established by the State Board of Education, providing that an annual appropriation is made for this purpose from State, federal or private funds. Nothing in this Section shall preclude school districts from applying for or accepting private funds to establish and implement programs.
    (c) The State Board of Education shall assist those districts and other eligible entities offering early childhood parental training programs, upon request, in developing instructional materials, training teachers and staff, and establishing appropriate time allotments for each of the areas included in such instruction.
    (d) School districts and other eligible entities may offer early childhood parental training courses during that period of the day which is not part of the regular school day. Residents of the community may enroll in such courses. The school board or other eligible entity may establish fees and collect such charges as may be necessary for attendance at such courses in an amount not to exceed the per capita cost of the operation thereof, except that the board or other eligible entity may waive all or part of such charges if it determines that the parent is indigent or that the educational needs of the parent require his or her attendance at such courses.
    (e) Parents who participate in early childhood parental training programs under this Section may be eligible for reasonable reimbursement of any incidental transportation and child care expenses from the school district receiving funds pursuant to this Section.
    (f) Districts and other eligible entities receiving grants pursuant to this Section shall coordinate programs created under this Section with other preschool educational programs, including "at-risk" preschool programs, special and vocational education, and related services provided by other governmental agencies and not-for-profit agencies.
    (g) The State Board of Education shall report to the General Assembly by July 1, 1991, on the results of the programs funded pursuant to this Section and whether a need continues for such programs.
    (h) After July 1, 2006, any parental training services funded pursuant to this Section on the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 94th General Assembly shall continue to be funded pursuant to this Section, subject to appropriation and the meeting of program standards. Any additional parental training services must be funded, subject to appropriation, through preschool education grants pursuant to subdivision (4) of subsection (a) of Section 2-3.71 of this Code for families with children ages 3 to 5 and through prevention initiative grants pursuant to subsection (b) of Section 2-3.89 of this Code for expecting families and those with children from birth to 3 years of age.
    (i) Early childhood programs under this Section are subject to the requirements under paragraph (7) of subsection (a) of Section 2-3.71 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 100-105, eff. 1-1-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.72)
    Sec. 2-3.72. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 84-1308. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.73) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.73)
    Sec. 2-3.73. Missing child program. The State Board of Education shall administer and implement a missing child program in accordance with the provisions of this Section. Upon receipt of each periodic information bulletin from the Department of State Police pursuant to Section 6 of the Intergovernmental Missing Child Recovery Act of 1984, the State Board of Education shall promptly disseminate the information to each school district in this State and to the principal or chief administrative officer of every nonpublic elementary and secondary school in this State registered with the State Board of Education. Upon receipt of such information, each school board shall compare the names on the bulletin to the names of all students presently enrolled in the schools of the district. If a school board or its designee determines that a missing child is attending one of the schools within the school district, or if the principal or chief administrative officer of a nonpublic school is notified by school personnel that a missing child is attending that school, the school board or the principal or chief administrative officer of the nonpublic school shall immediately give notice of this fact to the Department of State Police and the law enforcement agency having jurisdiction in the area where the missing child resides or attends school.
(Source: P.A. 95-793, eff. 1-1-09; 96-734, eff. 8-25-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.74)
    Sec. 2-3.74. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 84-1308. Repealed by P.A. 97-256, eff. 1-1-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.76) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.76)
    Sec. 2-3.76. The State Board of Education shall be the State agency responsible for ensuring that educational services are provided to all eligible children in Illinois. This shall enhance the ability of the State Board to guarantee that an appropriate education is made available to each eligible child regardless of which agency places a child or is responsible for its care and custody. In order to fully implement this Section the State Board shall have the authority to ensure that the educational programs provided by the Department of Human Services and the Department of Corrections, the educational components of the residential schools operated by the Department of Human Services, and the educational placements paid for by the Department of Children and Family Services shall meet the standards of programs that shall be provided to all eligible children.
(Source: P.A. 89-507, eff. 7-1-97.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.77) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.77)
    Sec. 2-3.77. Temporary relocation expenses.
    (a) The State Board of Education may distribute loan or grant moneys appropriated for temporary relocation expenses incurred by school districts as a result of fires, earthquakes, tornados, mine subsidence, or other natural or man-made disasters which destroy school buildings, or as a result of the condemnation of a school building under Section 3-14.22. The State Board of Education shall by rule prescribe those expenses which qualify as temporary relocation expenses and the manner of determining and reporting the same, provided that such expenses shall be deemed to include amounts reasonably required to be expended for the lease, rental, and renovation of educational facilities and for additional transportation and other expenses directly associated with the temporary relocation and housing of the normal operations, activities, and affairs of a school district.
    (b) Except as provided in subsection (c), no moneys appropriated to the State Board of Education for purposes of distribution in accordance with the provisions of this Section shall be distributed to any school district unless the school board of such district, as an express condition of any such distribution, agrees to levy the tax provided for by Section 17-2.2c at the maximum rate permitted thereunder and to pay to the State of Illinois for deposit in the Temporary Relocation Expenses Revolving Grant Fund (i) all proceeds of such tax attributable to the first year and succeeding years for which the tax is levied after moneys appropriated for purposes of this Section have been distributed to the school district, and (ii) all insurance proceeds which become payable to the district under those provisions of any contract or policy of insurance which provide reimbursement for or other coverage against loss with respect to any temporary relocation expenses of the school district; provided, that the aggregate of any tax and insurance proceeds paid by the school district to the State pursuant to this Section shall not exceed in amount the moneys distributed to the school district pursuant to this Section.
    (c) The State Board of Education may, from appropriations made for this purpose from the Temporary Relocation Expenses Revolving Grant Fund, make grants that do not require repayment to school districts that qualify for temporary relocation assistance under this Section to the extent that the amount of temporary relocation expenses incurred by a district exceeds the amount that the district is able to repay to the State through insurance proceeds and the tax levy authorized in Section 17-2.2c.
    (d) The Temporary Relocation Expenses Revolving Grant Fund is hereby established as a special fund within the State treasury. Appropriations and amounts that school districts repay to the State under subsection (b) of this Section shall be deposited into that Fund. If the balance in that Fund exceeds $3,000,000, the excess shall be transferred into the General Revenue Fund.
    (e) The State Board of Education shall promulgate such rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Section, as are necessary to provide for the distribution of loan and grant moneys and for the repayment of loan moneys distributed pursuant to this Section.
(Source: P.A. 96-102, eff. 7-29-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.78) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.78)
    Sec. 2-3.78. Rights of children with disabilities to free appropriate public education. The State Board of Education is encouraged to use free access radio and television to inform the public of the right of all children with disabilities to a free appropriate public education under this Code and the Education of the Handicapped Act, as amended.
(Source: P.A. 89-397, eff. 8-20-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.79) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.79)
    Sec. 2-3.79. Pilot programs and special education services for preschool children with disabilities from birth to age 3. The State Board of Education may enter into contracts with public or not-for-profit private organizations or agencies to establish model pilot programs which provide services to children with disabilities from birth up to the age of 3 years. Annual grants shall be awarded on a competitive basis pursuant to established criteria provided that there is an annual appropriation for this purpose. Public or not-for-profit private organizations or agencies that are providing services to children with disabilities up to the age of 3 years prior to September 22, 1985 are eligible to receive grants awarded pursuant to this Section.
    Each pilot program shall include, but not be limited to: a process for identification of infants with disabilities in the region; community awareness of the project and the services provided; an intervention system; methods to assess and diagnose infants with disabilities; written individual treatment programs that include parental involvement; an interdisciplinary treatment approach to include other agencies and not-for-profit organizations; and a written evaluation submitted to the State Board of Education at the end of the grant period.
    An Interagency Coordination Council shall be established consisting of a representative of the State Superintendent of Education who shall serve as chairman, and one representative from the following departments appointed by the respective directors or secretary: Children and Family Services, Public Health, Human Services, Public Aid, and the Division of Specialized Care for Children of the University of Illinois. The council shall recommend criteria to the State Board of Education for the awarding of grants pursuant to this Section and shall assist in coordinating the services provided by agencies to the children with disabilities described in this Section.
    A report containing recommendations concerning all of the pilot programs shall be submitted by the State Board of Education to the General Assembly by January of 1989. The report which shall analyze the results of the pilot programs funded under this Section and make recommendations concerning existing and proposed programs shall include, but not be limited to: recommendations for staff licensure and qualifications; the number of children and families eligible for services statewide; the cost of serving the children and their families; the types of services to be provided; and designs for the most effective delivery systems of these services.
(Source: P.A. 89-397, eff. 8-20-95; 89-507, eff. 7-1-97.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.80) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.80)
    Sec. 2-3.80. (a) The General Assembly recognizes that agriculture is the most basic and singularly important industry in the State, that agriculture is of central importance to the welfare and economic stability of the State, and that the maintenance of this vital industry requires a continued source of trained and qualified individuals for employment in agriculture and agribusiness. The General Assembly hereby declares that it is in the best interests of the people of the State of Illinois that a comprehensive education program in agriculture be created and maintained by the State's public school system in order to ensure an adequate supply of trained and skilled individuals and to ensure appropriate representation of racial and ethnic groups in all phases of the industry. It is the intent of the General Assembly that a State program for agricultural education shall be a part of the curriculum of the public school system K through adult, and made readily available to all school districts which may, at their option, include programs in education in agriculture as a part of the curriculum of that district.
    (b) The State Board of Education shall adopt such rules and regulations as are necessary to implement the provisions of this Section. The rules and regulations shall not create any new State mandates on school districts as a condition of receiving federal, State, and local funds by those entities. It is in the intent of the General Assembly that, although this Section does not create any new mandates, school districts are strongly advised to follow the guidelines set forth in this Section.
    (c) The State Superintendent of Education shall assume responsibility for the administration of the State program adopted under this Section throughout the public school system as well as the articulation of the State program to the requirements and mandates of federally assisted education. There is currently within the State Board of Education an agricultural education unit to assist school districts in the establishment and maintenance of educational programs pursuant to the provisions of this Section. The staffing of the unit shall at all times be comprised of an appropriate number of full-time employees who shall serve as program consultants in agricultural education and shall be available to provide assistance to school districts. At least one consultant shall be responsible for the coordination of the State program, as Head Consultant. At least one consultant shall be responsible for the coordination of the activities of student and agricultural organizations and associations.
    (d) A committee of 13 agriculturalists representative of the various and diverse areas of the agricultural industry in Illinois shall be established to at least develop a curriculum and overview the implementation of the Build Illinois through Quality Agricultural Education plans of the Illinois Leadership Council for Agricultural Education and to advise the State Board of Education on vocational agricultural education. The Committee shall be composed of the following: (6) agriculturalists representing the Illinois Leadership Council for Agricultural Education; (2) Secondary Agriculture Teachers; (1) "Ag In The Classroom" Teacher; (1) Community College Agriculture Teacher; (1) Adult Agriculture Education Teacher; (1) University Agriculture Teacher Educator; and (1) FFA Representative. All members of the Committee shall be appointed by the Governor by and with the advice and consent of the Senate. The terms of all members so appointed shall be for 3 years, except that of the members initially appointed, 5 shall be appointed to serve for terms of 1 year, 4 shall be appointed to serve for terms of 2 years and 4 shall be appointed to serve for terms of 3 years. All members of the Committee shall serve until their successors are appointed and qualified. Vacancies in terms shall be filled by appointment of the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate for the extent of the unexpired term. The State Board of Education shall implement a Build Illinois through Quality Agricultural Education plan following receipt of these recommendations which shall be made available on or before March 31, 1987. Recommendations shall include, but not be limited to, the development of a curriculum and a strategy for the purpose of establishing a source of trained and qualified individuals in agriculture, a strategy for articulating the State program in agricultural education throughout the public school system, and a consumer education outreach strategy regarding the importance of agriculture in Illinois. The committee of agriculturalists shall serve without compensation.
    (e) A school district that offers a secondary agricultural education program that is approved for State and federal funding must ensure that, at a minimum, all of the following are available to its secondary agricultural education students:
        (1) An instructional sequence of courses approved by
    	
the State Board of Education.
        (2) A State and nationally affiliated FFA (Future
    	
Farmers of America) chapter that is integral to instruction and is not treated solely as an extracurricular activity.
        (3) A mechanism for ensuring the involvement of all
    	
secondary agricultural education students in formal, supervised, agricultural-experience activities and programs.
    (f) Nothing in this Section may prevent those secondary agricultural education programs that are in operation before the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 94th General Assembly and that do not have an active State and nationally affiliated FFA chapter from continuing to operate or from continuing to receive funding from the State Board of Education.
(Source: P.A. 94-855, eff. 1-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.80a)
    Sec. 2-3.80a. Agricultural science teacher education.
    (a) Subject to appropriation, the State Board of Education shall develop an agricultural science teacher education training continuum beginning at the secondary level and shall provide grants to the following:
        (1) institutions of higher education that offer
    	
State-approved agricultural science teacher preparation programs; and
        (2) public community colleges in this State that
    	
provide an articulated agricultural science teacher education course of study.
    (b) The funds provided by the State Board of Education under subsection (a) of this Section may be used to support the following activities:
        (1) Teacher education candidate recruitment and
    	
retention incentives.
        (2) Having Master teachers and practitioners assist
    	
with various aspects of the recruitment of potential candidates and the preparation of those candidates as skilled and qualified teachers of agricultural education.
        (3) Establishing, delivering, arranging for, or
    	
providing financial support for professional development experiences for new agricultural science teachers during their first 5 years of teaching.
        (4) Professional development for faculty in
    	
universities' agricultural education teacher preparation programs and for community college agriculture faculty responsible for instruction in agricultural education teacher preparation transfer programs.
(Source: P.A. 95-153, eff. 1-1-08; 96-404, eff. 8-13-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.80b)
    Sec. 2-3.80b. Agriculture education teacher grant program.
    (a) As used in this Section:
    "New agriculture education program" means an agriculture education program approved by the State Board of Education in a school district that has not had an agriculture education program for a period of 10 years or more prior to the date of application for a grant under this Section.
    "Personal services cost" means the cost of a teacher providing 60 additional days, which shall mean 400 additional hours, outside the teacher's regularly scheduled teaching duties for the benefit of agriculture education. The 400 additional hours shall be any activity that is to the benefit of agriculture education, as defined by the State Board of Education by rule, regardless of the time of year the activity occurs.
    (b) Subject to appropriation to the State Board of Education, there is created an agriculture education teacher grant program to fund personal services costs for agriculture education teachers in school districts. The grants shall be for the purpose of assisting school districts with paying for personal services costs of agriculture education teachers.
    (c) A school district may apply for a grant to fund an amount not to exceed 50% of the personal services cost for an agriculture education teacher under this Section. However, a school district that is creating a new agriculture education program may apply for a grant to fund an amount not to exceed 100% of an agriculture teacher's personal services cost in the first and second year of the new agriculture education program and an amount not to exceed 80% of an agriculture teacher's personal services cost in the third and fourth years of the new agriculture education program. A school district may apply for a grant for more than one teacher under this Section.
    (d) A school district that applies for a grant under this Section or offers any extended contract for agriculture education shall base its personal services costs on the reasonably expected personal services cost for the teacher based on the cost of the teacher's regularly scheduled teaching duties.
    (e) The State Board of Education shall create a statewide system for an agriculture education teacher to track his or her additional hours completed pursuant to a grant under this Section.
    (f) The State Board of Education shall adopt rules as necessary to implement this Section.
(Source: P.A. 99-826, eff. 1-1-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.80c)
    Sec. 2-3.80c. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 100-118, eff. 8-15-17. Repealed internally, eff. 2-1-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.80d)
    Sec. 2-3.80d. Agricultural Education Pre-Service Teacher Internship Program.
    (a) In this Section:
    "Pre-service teaching student" means a student who is a declared agricultural education major accepted into an approved agricultural teacher education program at a public university in this State and who has completed at least 30 credit hours and has maintained, at a minimum, a 2.5 cumulative grade point average on a 4.0 scale or its equivalent.
    "Illinois agricultural company" means any company in this State that has an interest in the agricultural industry, as determined by the pre-service teaching student's public university.
    (b) Subject to appropriation, the State Board of Education must, in consultation with the Board of Higher Education, develop an Agricultural Education Pre-Service Teacher Internship Program, beginning at the secondary education level, for pre-service teaching students that consists of both of the following:
        (1) At a minimum, an 8-week experience or 300 hours
    	
of experience to prepare the pre-service teaching student for in-classroom experiences, including, but not limited to, experiences in the 5 career clusters for Illinois agricultural education through partnerships with Illinois agricultural companies. The 5 career clusters include agricultural business management, agricultural mechanics and technology, horticulture services operations and management, agricultural sciences, and natural resources conservation management.
        (2) Both in-classroom lectures and hands-on, applied
    	
learning.
    (c) Subject to appropriation, the State Board must award grants to a pre-service teaching student enrolled in the Internship Program under subsection (b), which may be used by the student to support all of the following activities:
        (1) A stipend not to exceed $7,500 for a pre-service
    	
teaching student's completion of the Internship Program, distributed in monthly installments.
        (2) Lodging for a pre-service teaching student while
    	
participating in the Internship Program.
        (3) Reimbursement for meals, not to exceed the per
    	
diem rate established by the Internal Revenue Service, for a pre-service teaching student while participating in the Internship Program.
        (4) Any reasonable costs for participation in the
    	
Internship Program charged by any participating Illinois agricultural company.
(Source: P.A. 101-554, eff. 8-23-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.81) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.81)
    Sec. 2-3.81. Alternative education diplomas. The State Board of Education shall award diplomas to students who successfully complete alternative education programs, including those programs which utilize student learning objectives and goals, when such programs are approved by the State Superintendent of Education and the organization providing the alternative program does not have the authority to award secondary education diplomas.
(Source: P.A. 84-1383; 84-1438.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.82)
    Sec. 2-3.82. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 84-1438. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.83) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.83)
    Sec. 2-3.83. Individual transition plan model pilot program.
    (a) The General Assembly finds that transition services for special education students in secondary schools are needed for the increasing numbers of students exiting school programs. Therefore, to ensure coordinated and timely delivery of services, the State shall establish a model pilot program to provide such services. Local school districts, using joint agreements and regional service delivery systems for special and vocational education selected by the Governor's Planning Council on Developmental Disabilities, shall have the primary responsibility to convene transition planning meetings for these students who will require post-school adult services.
    (b) For purposes of this Section:
        (1) "Post-secondary Service Provider" means a
    	
provider of services for adults who have any developmental disability as defined in Section 1-106 of the Mental Health and Developmental Disabilities Code or who are persons with one or more disabilities as defined in the Rehabilitation of Persons with Disabilities Act.
        (2) "Individual Education Plan" means a written
    	
statement for an exceptional child that provides at least a statement of: the child's present levels of educational performance, annual goals and short-term instructional objectives; specific special education and related services; the extent of participation in the regular education program; the projected dates for initiation of services; anticipated duration of services; appropriate objective criteria and evaluation procedures; and a schedule for annual determination of short-term objectives.
        (3) "Individual Transition Plan" (ITP) means a
    	
multi-agency informal assessment of a student's needs for post-secondary adult services including but not limited to employment, post-secondary education or training and residential independent living.
        (4) "Developmental Disability" means a disability
    	
which is attributable to: (a) an intellectual disability, cerebral palsy, epilepsy or autism; or to (b) any other condition which results in impairment similar to that caused by an intellectual disability and which requires services similar to those required by persons with an intellectual disability. Such disability must originate before the age of 18 years, be expected to continue indefinitely, and constitute a substantial disability.
        (5) "Exceptional Characteristic" means any disabling
    	
or exceptional characteristic which interferes with a student's education including, but not limited to, a determination that the student has a severe or profound mental disability, has mental disability but is trainable, is deaf-blind, or has some other health impairment.
    (c) The model pilot program required by this Section shall be established and administered by the Governor's Planning Council on Developmental Disabilities in conjunction with the case coordination pilot projects established by the Department of Human Services pursuant to Section 4.1 of the Community Services Act, as amended.
    (d) The model pilot program shall include the following features:
        (1) Written notice shall be sent to the student and,
    	
when appropriate, his or her parent or guardian giving the opportunity to consent to having the student's name and relevant information shared with the local case coordination unit and other appropriate State or local agencies for purposes of inviting participants to the individual transition plan meeting.
        (2) Meetings to develop and modify, as needed, an
    	
Individual Transition Plan shall be conducted annually for all students with a developmental disability in the pilot program area who are age 16 or older and who are receiving special education services for 50% or more of their public school program. These meetings shall be convened by the local school district and conducted in conjunction with any other regularly scheduled meetings such as the student's annual individual educational plan meeting. The Governor's Planning Council on Developmental Disabilities shall cooperate with and may enter into any necessary written agreements with the Department of Human Services and the State Board of Education to identify the target group of students for transition planning and the appropriate case coordination unit to serve these individuals.
        (3) The ITP meetings shall be co-chaired by the
    	
individual education plan coordinator and the case coordinator. The ITP meeting shall include but not be limited to discussion of the following: the student's projected date of exit from the public schools; his projected post-school goals in the areas of employment, residential living arrangement and post-secondary education or training; specific school or post-school services needed during the following year to achieve the student's goals, including but not limited to vocational evaluation, vocational education, work experience or vocational training, placement assistance, independent living skills training, recreational or leisure training, income support, medical needs and transportation; and referrals and linkage to needed services, including a proposed time frame for services and the responsible agency or provider. The individual transition plan shall be signed by participants in the ITP discussion, including but not limited to the student's parents or guardian, the student (where appropriate), multi-disciplinary team representatives from the public schools, the case coordinator and any other individuals who have participated in the ITP meeting at the discretion of the individual education plan coordinator, the developmental disability case coordinator or the parents or guardian.
        (4) At least 10 days prior to the ITP meeting, the
    	
parents or guardian of the student shall be notified in writing of the time and place of the meeting by the local school district. The ITP discussion shall be documented by the assigned case coordinator, and an individual student file shall be maintained by each case coordination unit. One year following a student's exit from public school the case coordinator shall conduct a follow up interview with the student.
        (5) Determinations with respect to individual
    	
transition plans made under this Section shall not be subject to any due process requirements prescribed in Section 14-8.02 of this Code.
    (e) (Blank).
(Source: P.A. 99-143, eff. 7-27-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.84) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.84)
    Sec. 2-3.84. In calculating the amount of State aid to be apportioned to the various school districts in this State, the State Board of Education shall incorporate and deduct the total aggregate adjustments to assessments made by the State Property Tax Appeal Board or Cook County Board of Appeals, as reported pursuant to Section 16-15 of the Property Tax Code or Section 129.1 of the Revenue Act of 1939 by the Department of Revenue, from the equalized assessed valuation that is otherwise to be utilized in the initial calculation.
    From the total amount of general State aid or evidence-based funding to be provided to districts, adjustments under this Section together with adjustments as a result of recomputation under Section 2-3.33 must not exceed $25 million, in the aggregate for all districts under both Sections combined, of the general State aid or evidence-based funding appropriation in any fiscal year; if necessary, amounts shall be prorated among districts. If it is necessary to prorate claims under this paragraph, then that portion of each prorated claim that is approved but not paid in the current fiscal year may be resubmitted as a valid claim in the following fiscal year.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.85)
    Sec. 2-3.85. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 85-1209. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.86) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.86)
    Sec. 2-3.86. The State Board of Education may conduct on-site auditing at the classrooms of any school district for the purpose of verifying attendance records.
(Source: P.A. 85-1209.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.87)
    Sec. 2-3.87. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 85-1209. Repealed by P.A. 97-256, eff. 1-1-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.88)
    Sec. 2-3.88. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 85-1209. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.89) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.89)
    Sec. 2-3.89. Programs concerning services to at-risk children and their families.
    (a) The State Board of Education may provide grants to eligible entities, as defined by the State Board of Education, to establish programs which offer coordinated services to at-risk infants and toddlers and their families. Each program shall include a parent education program relating to the development and nurturing of infants and toddlers and case management services to coordinate existing services available in the region served by the program. These services shall be provided through the implementation of an individual family service plan. Each program will have a community involvement component to provide coordination in the service system.
    (b) The State Board of Education shall administer the programs through the grants to public school districts and other eligible entities. These grants must be used to supplement, not supplant, funds received from any other source. School districts and other eligible entities receiving grants pursuant to this Section shall conduct voluntary, intensive, research-based, and comprehensive prevention services, as defined by the State Board of Education, for expecting parents and families with children from birth to age 3 who are at-risk of academic failure. A public school district that receives a grant under this Section may subcontract with other eligible entities.
    (c) The State Board of Education shall report to the General Assembly by July 1, 2006 and every 2 years thereafter, using the most current data available, on the status of programs funded under this Section, including without limitation characteristics of participants, services delivered, program models used, unmet needs, and results of the programs funded.
(Source: P.A. 96-734, eff. 8-25-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.90)
    Sec. 2-3.90. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 86-1477. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.91)
    Sec. 2-3.91. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 86-1477. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.92)
    Sec. 2-3.92. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 94-793, eff. 5-19-06. Repealed by P.A. 95-793, eff. 1-1-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.93)
    Sec. 2-3.93. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 89-507, eff. 7-1-97. Repealed by P.A. 95-793, eff. 1-1-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.94)
    Sec. 2-3.94. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 89-397, eff. 8-20-95. Repealed by P.A. 95-793, eff. 1-1-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.95)
    Sec. 2-3.95. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 86-822. Repealed by P.A. 95-793, eff. 1-1-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.96) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.96)
    Sec. 2-3.96. Waiver of school fees. The State Board of Education shall promulgate regulations governing waiver of school fees authorized in Sections 10-20.13 and 34-21.6. Board regulations shall require that each school district adopt written policies for the administration of the waiver of school fees. Such policies shall include, but not be limited to: standards for determination of eligibility, procedures for notice to parents and procedures for resolving disputes regarding the administration of the waiver of school fees.
(Source: P.A. 86-195; 86-1028.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.97)
    Sec. 2-3.97. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 86-1028. Repealed by P.A. 96-1423, eff. 8-3-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.98) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.98)
    Sec. 2-3.98. Transition program for persons with developmental disabilities. The State Board of Education shall establish and implement, in conjunction with the Department of Human Services, a pilot program for the provision of transitional, educational services to persons with a developmental disability 18 years of age or older who have completed public school programs.
(Source: P.A. 99-143, eff. 7-27-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.99)
    Sec. 2-3.99. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 86-1028. Repealed by P.A. 95-793, eff. 1-1-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.100)
    Sec. 2-3.100. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 86-1028. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.101)
    Sec. 2-3.101. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 91-830, eff. 7-1-00. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.102)
    Sec. 2-3.102. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 87-895. Repealed by P.A. 95-793, eff. 1-1-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.103) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.103)
    Sec. 2-3.103. Salary and benefit survey. For each school year commencing on or after January 1, 1992, the State Board of Education shall conduct, in each school district, a school district salary and benefits survey covering the district's certificated and educational support personnel. However, the collection of information covering educational support personnel must be limited to districts with 1,000 or more students enrolled.
    A survey form shall be developed and furnished by the State Board of Education to each school district on or before October 1 of the school year covered by the survey, and each school district shall submit a completed survey to the State Board of Education on or before February 1 of the school year covered by the survey.
    The State Board of Education shall compile, by April 30 of the school year covered by the survey, a statewide salary and benefit survey report based upon the surveys completed and submitted for that school year by the individual school districts as required by this Section, and shall make the survey report available to all school districts and to all "employee organizations" as defined in Section 2 of the Illinois Educational Labor Relations Act.
    The data required to be reported by each school district on the salary and benefits survey developed and furnished under this Section for the school year covered by the survey shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
        (1) the district's estimated fall enrollment;
        (2) with respect to both its certificated and
    	
educational support personnel employees:
            (A) whether the district has a salary schedule,
        	
salary policy but no salary schedule, or no salary policy and no salary schedule;
            (B) when each such salary schedule or policy of
        	
the district was or will be adopted;
            (C) whether there is a negotiated agreement
        	
between the school board and any teacher, educational support personnel or other employee organization and, if so, the affiliation of the local of such organization, together with the month and year of expiration of the negotiated agreement and whether it contains a fair share provision; and if there is no such negotiated agreement but the district does have a salary schedule or policy, a brief explanation of the manner in which each such salary schedule or policy was developed prior to its adoption by the school board, including a statement of whether any meetings between the school board and the superintendent leading up to adoption of the salary schedule or policy were based upon, or were conducted without any discussions between the superintendent and the affected teachers, educational support personnel or other employees;
            (D) whether the district's salary program,
        	
policies or provisions are based upon merit or performance evaluation of individual teachers, educational support personnel or other employees, and whether they include: severance pay provisions; early retirement incentives; sick leave bank provisions; sick leave accumulation provisions and, if so, to how many days; personal, business or emergency leave with pay and, if so, the number of days; or direct reimbursement in whole or in part for expenses, such as tuition and materials, incurred in acquiring additional college credit;
            (E) whether school board paid or tax sheltered
        	
retirement contributions are included in any existing salary schedule or policy of the school district; what percent (if any) of the salary of each different certified and educational support personnel employee classification (using the employee salary which reflects the highest regularly scheduled step in that classification on the salary schedule or policy of the district) is school board paid to an employee retirement system; the highest scheduled salary and the level of education or training required to reach the highest scheduled salary in each certified and educational support personnel employee classification; using annual salaries from the school board's salary schedule or policy for each certified and educational support personnel employee classification (and excluding from such salaries items of individual compensation resulting from extra-curricular duties, employment beyond the regular school year and longevity service pay, but including additional compensation such as grants and cost of living bonuses that are received by all employees in a classification or by all employees in a classification who are at the maximum experience level), the beginning, maximum and specified intermediate salaries reported to an employee retirement system (including school board paid or tax sheltered retirement contributions, but excluding fringe benefits) for each educational or training category within each certified and educational support personnel employee classification; and the completed years of experience required to reach such maximum regularly scheduled and highest scheduled salaries;
            (F) whether the school district provides
        	
longevity pay beyond the last annual regular salary increase available under the district's salary schedule or policy; and if so, the maximum earnings with longevity for each educational or training category specified by the State Board of Education in its survey form (based on salary reported to an employee's retirement system, including school board paid and tax sheltered retirement contributions, but excluding fringe benefits, and with maximum longevity step numbers and completed years of experience computed as provided in the survey form);
            (G) for each dental, disability, hospitalization,
        	
life, prescription or vision insurance plan, cafeteria plan or other fringe benefit plan sponsored by the school board: (i) a statement of whether such plan is available to full time teachers or other certificated personnel covered by a district salary schedule or policy, whether such plan is available to full time educational support personnel covered by a district salary schedule or policy, and whether all full time employees to whom coverage under such plan is available are entitled to receive the same benefits under that plan; and (ii) the total annual cost of coverage under that plan for a covered full time employee who is at the highest regularly scheduled step on the salary schedule or policy of the district applicable to such employee, the percent of that total annual cost paid by the school board, the total annual cost of coverage under that plan for the family of that employee, and the percent of that total annual cost for family coverage paid by the school board.
    In addition, each school district shall provide to the State Board of Education, on or before February 1 of the school year covered by the survey, as required by this Section, a copy of each salary schedule, salary policy and negotiated agreement which is identified or otherwise referred to in the completed survey form.
(Source: P.A. 96-1423, eff. 8-3-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.104) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.104)
    Sec. 2-3.104. State mandate reports. The State Board of Education shall prepare an annual report listing all State mandates applicable to the common schools during the school year covered by the report, excluding only those mandates that relate to school elections. The annual report shall set forth for each listed mandate the date or approximate date that the mandate became effective and the cost of implementing that mandate during the school year covered by the report; provided that if the mandate has not been in effect for the entire school year covered by the report, the estimated annual cost of implementing that mandate shall be set forth in that report, and provided that if the mandate exists because of a federal law, rule or regulation, the report shall note that fact. The State Board of Education shall highlight on each annual report each mandate listed thereon that first became effective and applicable to the common schools during the school year covered by the current annual report. Each annual report prepared by the State Board of Education shall be filed by the State Board of Education with the General Assembly on or before March 1 of the calendar year, beginning with calendar year 1992, and shall cover the school year ending during the calendar year immediately preceding the calendar year in which the annual report is required to be filed.
(Source: P.A. 87-632; 87-895.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.105) (from Ch. 122, par. 2-3.105)
    Sec. 2-3.105. Services to educational service regions and school districts. Commencing July 1, 1994 and thereafter, the State Board of Education through the office of the State Superintendent of Education shall have and exercise, in and with respect to an educational service region located in a city of 500,000 or more inhabitants, and in and with respect to each school district located in any such educational service region, all rights, powers, duties and responsibilities theretofore vested in and exercised and performed by the regional superintendent of schools in that educational service region under the provisions of this Act or any other law of this State.
(Source: P.A. 96-893, eff. 7-1-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.105a)
    Sec. 2-3.105a. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 89-397, eff. 8-20-95. Repealed by P.A. 91-46, eff. 6-30-99.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.106)
    Sec. 2-3.106. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 91-357, eff. 7-29-99. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.107)
    Sec. 2-3.107. Test administration ethics. The State Board of Education shall develop a code of ethics for test administration and shall provide assistance to school districts upon request in the implementation of the code. The code of ethics shall at least include a procedure to be followed and safeguards to be observed in the administration of tests.
(Source: P.A. 87-1039; 88-45; 88-670, eff. 12-2-94.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.108)
    Sec. 2-3.108. Volunteer service credit program. The State Board of Education shall offer guidance and assistance to any school district that chooses to establish a volunteer service credit program under Section 27-22.3.
(Source: P.A. 87-1082; 88-45.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.109)
    Sec. 2-3.109. Service region as local education agency. The State Board shall define local education agency to include an otherwise qualified educational service region when determining eligibility for any grant, loan, program authorization or other assistance provided to local education agencies by the State Board.
(Source: P.A. 87-1124; 88-45.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.109a)
    Sec. 2-3.109a. Laboratory schools grant eligibility. A laboratory school as defined in Section 18-8 or 18-8.15 may apply for and be eligible to receive, subject to the same restrictions applicable to school districts, any grant administered by the State Board of Education that is available for school districts.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.109b)
    Sec. 2-3.109b. Vocational center grant eligibility. An area vocational center, as designated by the State Board of Education, may apply for and be eligible to receive any school maintenance grant, federal or State technology grant, or other competitive grant administered by the State Board of Education that is available for school districts, subject to the same restrictions applicable to school districts.
(Source: P.A. 92-56, eff. 7-12-01.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.110)
    Sec. 2-3.110. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 88-118. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.111)
    Sec. 2-3.111. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 88-670, eff. 12-2-94. Repealed by P.A. 97-256, eff. 1-1-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.112)
    Sec. 2-3.112. Service evaluation reports.
    (a) The Service Evaluation Committee is hereby created to design and develop, under the direction of the Office of the Lieutenant Governor, a form to be used by school districts as provided in this Section to annually evaluate the nature and quality of the services furnished to those school districts by the State Board of Education and the regional offices of education. The Service Evaluation Committee shall be composed of 7 members, consisting of one member from each of the following entities, designated in each case by the governing board of the entity from which the member is designated:
        (1) the Regional Superintendents Association;
        (2) the staff employed by the State Board of
    	
Education;
        (3) the Illinois Parent Teacher Association;
        (4) the Illinois Education Association;
        (5) the Illinois Federation of Teachers;
        (6) the Illinois Association of School Boards; and
        (7) the Illinois Association of School Administrators.
Members of the Service Evaluation Committee shall serve at the pleasure of the governing board of the entity by which they are designated to serve as members of the Committee. Committee members shall serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed for the reasonable expenses which they necessarily incur in the performance of their responsibilities as members of the Committee.
    (b) Under the direction of the Office of the Lieutenant Governor, the Committee, at periodic intervals not to exceed 3 years, shall review the form to be used for the evaluation and make any modifications in the form that it determines are necessary. The design, development, and any modifications that are to be made to the form shall be determined not later than August 1 of each year, beginning in 1998.
    (c) The Office of the Lieutenant Governor shall cause the form of evaluation as last designed, developed, or modified under this Section to be printed and distributed to the board of education of each school district in the State not later than September 1 of each year, beginning in 1998.
    (d) The president of the board of education is authorized to cause the evaluation form to be completed and may sign the form as president of the board of education and forward the completed form to the Office of the Lieutenant Governor not later than November 1 of each year, beginning in 1998. Before completing and signing the evaluation form, the president, acting through the board of education, shall request and receive comments, opinions, and other input from the district's administrators, teachers, and teacher organizations to assist the board of education in evaluating, rating, and reporting, on the form to be transmitted to the Office of the Lieutenant Governor, the nature and quality of the services furnished to the district by the State Board of Education and the regional office of education for the educational service region in which the school district is located.
    (e) The Office of the Lieutenant Governor shall review and tally the results of all evaluation forms received from the several school districts of the State and submit a written report of the evaluation results to the Governor, the General Assembly, the members of the State Board of Education, and each of the several regional superintendents of schools not later than December 15 of each year, beginning in 1998. The Office of the Lieutenant Governor, in making the annual written report required by this subsection, shall not report, publish, or otherwise release the evaluation results separately for any regional offices of education but instead the evaluation results with respect to the regional offices of education shall be tallied and reported on an aggregate or composite basis, in such manner as to avoid reporting evaluation results on a regional office of education by regional office of education basis.
    (f) This Section is subject to the provisions of Section 405-500 of the Department of Central Management Services Law (20 ILCS 405/405-500).
(Source: P.A. 90-96, eff. 1-1-98; 90-498, eff. 1-1-98; 90-609, eff. 6-30-98; 91-239, 1-1-00.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.113)
    Sec. 2-3.113. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 89-626, eff. 8-9-96. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.114)
    Sec. 2-3.114. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 91-357, eff. 7-29-99. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.115)
    Sec. 2-3.115. Tech Prep Programs.
    (a) Programs of academic credit. The State Superintendent of Education is encouraged to establish a program of academic credit for Tech Prep work based learning for secondary school students with an interest in pursuing such career training. The program may be instituted by any school district seeking to provide its secondary school students with an opportunity to participate in Tech Prep work based learning programs.
    (b) Partnership for Careers grants. The State Board of Education may make grants, subject to appropriations for such purpose, to school districts to be used for Tech Prep Partnership for Careers programs. School districts must submit joint applications for the grants along with one or more companies who commit to (i) make off-campus, privately owned facilities available for the use of the program, (ii) provide significant financial contributions to the program in order to supplement State grants, and (iii) provide career opportunities for students who successfully complete the program training. The State Board of Education may use a portion of the funds appropriated for the program to promote its availability and successes with school districts, businesses, and communities.
(Source: P.A. 90-649, eff. 7-24-98.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.116)
    Sec. 2-3.116. Electronic transfer of funds to school districts, regional offices of education, and other providers. The State Board of Education shall, in consultation with the regional superintendents of schools and with the advice and approval of the Comptroller, adopt and implement rules establishing a system for the electronic transfer of funds to school districts, regional offices of education, and other providers entitled to payment under programs administered by the State Board of Education. Beginning July 1, 2002, all payments for school districts, regional offices of education, and other providers entitled to payment under programs administered by the State Board of Education must be disbursed by the Comptroller through electronic funds transfer, except as the State Board of Education otherwise directs. If a school district entitled to payment wishes an electronic payment to be made to the district's regional office of education on the district's behalf, the school board, with the approval of the regional office of education, must provide a resolution to the State Board of Education directing that the electronic deposit be made into the account of the regional office of education.
(Source: P.A. 92-121, eff. 7-20-01.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.117)
    Sec. 2-3.117. School Technology Program.
    (a) The State Board of Education is authorized to provide technology-based learning resources to school districts to improve educational opportunities and student achievement throughout the State. These resources may include reimbursements for the cost of tuition incurred by a school district for approved online courses accessed through the State Board of Education's Illinois Virtual Course Catalog Program.
        (1) A school district shall be eligible for
    	
reimbursement for the cost of each virtual class accessed through the Illinois Virtual Course Catalog program and successfully completed by a student of the school district, to the extent appropriated funds are available for such reimbursements.
        (2) A school district shall claim reimbursement on
    	
forms and through a process prescribed by the State Board of Education.
    (b) The State Board of Education is authorized, to the extent funds are available, to establish a statewide support system for information, professional development, technical assistance, network design consultation, leadership, technology planning consultation, and information exchange; to expand school district connectivity; and to increase the quantity and quality of student and educator access to on-line resources, experts, and communications avenues from moneys appropriated for the purposes of this Section.
    (b-5) The State Board of Education may enter into intergovernmental contracts or agreements with other State agencies, public community colleges, public libraries, public and private colleges and universities, museums on public land, and other public agencies in the areas of technology, telecommunications, and information access, under such terms as the parties may agree, provided that those contracts and agreements are in compliance with the Department of Central Management Services' mandate to provide telecommunications services to all State agencies.
    (c) (Blank).
    (d) (Blank).
(Source: P.A. 102-16, eff. 6-17-21.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.117a)
    Sec. 2-3.117a. School Technology Revolving Loan Program.
    (a) The State Board of Education is authorized to administer a School Technology Revolving Loan Program from funds appropriated from the School Technology Revolving Loan Fund for the purpose of making the financing of school technology hardware improvements affordable and making the integration of technology in the classroom possible. School technology loans shall be made available to public school districts, charter schools, area vocational centers, laboratory schools, and State-recognized, non-public schools to purchase technology hardware for eligible grade levels on a 2-year rotating basis: grades 9 through 12 in fiscal year 2004 and each second year thereafter and grades K through 8 in fiscal year 2005 and each second year thereafter. However, priority shall be given to public school districts, charter schools, area vocational centers, and laboratory schools that apply prior to October 1 of each year.
    The State Board of Education shall determine the interest rate the loans shall bear which shall not be greater than 50% of the rate for the most recent date shown in the 20 G.O. Bonds Index of average municipal bond yields as published in the most recent edition of The Bond Buyer, published in New York, New York. The repayment period for School Technology Revolving Loans shall not exceed 3 years. Participants shall use at least 90% of the loan proceeds for technology hardware investments for students and staff (including computer hardware, technology networks, related wiring, and other items as defined in rules adopted by the State Board of Education) and up to 10% of the loan proceeds for computer furniture. No participant whose equalized assessed valuation per pupil in average daily attendance is at the 99th percentile and above for all districts of the same type shall be eligible to receive a School Technology Revolving Loan under the provisions of this Section for that year.
    The State Board of Education shall have the authority to adopt all rules necessary for the implementation and administration of the School Technology Revolving Loan Program, including, but not limited to, rules defining application procedures, prescribing a maximum amount per pupil that may be requested annually, requiring appropriate local commitments for technology investments, prescribing a mechanism for disbursing loan funds in the event requests exceed available funds, specifying collateral, prescribing actions necessary to protect the State's interest in the event of default, foreclosure, or noncompliance with the terms and conditions of the loans, and prescribing a mechanism for reclaiming any items or equipment purchased with the loan funds in the case of the closure of a non-public school.
    (b) There is created in the State treasury the School Technology Revolving Loan Fund. The State Board shall have the authority to make expenditures from the Fund pursuant to appropriations made for the purposes of this Section, including refunds. There shall be deposited into the Fund such amounts, including but not limited to:
        (1) Transfers from the School Infrastructure Fund;
        (2) All receipts, including principal and interest
    	
payments, from any loan made from the Fund;
        (3) All proceeds of assets of whatever nature
    	
received by the State Board as a result of default or delinquency with respect to loans made from the Fund;
        (4) Any appropriations, grants, or gifts made to the
    	
Fund; and
        (5) Any income received from interest on investments
    	
of money in the Fund.
(Source: P.A. 96-734, eff. 8-25-09; 96-783, eff. 8-28-09; 96-1000, eff. 7-2-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.118)
    Sec. 2-3.118. Technology utilization. The State Superintendent of Education shall, from funds appropriated for that purpose, provide assistance to public schools for the implementation or improved utilization of technology, such as support for the development of communication networks and infrastructure, efforts to promote the use of technology in the classroom, and the initiation of technology leadership and capacity-building activities. Assistance may include the provision of staff development resources, curriculum planning and implementation resources, the establishment of demonstration sites, and the integration of technology into school improvement activities.
(Source: P.A. 89-397, eff. 8-20-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.119)
    Sec. 2-3.119. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 89-610, eff. 8-6-96. Repealed by P.A. 89-698, eff. 1-14-97.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.119a)
    Sec. 2-3.119a. School STEAM Grant Program.
    (a) The State Board of Education shall administer the School STEAM Grant Program from the funds appropriated from the School STEAM Grant Program Fund for the purpose of making science, technology, engineering, art, and math programming available to low-income students in disadvantaged neighborhoods. School STEAM grants shall be made available to public schools, charter schools, area vocational centers, and laboratory schools in which the percentage of students classified as low income exceeds the State average. Grant recipients shall use grant proceeds to conduct, or contract with a third party to conduct, programming that educates, encourages, and promotes obtaining skills and career opportunities in the fields of science, technology, engineering, art, and math. Priority shall be given to programs that provide hands-on experience and programs that focus on promoting young women to enter into the fields of science, technology, engineering, art, and math.
    (b) The State Board of Education may adopt all rules necessary for the implementation and administration of the STEAM Grant Program, including, but not limited to, rules defining application procedures and prescribing a mechanism for disbursing grant funds if requests exceed available funds.
    (c) There is created in the State treasury the School STEAM Grant Program Fund. The State Board shall have the authority to make expenditures from the Fund pursuant to appropriations made for the purposes of this Section. There shall be deposited into the Fund such amounts, including, but not limited to:
        (1) transfers from the State Lottery Fund pursuant to
    	
Section 21.12 of the Illinois Lottery Law; and
        (2) any appropriations, grants, or gifts made to the
    	
Fund.
(Source: P.A. 101-561, eff. 8-23-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.120)
    Sec. 2-3.120. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 94-91, eff. 7-1-05. Repealed by P.A. 99-30, eff. 7-10-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.121)
    Sec. 2-3.121. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 90-463, eff. 8-17-97. Repealed by P.A. 94-91, eff. 7-1-05.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.122)
    Sec. 2-3.122. Dissection alternatives. The State Board of Education shall make available to school districts sources of information concerning alternatives to the dissection of animals. Such information may include, but need not be limited to, names, addresses, and contact personnel of organizations that offer free instructional and teaching materials as alternatives to dissection.
(Source: P.A. 90-566, eff. 1-2-98.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.123)
    Sec. 2-3.123. Giant Steps Autism Center for Excellence pilot program. From appropriations made for purposes of this Section, the State Board of Education shall implement and administer a Giant Steps Autism Center for Excellence pilot program for the study and evaluation of autism and to provide related training for teachers, paraprofessionals, and respite workers, therapist training, and consultative services. The program shall be operated over a period of 3 school years, beginning with the 2005-2006 school year. The State Board of Education is authorized to make grants to school districts and other programs that apply to participate in the Giant Steps Autism Center for Excellence program as implemented and administered by the State Board of Education. The State Board of Education shall by rule provide the form of application and criteria to be used and applied in selecting participating school districts and other programs.
(Source: P.A. 94-196, eff. 7-12-05.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.124)
    Sec. 2-3.124. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 90-548, eff. 1-1-98. Repealed by P.A. 95-793, eff. 1-1-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.125)
    Sec. 2-3.125. Arts and humanities organizations and cultural institutions. The State Board of Education is authorized to reimburse not-for-profit arts and humanities organizations and cultural institutions of Illinois, including but not limited to, museums and theater or dance companies, for the costs of providing educational programs to public elementary and secondary school students.
(Source: P.A. 90-361, eff. 1-1-98; 90-655, eff. 7-30-98.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.126)
    Sec. 2-3.126. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 92-16, eff. 6-28-01. Repealed internally, eff. 7-16-03.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.127)
    Sec. 2-3.127. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 91-143, eff. 7-16-99. Repealed internally, eff. 7-16-03.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.127a)
    Sec. 2-3.127a. The State Board of Education Special Purpose Trust Fund. The State Board of Education Special Purpose Trust Fund is created as a special fund in the State treasury. The State Board of Education shall deposit all indirect costs recovered from federal programs into the State Board of Education Special Purpose Trust Fund. These funds may be used by the State Board of Education for its ordinary and contingent expenses. Additionally and unless specifically directed to be deposited into other funds, all moneys received by the State Board of Education from gifts, grants, or donations from any source, public or private, shall be deposited into the State Board of Education Special Purpose Trust Fund. These funds shall be used, subject to appropriation by the General Assembly, by the State Board of Education for the purposes established by the gifts, grants, or donations.
(Source: P.A. 94-69, eff. 7-1-05; 95-707, eff. 1-11-08.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.128)
    Sec. 2-3.128. Job training program; prohibition. The State Board of Education shall not require a school district or a student of any district to participate in any school-to-work or job training program.
(Source: P.A. 91-175, eff. 1-1-00; 92-16, eff. 6-28-01.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.129)
    Sec. 2-3.129. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 92-16, eff. 6-28-01. Repealed by P.A. 94-600, eff. 8-16-05.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.130)
    Sec. 2-3.130. Time out and physical restraint rules. The State Board of Education shall promulgate rules governing the use of time out and physical restraint in the public schools. The rules shall include provisions governing recordkeeping that is required when physical restraint or more restrictive forms of time out are used.
(Source: P.A. 91-600, eff. 8-14-99; 92-16, eff. 6-28-01.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.131)
    Sec. 2-3.131. Transitional assistance payments.
    (a) If the amount that the State Board of Education will pay to a school district from fiscal year 2004 appropriations, as estimated by the State Board of Education on April 1, 2004, is less than the amount that the State Board of Education paid to the school district from fiscal year 2003 appropriations, then, subject to appropriation, the State Board of Education shall make a fiscal year 2004 transitional assistance payment to the school district in an amount equal to the difference between the estimated amount to be paid from fiscal year 2004 appropriations and the amount paid from fiscal year 2003 appropriations.
    (b) If the amount that the State Board of Education will pay to a school district from fiscal year 2005 appropriations, as estimated by the State Board of Education on April 1, 2005, is less than the amount that the State Board of Education paid to the school district from fiscal year 2004 appropriations, then the State Board of Education shall make a fiscal year 2005 transitional assistance payment to the school district in an amount equal to the difference between the estimated amount to be paid from fiscal year 2005 appropriations and the amount paid from fiscal year 2004 appropriations.
    (c) If the amount that the State Board of Education will pay to a school district from fiscal year 2006 appropriations, as estimated by the State Board of Education on April 1, 2006, is less than the amount that the State Board of Education paid to the school district from fiscal year 2005 appropriations, then the State Board of Education shall make a fiscal year 2006 transitional assistance payment to the school district in an amount equal to the difference between the estimated amount to be paid from fiscal year 2006 appropriations and the amount paid from fiscal year 2005 appropriations.
    (d) If the amount that the State Board of Education will pay to a school district from fiscal year 2007 appropriations, as estimated by the State Board of Education on April 1, 2007, is less than the amount that the State Board of Education paid to the school district from fiscal year 2006 appropriations, then the State Board of Education, subject to appropriation, shall make a fiscal year 2007 transitional assistance payment to the school district in an amount equal to the difference between the estimated amount to be paid from fiscal year 2007 appropriations and the amount paid from fiscal year 2006 appropriations.
    (e) Subject to appropriation, beginning on July 1, 2007, the State Board of Education shall adjust prior year information for the transitional assistance calculations under this Section in the event of the creation or reorganization of any school district pursuant to Article 11E of this Code, the dissolution of an entire district and the annexation of all of its territory to one or more other districts pursuant to Article 7 of this Code, or a boundary change whereby the enrollment of the annexing district increases by 90% or more as a result of annexing territory detached from another district pursuant to Article 7 of this Code.
    (f) If the amount that the State Board of Education will pay to a school district from fiscal year 2008 appropriations, as estimated by the State Board of Education on April 1, 2008, is less than the amount that the State Board of Education paid to the school district from fiscal year 2007 appropriations, then the State Board of Education, subject to appropriation, shall make a fiscal year 2008 transitional assistance payment to the school district in an amount equal to the difference between the estimated amount to be paid from fiscal year 2008 appropriations and the amount paid from fiscal year 2007 appropriations.
    (g) If the amount that the State Board of Education will pay to a school district from fiscal year 2009 appropriations, as estimated by the State Board of Education on April 1, 2009, is less than the amount that the State Board of Education paid to the school district from fiscal year 2008 appropriations, then the State Board of Education, subject to appropriation, shall make a fiscal year 2009 transitional assistance payment to the school district in an amount equal to the difference between the estimated amount to be paid from fiscal year 2009 appropriations and the amount paid from fiscal year 2008 appropriations.
(Source: P.A. 94-69, eff. 7-1-05; 94-835, eff. 6-6-06; 95-331, eff. 8-21-07; 95-707, eff. 1-11-08; 95-744, eff. 7-18-08.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.132)
    Sec. 2-3.132. Sharing information on school lunch applicants. The State Board of Education shall, whenever requested by the Department of Healthcare and Family Services (formerly Department of Public Aid), agree in writing with the Department of Healthcare and Family Services (as the State agency that administers the State Medical Assistance Program as provided in Title XIX of the federal Social Security Act and the State Children's Health Insurance Program as provided in Title XXI of the federal Social Security Act) to share with the Department of Healthcare and Family Services information on applicants for free or reduced-price lunches. This sharing of information shall be for the sole purpose of helping the Department of Healthcare and Family Services identify and enroll children in the State Medical Assistance Program or the State Children's Health Insurance Program or both as allowed under 42 U.S.C. Sec. 1758(b)(2)(C)(iii)(IV) and under the restrictions set forth in 42 U.S.C. Sec. 1758(b)(2)(C)(vi) and (vii). The State Board of Education may not adopt any rule that would prohibit a child from receiving any form of subsidy or benefit due to his or her parent or guardian withholding consent under Section 22-35 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 95-331, eff. 8-21-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.133)
    Sec. 2-3.133. Homework assistance information for parents. The State Board of Education shall provide information on its Internet web site regarding strategies that parents can use to assist their children in successfully completing homework assignments. The State Board of Education shall notify all school districts about this information's availability on the State Board of Education's Internet web site.
(Source: P.A. 95-331, eff. 8-21-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.134)
    Sec. 2-3.134. Persistently dangerous schools. The State Board of Education shall maintain data and publish a list of persistently dangerous schools on an annual basis.
(Source: P.A. 95-331, eff. 8-21-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.135)
    Sec. 2-3.135. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 95-949, eff. 8-29-08. Repealed internally, eff. 8-31-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.136)
    Sec. 2-3.136. Funding for class size reduction.
    (a) Class size reduction funding shall assist schools that meet the criteria established by this Section for the award of funds.
    (a-5) Funds shall be awarded pursuant to application. The form and manner of applications and the criteria for the award of funds shall be prescribed by the State Board of Education.
    Funding awarded to eligible schools under this Section shall be used and applied by the schools to defray the costs and expenses of reducing class size to a level that is evidence-based. If a school's facilities are inadequate to allow for the specified class size, then funding may be used for, but is not limited to, support for professional learning.
    (b) (Blank).
    (c) (Blank).
    (d) The State Board of Education shall adopt any rules, consistent with the requirements of this Section, that are necessary to implement and administer this Section.
(Source: P.A. 99-193, eff. 7-30-15; 100-1046, eff. 8-23-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.136a)
    Sec. 2-3.136a. Class size report.
    (a) In this Section:
    "Class" means a setting in which organized instruction of academic course content is regularly provided to a group of students for a given scheduled period of time.
    "Class instructor" means a teacher who has been assigned to teach students in a class at a public school.
    "Class section" means a single class where a class instructor is assigned to teach more than one class per school day.
    "Class size" means the number of students in a class who appear on the class roster and for whom the class instructor is primarily responsible and accountable.
    "Pupil-teacher ratio" means the total number of students in a school divided by the total number of teachers working in that school.
    "Teacher" means an individual instructing students at a public school.
    (b) No later than January 31, 2021, and annually thereafter, the State Board of Education must make available on its website all of the following information:
        (1) The total number of teachers actively employed
    	
within each school district, listed by individual school.
        (2) The pupil-teacher ratios for each school district.
        (3) The number of class instructors, by grade level
    	
and subject, in each school district.
        (4) The class size for each class and class section
    	
at each school in a school district and the total number of classes or class sections in each school that exceeds the class size guidelines under paragraph (2) of subsection (b) of Section 18-8.15.
(Source: P.A. 101-451, eff. 1-1-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.137)
    Sec. 2-3.137. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 96-734, eff. 8-25-09. Repealed by P.A. 99-30, eff. 7-10-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.138)
    Sec. 2-3.138. School health recognition program. The State Board of Education shall establish a school health recognition program that:
        (1) publicly identifies those schools that have
    	
implemented programs to increase the level of physical activity of their students;
        (2) publicly identifies those schools that have
    	
adopted policies or implemented programs to promote healthy nutritional choices for their students; and
        (3) allows recognized schools to share best practices
    	
and model services with other schools throughout the State.
(Source: P.A. 94-190, eff. 7-12-05; 95-331, eff. 8-21-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.139)
    Sec. 2-3.139. School wellness policies; taskforce.
    (a) The State Board of Education shall establish a State goal that all school districts have a wellness policy that is consistent with recommendations of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), which recommendations include the following:
        (1) nutrition guidelines for all foods sold on school
    	
campus during the school day;
        (2) setting school goals for nutrition education and
    	
physical activity;
        (3) establishing community participation in creating
    	
local wellness policies; and
        (4) creating a plan for measuring implementation of
    	
these wellness policies.
    The Department of Public Health, the Department of Human Services, and the State Board of Education shall form an interagency working group to publish model wellness policies and recommendations. Sample policies shall be based on CDC recommendations for nutrition and physical activity. The State Board of Education shall distribute the model wellness policies to all school districts before June 1, 2006.
    (b) There is created the School Wellness Policy Taskforce, consisting of the following members:
        (1) One member representing the State Board of
    	
Education, appointed by the State Board of Education.
        (2) One member representing the Department of Public
    	
Health, appointed by the Director of Public Health.
        (3) One member representing the Department of Human
    	
Services, appointed by the Secretary of Human Services.
        (4) One member of an organization representing the
    	
interests of school nurses in this State, appointed by the interagency working group.
        (5) One member of an organization representing the
    	
interests of school administrators in this State, appointed by the interagency working group.
        (6) One member of an organization representing the
    	
interests of school boards in this State, appointed by the interagency working group.
        (7) One member of an organization representing the
    	
interests of regional superintendents of schools in this State, appointed by the interagency working group.
        (8) One member of an organization representing the
    	
interests of parent-teacher associations in this State, appointed by the interagency working group.
        (9) One member of an organization representing the
    	
interests of pediatricians in this State, appointed by the interagency working group.
        (10) One member of an organization representing the
    	
interests of dentists in this State, appointed by the interagency working group.
        (11) One member of an organization representing the
    	
interests of dieticians in this State, appointed by the interagency working group.
        (12) One member of an organization that has an
    	
interest and expertise in heart disease, appointed by the interagency working group.
        (13) One member of an organization that has an
    	
interest and expertise in cancer, appointed by the interagency working group.
        (14) One member of an organization that has an
    	
interest and expertise in childhood obesity, appointed by the interagency working group.
        (15) One member of an organization that has an
    	
interest and expertise in the importance of physical education and recreation in preventing disease, appointed by the interagency working group.
        (16) One member of an organization that has an
    	
interest and expertise in school food service, appointed by the interagency working group.
        (17) One member of an organization that has an
    	
interest and expertise in school health, appointed by the interagency working group.
        (18) One member of an organization that campaigns
    	
for programs and policies for healthier school environments, appointed by the interagency working group.
        (19) One at-large member with a doctorate in
    	
nutrition, appointed by the State Board of Education.
    Members of the taskforce shall serve without compensation. The taskforce shall meet at the call of the State Board of Education. The taskforce shall report its identification of barriers to implementing school wellness policies and its recommendations to reduce those barriers to the General Assembly and the Governor on or before January 1, 2006. The taskforce shall report its recommendations on statewide school nutrition standards to the General Assembly and the Governor on or before January 1, 2007. The taskforce shall report its evaluation of the effectiveness of school wellness policies to the General Assembly and the Governor on or before January 1, 2008. The evaluation shall review a sample size of 5 to 10 school districts. Reports shall be made to the General Assembly by filing copies of each report as provided in Section 3.1 of the General Assembly Organization Act. Upon the filing of the last report, the taskforce is dissolved.
    (c) The State Board of Education may adopt any rules necessary to implement this Section.
    (d) Nothing in this Section may be construed as a curricular mandate on any school district.
(Source: P.A. 94-199, eff. 7-12-05; 95-331, eff. 8-21-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.140)
    Sec. 2-3.140. Child abduction prevention instruction. The State Board of Education, in coordination with the Department of State Police, shall develop child abduction prevention instruction for inclusion in elementary and secondary school curricula throughout the State. The State Board of Education and the Department of State Police shall encourage the inclusion of the child abduction prevention instruction in private elementary and secondary school curricula throughout the State.
(Source: P.A. 93-310, eff. 7-23-03.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.141)
    Sec. 2-3.141. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 95-331, eff. 8-21-07. Repealed internally, eff. 12-31-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.142)
    Sec. 2-3.142. Grants to Illinois School Psychology Internship Consortium. Subject to appropriations for this purpose, the State Board of Education shall provide grants to the Illinois School Psychology Internship Consortium for aid in providing training programs and facilitating interns to improve the educational and mental health services of children in this State.
(Source: P.A. 95-102, eff. 1-1-08; 95-876, eff. 8-21-08.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.143)
    Sec. 2-3.143. Lincoln's ChalleNGe Academy study. The State Board of Education shall conduct a study to consider the need for an expansion of enrollment at or the replication of services in other portions of this State for the Lincoln's ChalleNGe Academy as an alternative program for students who have dropped out of traditional school.
(Source: P.A. 95-707, eff. 1-11-08.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.144)
    Sec. 2-3.144. Community college enrollments. The State Board of Education shall annually assemble all data reported to the State Board of Education under Section 10-21.4 or 34-8 of this Code by district superintendents, relating to the number of high school students in the educational service region who are enrolled in accredited courses at any community college, together with the name and number of the course or courses that each such student is taking, assembled both by individual school district and by educational service region totals.
(Source: P.A. 95-496, eff. 8-28-07; 95-876, eff. 8-21-08.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.145)
    Sec. 2-3.145. Special education expenditure and receipt report. The State Board of Education shall issue an annual report to the General Assembly and Governor identifying each school district's special education expenditures; receipts received from State, federal, and local sources; and net special education expenditures over receipts received, if applicable. Expenditures and receipts shall be calculated in a manner specified by the State Board using data obtained from the Annual Financial Report, the Funding and Child Tracking System, and district enrollment information. This report must be issued on or before May 1, 2008 and on or before each May 1 thereafter.
(Source: P.A. 95-555, eff. 8-30-07; 95-876, eff. 8-21-08.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.146)
    Sec. 2-3.146. Severely overcrowded schools grant program. There is created a grant program, subject to appropriation, for severely overcrowded schools. The State Board of Education shall administer the program. Grant funds may be used for purposes of relieving overcrowding. In order for a school district to be eligible for a grant under this Section, (i) the main administrative office of the district must be located in a city of 85,000 or more in population, according to the 2000 U.S. Census, (ii) the school district must have a district-wide percentage of low-income students of 70% or more, as identified by the 2005-2006 School Report Cards published by the State Board of Education, and (iii) the school district must not be eligible for a fast growth grant under Section 18-8.10 of this Code. The State Board of Education shall distribute the funds on a proportional basis with no single district receiving more than 75% of the funds in any given year. The State Board of Education may adopt rules as needed for the implementation and distribution of grants under this Section.
(Source: P.A. 95-707, eff. 1-11-08.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.147)
    Sec. 2-3.147. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 96-1551, eff. 7-1-11. Repealed by P.A. 99-30, eff. 7-10-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.148)
    Sec. 2-3.148. Disability history and awareness campaign. The State Board of Education shall promote an annual campaign about disability history and awareness in this State. The campaign shall be designed to increase public awareness and respect for people with disabilities who comprise a substantial percentage of this State's population, teach future generations that people with disabilities have a rich history and have made valuable contributions throughout this State and the United States, and teach future generations that disability is a natural part of life and that people with disabilities have a right to be treated with civil, legal, and human rights and as full human beings above all else.
(Source: P.A. 96-191, eff. 1-1-10; 96-1000, eff. 7-2-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.149)
    Sec. 2-3.149. Food allergy guidelines.
    (a) Not later than July 1, 2010, the State Board of Education, in conjunction with the Department of Public Health, shall develop and make available to each school board guidelines for the management of students with life-threatening food allergies. The State Board of Education and the Department of Public Health shall establish an ad hoc committee to develop the guidelines. The committee shall include experts in the field of food allergens, representatives on behalf of students with food allergies, representatives from the several public school management organizations, which shall include school administrators, principals, and school board members, and representatives from 2 statewide professional teachers' organizations. The guidelines shall include, but need not be limited to, the following:
        (1) education and training for school personnel who
    	
interact with students with life-threatening food allergies, such as school and school district administrators, teachers, school advisors and counselors, school health personnel, and school nurses, on the management of students with life-threatening food allergies, including training related to the administration of medication with an auto-injector;
        (2) procedures for responding to life-threatening
    	
allergic reactions to food;
        (3) a process for the implementation of
    	
individualized health care and food allergy action plans for every student with a life-threatening food allergy; and
        (4) protocols to prevent exposure to food allergens.
    (b) Not later than January 1, 2011, each school board shall implement a policy based on the guidelines developed pursuant to subsection (a) of this Section for the management of students with life-threatening food allergies enrolled in the schools under its jurisdiction. Nothing in this subsection (b) is intended to invalidate school district policies that were implemented before the development of guidelines pursuant to subsection (a) of this Section as long as such policies are consistent with the guidelines developed pursuant to subsection (a) of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 96-349, eff. 8-13-09; 96-1000, eff. 7-2-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.150)
    Sec. 2-3.150. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 96-1000, eff. 7-2-10. Repealed internally, eff. 1-16-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.151)
    Sec. 2-3.151. Green career and technical education programs.
    (a) As used in this Section, "green industries" means industries that contribute directly to preserving or enhancing environmental quality by reducing waste and pollution or producing sustainable products using sustainable processes and materials and that provide opportunities for advancement along a career track of increasing skills and wages. Green industries include any of the following:
        (1) Energy system retrofits to increase energy
    	
efficiency and conservation.
        (2) The production and distribution of biofuels and
    	
vehicle retrofits for biofuels.
        (3) Building design and construction that meet the
    	
equivalent of the best available technology in energy and environmental design standards.
        (4) Organic and community food production.
        (5) The manufacture of products from non-toxic,
    	
environmentally certified or recycled materials.
        (6) The manufacture and production of sustainable
    	
technologies, including, but not limited to, solar panels, wind turbines, and fuel cells.
        (7) Solar technology installation and maintenance.
        (8) Recycling, green composting, and large-scale
    	
reuse of construction and demolition materials and debris.
        (9) Water system retrofits to increase water
    	
efficiency and conservation.
        (10) Horticulture.
    (b) It is the purpose and intent of this Section to establish a State grant program that develops secondary programs that introduce students to developing green industries.
    (c) Subject to appropriation, the State Board of Education shall establish a State grant program that develops, through a competitive process, 2-year pilot programs to assist in the creation and promotion of green career and technical education programs in public secondary schools in this State. Preference must be given to proposals that include the integration of academic and career and technical education content, arranged in sequences of courses that lead to post-secondary completion.
    (d) The State Board of Education may adopt any rules necessary for the implementation of this Section.
    (e) The State Board of Education may use up to 5% of the funds appropriated for the purposes of this Section for administrative costs, including the hiring of positions for the implementation and administration of the grant program, provided that if no appropriation is made to the State Board for a given fiscal year for the purposes of the grant program, then the State Board is not required to make any expenditures in support of the program during that fiscal year.
(Source: P.A. 96-659, eff. 8-25-09; 96-1000, eff. 7-2-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.152)
    Sec. 2-3.152. Community schools.
    (a) This Section applies beginning with the 2009-2010 school year.
    (b) The General Assembly finds all of the following:
        (1) All children are capable of success.
        (2) Schools are the centers of vibrant communities.
        (3) Strong families build strong educational
    	
communities.
        (4) Children succeed when adults work together to
    	
foster positive educational outcomes.
        (5) Schools work best when families take active roles
    	
in the education of children.
        (6) Schools today are limited in their ability to
    	
dedicate time and resources to provide a wide range of educational opportunities to students because of the focus on standardized test outcomes.
        (7) By providing learning opportunities outside of
    	
normal school hours, including programs on life skills and health, students are more successful academically, more engaged in their communities, safer, and better prepared to make a successful transition from school to adulthood.
        (8) A community school is a traditional school that
    	
actively partners with its community to leverage existing resources and identify new resources to support the transformation of the school to provide enrichment and additional life skill opportunities for students, parents, and community members at-large. Each community school is unique because its programming is designed by and for the school staff, in partnership with parents, community stakeholders, and students.
        (9) Community schools currently exist in this State
    	
in urban, rural, and suburban communities.
        (10) Research shows that community schools have a
    	
powerful positive impact on students, as demonstrated by increased academic success, a positive change in attitudes toward school and learning, and decreased behavioral problems.
        (11) After-school and evening programs offered by
    	
community schools provide academic enrichment consistent with the Illinois Learning Standards and general school curriculum; an opportunity for physical fitness activities for students, fine arts programs, structured learning "play" time, and other recreational opportunities; a safe haven for students; and work supports for working families.
        (12) Community schools are cost-effective because
    	
they leverage existing resources provided by local, State, federal, and private sources and bring programs to the schools, where the students are already congregated. Community schools have been shown to leverage between $5 to $8 in existing programming for every $1 spent on a community school.
    (c) Subject to an appropriation or the availability of funding for such purposes, the State Board of Education shall make grants available to fund community schools and to enhance programs at community schools. A request-for-proposal process must be used in awarding grants under this subsection (c). Proposals may be submitted on behalf of a school, a school district, or a consortium of 2 or more schools or school districts. Proposals must be evaluated and scored on the basis of criteria consistent with this Section and other factors developed and adopted by the State Board of Education. Technical assistance in grant writing must be made available to schools, school districts, or consortia of school districts through the State Board of Education directly or through a resource and referral directory established and maintained by the State Board of Education.
    (d) In order to qualify for a community school grant under this Section, a school must, at a minimum, have the following components:
        (1) Before and after-school programming each school
    	
day to meet the identified needs of students.
        (2) Weekend programming.
        (3) At least 4 weeks of summer programming.
        (4) A local advisory group comprised of school
    	
leadership, parents, and community stakeholders that establishes school-specific programming goals, assesses program needs, and oversees the process of implementing expanded programming.
        (5) A program director or resource coordinator who is
    	
responsible for establishing a local advisory group, assessing the needs of students and community members, identifying programs to meet those needs, developing the before and after-school, weekend, and summer programming and overseeing the implementation of programming to ensure high quality, efficiency, and robust participation.
        (6) Programming that includes academic excellence
    	
aligned with the Illinois Learning Standards, life skills, healthy minds and bodies, parental support, and community engagement and that promotes staying in school and non-violent behavior and non-violent conflict resolution.
        (7) Maintenance of attendance records in all
    	
programming components.
        (8) Maintenance of measurable data showing annual
    	
participation and the impact of programming on the participating children and adults.
        (9) Documentation of true collaboration between the
    	
school and community stakeholders, including local governmental units, civic organizations, families, businesses, and social service providers.
        (10) A non-discrimination policy ensuring that the
    	
community school does not condition participation upon race, ethnic origin, religion, sex, or disability.
(Source: P.A. 96-746, eff. 8-25-09; 96-1000, eff. 7-2-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.153)
    Sec. 2-3.153. Survey of learning conditions.
    (a) The State Board of Education shall administer a climate survey, identified by and paid for by the State Board of Education, to provide feedback from, at a minimum, students in grades 4 through 12 and teachers on the instructional environment within a school. Each school district shall annually administer the climate survey in every public school attendance center by a date specified by the State Superintendent of Education, and data resulting from the instrument's administration must be provided to the State Board of Education. The survey component that requires completion by the teachers must be administered during teacher meetings or professional development days or at other times that would not interfere with the teachers' regular classroom and direct instructional duties. The State Superintendent shall publicly report on the survey indicators of learning conditions resulting from administration of the instrument at the individual school, district, and State levels and shall identify whether the indicators result from an anonymous administration of the instrument.
    (b) A school district may elect to use, on a district-wide basis and at the school district's sole cost and expense, an alternate climate survey of learning conditions instrument pre-approved by the State Superintendent under subsection (c) of this Section in lieu of the State-adopted climate survey, provided that:
        (1) the school district notifies the State Board of
    	
Education, on a form provided by the State Superintendent, of its intent to administer an alternate climate survey on or before a date established by the State Superintendent for each school;
        (2) the notification submitted to the State Board
    	
under paragraph (1) of this subsection (b) must be accompanied by a certification signed by the president of the local teachers' exclusive bargaining representative and president of the school board indicating that the alternate survey has been agreed to by the teachers' exclusive bargaining representative and the school board;
        (3) the school district's administration of the
    	
alternate instrument, including providing to the State Board of Education data and reports suitable to be published on school report cards and the State School Report Card Internet website, is performed in accordance with the requirements of subsection (a) of this Section; and
        (4) the alternate instrument is administered each
    	
school year.
    (c) The State Superintendent, in consultation with teachers, principals, superintendents, and other appropriate stakeholders, shall administer an approval process through which at least 2, but not more than 3, alternate survey of learning conditions instruments will be approved by the State Superintendent following a determination by the State Superintendent that each approved instrument:
        (1) meets all requirements of subsection (a) of this
    	
Section;
        (2) provides a summation of indicator results of the
    	
alternative survey by a date established by the State Superintendent in a manner that allows the indicator results to be included on school report cards pursuant to Section 10-17a of this Code by October 31 of the school year following the instrument's administration;
        (3) provides summary reports for each district and
    	
attendance center intended for parents and community stakeholders;
        (4) meets scale reliability requirements using
    	
accepted testing measures;
        (5) provides research-based evidence linking
    	
instrument content to one or more improved student outcomes; and
        (6) has undergone and documented testing to prove
    	
validity and reliability.
The State Superintendent shall periodically review and update the list of approved alternate survey instruments, provided that at least 2, but no more than 3, alternate survey instruments shall be approved for use during any school year.
    (d) Nothing contained in this amendatory Act of the 98th General Assembly repeals, supersedes, invalidates, or nullifies final decisions in lawsuits pending on the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 98th General Assembly in Illinois courts involving the interpretation of Public Act 97-8.
(Source: P.A. 100-1046, eff. 8-23-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.154)
    Sec. 2-3.154. Low Performing Schools Intervention Program. From any funds appropriated to the State Board of Education for the purposes of intervening in low performing schools, the State Superintendent may, in his or her discretion, select school districts and schools in which to directly or indirectly intervene; provided however that such school districts and schools are within the lowest 5% in terms of performance in the State as determined by the State Superintendent. Intervention may take the form of a needs assessment or additional, more intensive intervention, as determined by the State Superintendent. Expenditures from funds appropriated for this purpose may include, without limitation, contracts, grants and travel to support the intervention.
(Source: P.A. 97-72, eff. 7-1-11; 97-813, eff. 7-13-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.155)
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-17)
    Sec. 2-3.155. Textbook block grant program.
    (a) The provisions of this Section are in the public interest, for the public benefit, and serve secular public purposes.
    (b) As used in this Section, "textbook" means any book or book substitute that a pupil uses as a text or text substitute, including electronic textbooks. "Textbook" includes books, reusable workbooks, manuals, whether bound or in loose-leaf form, instructional computer software, and electronic textbooks and the technological equipment necessary to gain access to and use electronic textbooks intended as a principal source of study material for a given class or group of students. "Textbook" also includes science curriculum materials in a kit format that includes pre-packaged consumable materials if (i) it is shown that the materials serve as a textbook substitute, (ii) the materials are for use by the pupils as a principal learning source, (iii) each component of the materials is integrally necessary to teach the requirements of the intended course, (iv) the kit includes teacher guidance materials, and (v) the purchase of individual consumable materials is not allowed.
    (c) Subject to annual appropriation by the General Assembly, the State Board of Education is authorized to provide annual funding to public school districts and State-recognized, non-public schools serving students in grades kindergarten through 12 for the purchase of selected textbooks. The textbooks authorized to be purchased under this Section are limited without exception to textbooks for use in any public school and that are secular, non-religious, and non-sectarian. Each public school district and State-recognized, non-public school shall, subject to appropriations for that purpose, receive a per pupil grant for the purchase of secular textbooks. The per pupil grant amount must be calculated by the State Board of Education utilizing the total appropriation made for these purposes divided by the most current student enrollment data available.
    (d) The State Board of Education may adopt rules as necessary for the implementation of this Section and to ensure the religious neutrality of the textbook block grant program, as well as provide for the monitoring of all textbooks authorized in this Section to be purchased directly by State-recognized, nonpublic schools serving students in grades kindergarten through 12.
(Source: P.A. 101-17, eff. 6-14-19.)
 
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-227)
    Sec. 2-3.155. Textbook block grant program.
    (a) The provisions of this Section are in the public interest, for the public benefit, and serve secular public purposes.
    (b) As used in this Section, "textbook" means any book or book substitute that a pupil uses as a text or text substitute, including electronic textbooks. "Textbook" includes books, reusable workbooks, manuals, whether bound or in loose-leaf form, instructional computer software, and electronic textbooks and the technological equipment necessary to gain access to and use electronic textbooks intended as a principal source of study material for a given class or group of students. "Textbook" also includes science curriculum materials in a kit format that includes pre-packaged consumable materials if (i) it is shown that the materials serve as a textbook substitute, (ii) the materials are for use by the pupils as a principal learning source, (iii) each component of the materials is integrally necessary to teach the requirements of the intended course, (iv) the kit includes teacher guidance materials, and (v) the purchase of individual consumable materials is not allowed.
    (c) Beginning July 1, 2011, subject to annual appropriation by the General Assembly, the State Board of Education is authorized to provide annual funding to public school districts and State-recognized, non-public schools serving students in grades kindergarten through 12 for the purchase of selected textbooks. The textbooks authorized to be purchased under this Section are limited without exception to textbooks that have been preapproved and designated by the State Board of Education for use in any public school and that are secular, non-religious, non-sectarian, and non-discriminatory as to any of the characteristics under the Illinois Human Rights Act. Textbooks authorized to be purchased under this Section must include the roles and contributions of all people protected under the Illinois Human Rights Act. The State Board of Education shall annually publish a list of the textbooks authorized to be purchased under this Section. Each public school district and State-recognized, non-public school shall, subject to appropriations for that purpose, receive a per pupil grant for the purchase of secular and non-discriminatory textbooks. The per pupil grant amount must be calculated by the State Board of Education utilizing the total appropriation made for these purposes divided by the most current student enrollment data available.
    (d) The State Board of Education may adopt rules as necessary for the implementation of this Section and to ensure the religious neutrality of the textbook block grant program, as well as provide for the monitoring of all textbooks authorized in this Section to be purchased directly by State-recognized, nonpublic schools serving students in grades kindergarten through 12.
(Source: P.A. 101-227, eff. 7-1-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.156)
    Sec. 2-3.156. Mathematics curriculum models.
    (a) The State Board of Education shall, immediately following the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 97th General Assembly, coordinate the acquisition, adaptation, and development of middle and high school mathematics curriculum models to aid school districts and teachers in implementing standards for all students. The acquisition, adaptation, and development process shall include the input of representatives of statewide educational organizations and stakeholders, including without limitation all of the following:
        (1) Representatives of a statewide mathematics
    	
professional organization.
        (2) Representatives of statewide teacher
    	
organizations.
        (3) Representatives of statewide school
    	
administrator organizations.
        (4) Experts in higher education mathematics
    	
instruction.
        (5) Experts in curriculum design.
        (6) Experts in professional development design.
        (7) State education policymakers and advisors.
        (8) A representative from the Department of Commerce
    	
and Economic Opportunity.
        (9) Higher education faculty.
        (10) Representatives of statewide school board
    	
organizations.
        (11) Representatives of statewide principal
    	
organizations.
    (b) The curriculum models under this Section shall include without limitation all of the following:
        (1) Scope-and-sequence descriptions for middle and
    	
high school mathematics progressions, building content and skill acquisition across the grades.
        (2) Recommendations of curricula for the final year
    	
of mathematics or math-equivalent instruction before graduation.
        (3) Sample lesson plans to illustrate instructional
    	
materials and methods for specific standards.
        (4) Model high school course designs that
    	
demonstrate effective student pathways to mathematics-standards attainment by graduation.
        (5) Training programs for teachers and
    	
administrators, to be made available in both traditional and electronic formats for regional and local delivery.
    (c) The curriculum models under this Section must be completed no later than March 1, 2013.
    (d) The curriculum models and training programs under this Section must be made available to all school districts, which may choose to adopt or adapt the models in lieu of developing their own mathematics curricula. The Illinois P-20 Council shall submit a report to the Governor and the General Assembly on the extent and effect of utilization of the curriculum models by school districts. Within 4 years after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 97th General Assembly, State mathematics test results and higher education mathematics remediation data must be used to gauge the effectiveness of high school mathematics instruction and the extent of standards attainment and be used to guide the continuous improvement of the mathematics curriculum and instruction.
(Source: P.A. 97-704, eff. 1-1-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.157)
    Sec. 2-3.157. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 98-756, eff. 7-16-14. Repealed internally, eff. 1-2-14.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.158)
    Sec. 2-3.158. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 98-790, eff. 7-25-14. Repealed internally, eff. 12-31-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.159)
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-222)
    Sec. 2-3.159. State Seal of Biliteracy.
    (a) In this Section, "foreign language" means any language other than English, including all modern languages, Latin, American Sign Language, Native American languages, and native languages.
    (b) The State Seal of Biliteracy program is established to recognize public and non-public high school graduates who have attained a high level of proficiency in one or more languages in addition to English. School district and non-public school participation in this program is voluntary.
    (c) The purposes of the State Seal of Biliteracy are as follows:
        (1) To encourage pupils to study languages.
        (2) To certify attainment of biliteracy.
        (3) To provide employers with a method of
    	
identifying people with language and biliteracy skills.
        (4) To provide universities with an additional
    	
method to recognize applicants seeking admission.
        (5) To prepare pupils with 21st century skills.
        (6) To recognize the value of foreign language and
    	
native language instruction in public and non-public schools.
        (7) To strengthen intergroup relationships, affirm
    	
the value of diversity, and honor the multiple cultures and languages of a community.
    (d) The State Seal of Biliteracy certifies attainment of a high level of proficiency, sufficient for meaningful use in college and a career, by a graduating public or non-public high school pupil in one or more languages in addition to English.
    (e) The State Board of Education shall adopt such rules as may be necessary to establish the criteria that pupils must achieve to earn a State Seal of Biliteracy, which may include without limitation attainment of units of credit in English language arts and languages other than English and passage of such assessments of foreign language proficiency as may be approved by the State Board of Education for this purpose. These rules shall ensure that the criteria that pupils must achieve to earn a State Seal of Biliteracy meet the course credit criteria established under subsection (i) of this Section.
    (f) The State Board of Education shall do both of the following:
        (1) Prepare and deliver to participating school
    	
districts and non-public schools an appropriate mechanism for designating the State Seal of Biliteracy on the diploma and transcript of the pupil indicating that the pupil has been awarded a State Seal of Biliteracy by the State Board of Education.
        (2) Provide other information the State Board of
    	
Education deems necessary for school districts and non-public schools to successfully participate in the program.
    (g) A school district or non-public school that participates in the program under this Section shall do both of the following:
        (1) Maintain appropriate records in order to identify
    	
pupils who have earned a State Seal of Biliteracy.
        (2) Make the appropriate designation on the
    	
diploma and transcript of each pupil who earns a State Seal of Biliteracy.
    (h) No fee shall be charged to a pupil to receive the designation pursuant to this Section. Notwithstanding this prohibition, costs may be incurred by the pupil in demonstrating proficiency, including without limitation any assessments required under subsection (e) of this Section.
    (i) For admissions purposes, each public university in this State shall accept the State Seal of Biliteracy as equivalent to 2 years of foreign language coursework taken during high school if a student's high school transcript indicates that he or she will be receiving or has received the State Seal of Biliteracy.
    (j) Each public community college and public university in this State shall establish criteria to translate a State Seal of Biliteracy into course credit based on foreign language course equivalencies identified by the community college's or university's faculty and staff and, upon request from an enrolled student, the community college or university shall award foreign language course credit to a student who has received a State Seal of Biliteracy. Students enrolled in a public community college or public university who have received a State Seal of Biliteracy must request course credit for their seal within 3 academic years after graduating from high school.
(Source: P.A. 101-222, eff. 1-1-20.)
 
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-503)
    Sec. 2-3.159. State Seal of Biliteracy.
    (a) In this Section, "foreign language" means any language other than English, including all modern languages, Latin, American Sign Language, Native American languages, and native languages.
    (b) The State Seal of Biliteracy program is established to recognize public high school graduates who have attained a high level of proficiency in one or more languages in addition to English. The State Seal of Biliteracy shall be awarded beginning with the 2014-2015 school year. School district participation in this program is voluntary.
    (c) The purposes of the State Seal of Biliteracy are as follows:
        (1) To encourage pupils to study languages.
        (2) To certify attainment of biliteracy.
        (3) To provide employers with a method of
    	
identifying people with language and biliteracy skills.
        (4) To provide universities with an additional
    	
method to recognize applicants seeking admission.
        (5) To prepare pupils with 21st century skills.
        (6) To recognize the value of foreign language and
    	
native language instruction in public schools.
        (7) To strengthen intergroup relationships, affirm
    	
the value of diversity, and honor the multiple cultures and languages of a community.
    (d) The State Seal of Biliteracy certifies attainment of a high level of proficiency, sufficient for meaningful use in college and a career, by a graduating public high school pupil in one or more languages in addition to English.
    (e) The State Board of Education shall adopt such rules as may be necessary to establish the criteria that pupils must achieve to earn a State Seal of Biliteracy, which may include without limitation attainment of units of credit in English language arts and languages other than English and passage of such assessments of foreign language proficiency as may be approved by the State Board of Education for this purpose. These rules shall ensure that the criteria that pupils must achieve to earn a State Seal of Biliteracy meet the course credit criteria established under subsection (i) of this Section.
    (e-5) To demonstrate sufficient English language proficiency for eligibility to receive a State Seal of Biliteracy under this Section, the State Board of Education shall allow a pupil to provide his or her school district with evidence of completion of any of the following, in accordance with guidelines for proficiency adopted by the State Board:
        (1) An AP (Advanced Placement) English Language and
    	
Composition Exam.
        (2) An English language arts dual credit course.
        (3) Transitional coursework in English language arts
    	
articulated in partnership with a public community college as an ESSA (Every Student Succeeds Act) College and Career Readiness Indicator.
    (f) The State Board of Education shall do both of the following:
        (1) Prepare and deliver to participating school
    	
districts an appropriate mechanism for designating the State Seal of Biliteracy on the diploma and transcript of the pupil indicating that the pupil has been awarded a State Seal of Biliteracy by the State Board of Education.
        (2) Provide other information the State Board of
    	
Education deems necessary for school districts to successfully participate in the program.
    (g) A school district that participates in the program under this Section shall do both of the following:
        (1) Maintain appropriate records in order to identify
    	
pupils who have earned a State Seal of Biliteracy.
        (2) Make the appropriate designation on the
    	
diploma and transcript of each pupil who earns a State Seal of Biliteracy.
    (h) No fee shall be charged to a pupil to receive the designation pursuant to this Section. Notwithstanding this prohibition, costs may be incurred by the pupil in demonstrating proficiency, including without limitation any assessments required under subsection (e) of this Section.
    (i) For admissions purposes, each public university in this State shall accept the State Seal of Biliteracy as equivalent to 2 years of foreign language coursework taken during high school if a student's high school transcript indicates that he or she will be receiving or has received the State Seal of Biliteracy.
    (j) Each public community college and public university in this State shall establish criteria to translate a State Seal of Biliteracy into course credit based on foreign language course equivalencies identified by the community college's or university's faculty and staff and, upon request from an enrolled student, the community college or university shall award foreign language course credit to a student who has received a State Seal of Biliteracy. Students enrolled in a public community college or public university who have received a State Seal of Biliteracy must request course credit for their seal within 3 academic years after graduating from high school.
(Source: P.A. 101-503, eff. 8-23-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.160)
    Sec. 2-3.160. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 99-78, eff. 7-20-15. Repealed internally, eff. July 1, 2015. P.A. 99-65 contained an extension of the internal repealer, but did not take effect until July 16, 2015.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.161)
    Sec. 2-3.161. Definition of dyslexia; reading instruction advisory group; handbook.
    (a) The State Board of Education shall incorporate, in both general education and special education, the following definition of dyslexia:
        Dyslexia is a specific learning disability that is
    	
neurobiological in origin. Dyslexia is characterized by difficulties with accurate and/or fluent word recognition and by poor spelling and decoding abilities. These difficulties typically result from a deficit in the phonological component of language that is often unexpected in relation to other cognitive abilities and the provision of effective classroom instruction. Secondary consequences may include problems in reading comprehension and reduced reading experience that can impede growth of vocabulary and background knowledge.
    (b) Subject to specific State appropriation or the availability of private donations, the State Board of Education shall establish an advisory group to develop a training module or training modules to provide education and professional development to teachers, school administrators, and other education professionals regarding multi-sensory, systematic, and sequential instruction in reading. This advisory group shall complete its work before December 15, 2015 and is abolished on December 15, 2015. The State Board of Education shall reestablish the advisory group abolished on December 15, 2015 to complete the abolished group's work. The reestablished advisory group shall complete its work before December 31, 2016 and is abolished on December 31, 2016. The provisions of this subsection (b), other than this sentence, are inoperative after December 31, 2016.
    (c) The State Board of Education shall develop and maintain a handbook to be made available on its Internet website that provides guidance for pupils, parents or guardians, and teachers on the subject of dyslexia. The handbook shall include, but is not limited to:
        (1) guidelines for teachers and parents or guardians
    	
on how to identify signs of dyslexia;
        (2) a description of educational strategies that have
    	
been shown to improve the academic performance of pupils with dyslexia; and
        (3) a description of resources and services available
    	
to pupils with dyslexia, parents or guardians of pupils with dyslexia, and teachers.
    The State Board shall review the handbook once every 4 years to update, if necessary, the guidelines, educational strategies, or resources and services made available in the handbook.
(Source: P.A. 99-65, eff. 7-16-15; 99-78, eff. 7-20-15; 99-602, eff. 7-22-16; 99-603, eff. 7-22-16; 100-201, eff. 8-18-17; 100-617, eff. 7-20-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.162)
    Sec. 2-3.162. Student discipline report; school discipline improvement plan.
    (a) On or before October 31, 2015 and on or before October 31 of each subsequent year, the State Board of Education, through the State Superintendent of Education, shall prepare a report on student discipline in all school districts in this State, including State-authorized charter schools. This report shall include data from all public schools within school districts, including district-authorized charter schools. This report must be posted on the Internet website of the State Board of Education. The report shall include data on the issuance of out-of-school suspensions, expulsions, and removals to alternative settings in lieu of another disciplinary action, disaggregated by race and ethnicity, gender, age, grade level, whether a student is an English learner, incident type, and discipline duration.
    (b) The State Board of Education shall analyze the data under subsection (a) of this Section on an annual basis and determine the top 20% of school districts for the following metrics:
        (1) Total number of out-of-school suspensions divided
    	
by the total district enrollment by the last school day in September for the year in which the data was collected, multiplied by 100.
        (2) Total number of out-of-school expulsions divided
    	
by the total district enrollment by the last school day in September for the year in which the data was collected, multiplied by 100.
        (3) Racial disproportionality, defined as the
    	
overrepresentation of students of color or white students in comparison to the total number of students of color or white students on October 1st of the school year in which data are collected, with respect to the use of out-of-school suspensions and expulsions, which must be calculated using the same method as the U.S. Department of Education's Office for Civil Rights uses.
    The analysis must be based on data collected over 3 consecutive school years, beginning with the 2014-2015 school year.
    Beginning with the 2017-2018 school year, the State Board of Education shall require each of the school districts that are identified in the top 20% of any of the metrics described in this subsection (b) for 3 consecutive years to submit a plan identifying the strategies the school district will implement to reduce the use of exclusionary disciplinary practices or racial disproportionality or both, if applicable. School districts that no longer meet the criteria described in any of the metrics described in this subsection (b) for 3 consecutive years shall no longer be required to submit a plan.
    This plan may be combined with any other improvement plans required under federal or State law.
    The calculation of the top 20% of any of the metrics described in this subsection (b) shall exclude all school districts, State-authorized charter schools, and special charter districts that issued fewer than a total of 10 out-of-school suspensions or expulsions, whichever is applicable, during the school year. The calculation of the top 20% of the metric described in subdivision (3) of this subsection (b) shall exclude all school districts with an enrollment of fewer than 50 white students or fewer than 50 students of color.
    The plan must be approved at a public school board meeting and posted on the school district's Internet website. Within one year after being identified, the school district shall submit to the State Board of Education and post on the district's Internet website a progress report describing the implementation of the plan and the results achieved.
(Source: P.A. 99-30, eff. 7-10-15; 99-78, eff. 7-20-15; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.163)
    Sec. 2-3.163. Prioritization of Urgency of Need for Services database.
    (a) The General Assembly makes all of the following findings:
        (1) The Department of Human Services maintains a
    	
statewide database known as the Prioritization of Urgency of Need for Services that records information about individuals with developmental disabilities who are potentially in need of services.
        (2) The Department of Human Services uses the data on
    	
Prioritization of Urgency of Need for Services to select individuals for services as funding becomes available, to develop proposals and materials for budgeting, and to plan for future needs.
        (3) Prioritization of Urgency of Need for Services is
    	
available for children and adults with a developmental disability who have an unmet service need anticipated in the next 5 years.
        (4) Prioritization of Urgency of Need for Services is
    	
the first step toward getting developmental disabilities services in this State. If individuals are not on the Prioritization of Urgency of Need for Services waiting list, they are not in queue for State developmental disabilities services.
        (5) Prioritization of Urgency of Need for Services
    	
may be underutilized by children and their parents or guardians due to lack of awareness or lack of information.
    (b) The State Board of Education may work with school districts to inform all students with developmental disabilities and their parents or guardians about the Prioritization of Urgency of Need for Services database.
    (c) Subject to appropriation, the Department of Human Services and State Board of Education shall develop and implement an online, computer-based training program for at least one designated employee in every public school in this State to educate him or her about the Prioritization of Urgency of Need for Services database and steps to be taken to ensure children and adolescents are enrolled. The training shall include instruction for at least one designated employee in every public school in contacting the appropriate developmental disabilities Independent Service Coordination agency to enroll children and adolescents in the database. At least one designated employee in every public school shall ensure the opportunity to enroll in the Prioritization of Urgency of Need for Services database is discussed during annual individualized education program (IEP) meetings for all children and adolescents believed to have a developmental disability.
    (d) The State Board of Education, in consultation with the Department of Human Services, shall inform parents and guardians of students through school districts about the Prioritization of Urgency of Need for Services waiting list, including the consideration required in subsection (e) of this Section.
    (e) The Department of Human Services shall consider the length of time spent on the Prioritization of Urgency of Need for Services waiting list, in addition to other factors considered, when selecting individuals on the list for services.
(Source: P.A. 99-144, eff. 1-1-16; 99-642, eff. 7-28-16; 99-716, eff. 1-1-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.164)
    (Section scheduled to be repealed on December 16, 2020)
    Sec. 2-3.164. Attendance Commission.
    (a) The Attendance Commission is created within the State Board of Education to study the issue of chronic absenteeism in this State and make recommendations for strategies to prevent chronic absenteeism. The Commission shall consist of all of the following members:
        (1) The Director of the Department of Children and
    	
Family Services or his or her designee.
        (2) The Chairperson of the State Board of Education
    	
or his or her designee.
        (3) The Chairperson of the Board of Higher Education
    	
or his or her designee.
        (4) The Secretary of the Department of Human Services
    	
or his or her designee.
        (5) The Director of the Department of Public Health
    	
or his or her designee.
        (6) The Chairperson of the Illinois Community College
    	
Board or his or her designee.
        (7) The Chairperson of the State Charter School
    	
Commission or his or her designee.
        (8) An individual that deals with children's
    	
disabilities, impairments, and social emotional issues, appointed by the State Superintendent of Education.
        (9) One member from each of the following
    	
organizations, appointed by the State Superintendent of Education:
            (A) A non-profit organization that advocates for
        	
students in temporary living situations.
            (B) An Illinois-focused, non-profit organization
        	
that advocates for the well-being of all children and families in this State.
            (C) An Illinois non-profit, anti-crime
        	
organization of law enforcement that researches and recommends early learning and youth development strategies to reduce crime.
            (D) An Illinois non-profit organization that
        	
conducts community-organizing around family issues.
            (E) A statewide professional teachers'
        	
organization.
            (F) A different statewide professional teachers'
        	
organization.
            (G) A professional teachers' organization in a
        	
city having a population exceeding 500,000.
            (H) An association representing school
        	
administrators.
            (I) An association representing school board
        	
members.
            (J) An association representing school principals.
            (K) An association representing regional
        	
superintendents of schools.
            (L) An association representing parents.
            (M) An association representing high school
        	
districts.
            (N) An association representing large unit
        	
districts.
            (O) An organization that advocates for healthier
        	
school environments in Illinois.
            (P) An organization that advocates for the health
        	
and safety of Illinois youth and families by providing capacity building services.
            (Q) A statewide association of local
        	
philanthropic organizations that advocates for effective educational, health, and human service policies to improve this State's communities.
            (R) A statewide organization that advocates for
        	
partnerships among schools, families, and the community that provide access to support and remove barriers to learning and development, using schools as hubs.
            (S) An organization representing statewide
        	
programs actively involved in truancy intervention.
    Attendance Commission members shall serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed for their travel expenses from appropriations to the State Board of Education available for that purpose and subject to the rules of the appropriate travel control board.
    (b) The Attendance Commission shall meet initially at the call of the State Superintendent of Education. The members shall elect a chairperson at their initial meeting. Thereafter, the Attendance Commission shall meet at the call of the chairperson. The Attendance Commission shall hold hearings on a periodic basis to receive testimony from the public regarding attendance.
    (c) The Attendance Commission shall identify strategies, mechanisms, and approaches to help parents, educators, principals, superintendents, and the State Board of Education address and prevent chronic absenteeism and shall recommend to the General Assembly and State Board of Education:
        (1) a standard for attendance and chronic
    	
absenteeism, defining attendance as a calculation of standard clock hours in a day that equal a full day based on instructional minutes for both a half day and a full day per learning environment;
        (2) mechanisms to improve data systems to monitor and
    	
track chronic absenteeism across this State in a way that identifies trends from prekindergarten through grade 12 and allows the identification of students who need individualized chronic absenteeism prevention plans;
        (3) mechanisms for reporting and accountability for
    	
schools and districts across this State, including creating multiple measure indexes for reporting;
        (4) best practices for utilizing attendance and
    	
chronic absenteeism data to create multi-tiered systems of support and prevention that will result in students being ready for college and career; and
        (5) new initiatives and responses to ongoing
    	
challenges presented by chronic absenteeism.
    (d) The State Board of Education shall provide administrative support to the Commission. The Attendance Commission shall submit an initial report to the General Assembly and the State Board of Education no later than March 15, 2016. The Attendance Commission shall submit an annual report to the General Assembly and the State Board of Education no later than December 15, 2016 and each December 15 thereafter.
    (e) The Attendance Commission is abolished and this Section is repealed on December 16, 2020.
(Source: P.A. 99-432, eff. 8-21-15; 99-601, eff. 7-22-16; 99-642, eff. 7-28-16.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.165)
    Sec. 2-3.165. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 99-642, eff. 7-28-16. Repealed internally, eff. 6-1-16)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.166)
    Sec. 2-3.166. Youth suicide awareness and prevention.
    (a) This Section may be referred to as Ann Marie's Law.
    (b) The State Board of Education shall do both of the following:
        (1) In consultation with a youth suicide prevention
    	
organization operating in this State and organizations representing school boards and school personnel, develop a model youth suicide awareness and prevention policy that is consistent with subsection (c) of this Section.
        (2) Compile, develop, and post on its publicly
    	
accessible Internet website both of the following, which may include materials already publicly available:
            (A) Recommended guidelines and educational
        	
materials for training and professional development.
            (B) Recommended resources and age-appropriate
        	
educational materials on youth suicide awareness and prevention.
    (c) The model policy developed by the State Board of Education under subsection (b) of this Section and any policy adopted by a school board under subsection (d) of this Section shall include all of the following:
        (1) A statement on youth suicide awareness and
    	
prevention.
        (2) Protocols for administering youth suicide
    	
awareness and prevention education to staff and students.
        (3) Methods of prevention, including procedures for
    	
early identification and referral of students at risk of suicide.
        (4) Methods of intervention, including procedures
    	
that address an emotional or mental health safety plan for students identified as being at increased risk of suicide.
        (5) Methods of responding to a student or staff
    	
suicide or suicide attempt.
        (6) Reporting procedures.
        (7) Recommended resources on youth suicide awareness
    	
and prevention programs, including current contact information for such programs.
    (d) Beginning with the 2015-2016 school year, each school board shall review and update its current suicide awareness and prevention policy to be consistent with subsection (c) of this Section or adopt an age-appropriate youth suicide awareness and prevention policy consistent with subsection (c) of this Section, inform each school district employee and the parent or legal guardian of each student enrolled in the school district of such policy, and post such policy on the school district's publicly accessible Internet website. The policy adopted by a school board under this subsection (d) may be based upon the model policy developed by the State Board of Education under subsection (b) of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 99-443, eff. 8-21-15; 99-642, eff. 7-28-16.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.167)
    Sec. 2-3.167. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 100-201, eff. 8-18-17. Repealed internally, eff. 7-1-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.168)
    Sec. 2-3.168. Advisory Council on At-Risk Students.
    (a) For purposes of this Section, "at-risk students" means students served by the Department of Human Services who receive services through Medicaid, the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, the Children's Health Insurance Program, or Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, as well as students under the legal custody of the Department of Children and Family Services. Students may not be counted more than once for receiving multiple services from the Department of Human Services or if they receive those services and are under the legal custody of the Department of Children and Family Services.
    (b) The Advisory Council on At-Risk Students is created within the State Board of Education. The Advisory Council shall consist of all of the following members:
        (1) One member of the House of Representatives
    	
appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
        (2) One member of the House of Representatives
    	
appointed by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
        (3) One member of the Senate appointed by the
    	
President of the Senate.
        (4) One member of the Senate appointed by the
    	
Minority Leader of the Senate.
        (5) The following members appointed by the State
    	
Superintendent of Education:
            (A) One member who is an educator representing a
        	
statewide professional teachers' organization.
            (B) One member who is an educator representing a
        	
different statewide professional teachers' organization.
            (C) One member who is an educator representing a
        	
professional teachers' organization in a city having a population exceeding 500,000.
            (D) One member from an organization that works
        	
for economic, educational, and social progress for African Americans and promotes strong sustainable communities through advocacy, collaboration, and innovation.
            (E) One member from an organization that
        	
facilitates the involvement of Latino Americans at all levels of public decision-making.
            (F) One member from an organization focused on
        	
research-based education policy to support a school system that prepares all students for college, a career, and democratic citizenship.
            (G) One member from an organization dedicated to
        	
advocating for public policies to prevent homelessness.
            (H) One member from the Illinois Student
        	
Assistance Commission.
            (I) One member from an organization that works to
        	
ensure the health and safety of Illinois youth and families by providing capacity building services.
            (J) One member from an organization that provides
        	
public high school students with opportunities to explore and develop their talents, while gaining critical skills for work, college, and beyond.
            (K) One member from an organization that promotes
        	
the strengths and abilities of youth and families by providing community-based services that empower each to face life's challenges with confidence, competence, and dignity.
            (L) One member from an organization that connects
        	
former members of the foster care system with current children in the foster care system.
            (M) One member who has experience with research
        	
and statistics.
            (N) Three members who are parents of at-risk
        	
students.
            (O) One member from an organization that
        	
optimizes the positive growth of at-risk youth and individuals working with at-risk youth through support services.
            (P) One member from a statewide organization
        	
representing regional superintendents of schools.
            (Q) One member from an association representing
        	
school management.
            (R) One member from an organization representing
        	
principals in a city having a population exceeding 500,000.
Members of the Council shall, to the extent possible, be selected on the basis of experience with or knowledge of various programs for at-risk students. The Council shall, to the extent possible, include diverse membership from a variety of socio-economic, racial, and ethnic backgrounds.
    (c) Initial members of the Council shall serve terms determined by lot as follows:
        (1) Seven members shall serve for one year.
        (2) Seven members shall serve for 2 years.
        (3) The remaining members shall serve for 3 years.
However, upon the appointment of the additional members under this amendatory Act of the 99th General Assembly, terms for the initial members of the Council shall be redetermined, with the initial and additional members of the Council serving as follows:
        (A) Members appointed under subdivisions (1) through
    	
(4) of subsection (b) of this Section shall serve on the Council until their successors are appointed.
        (B) Of the members appointed under subdivision (5)
    	
of subsection (b) of this Section, 6 members shall serve for one year, 6 members shall serve for 2 years, and the remaining members shall serve for 3 years, as determined by lot.
    (c-5) Successors to members appointed under subdivisions (1) through (4) of subsection (b) of this Section shall serve on the Council until their successors are appointed. Successors to members appointed under subdivision (5) of subsection (b) of this Section shall serve 3-year terms and must serve until their successors are appointed.
    (d) Members of the Council shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for travel if funds are made available for that specific purpose.
    (e) The Council shall initially meet at the call of the State Superintendent of Education. The members shall elect a chairperson from among their number at their initial meeting, with successor chairpersons being elected as determined by the Council. Thereafter, the Council shall meet at the call of the chairperson.
    (f) The State Board of Education and City of Chicago School District 299 shall provide administrative support to the Council.
    (g) The Council shall operate under the provisions of the Open Meetings Act and accept and consider public comments.
    (h) By no later than December 15, 2017, the Council shall submit a report to the State Board of Education, the Governor, and the General Assembly addressing, at a minimum, the following with respect to school districts where racial minorities comprise a majority of the student population:
        (1) What are the barriers to success present for
    	
at-risk students?
        (2) How much does socio-economic status impact
    	
academic and career achievement?
        (3) How do at-risk students perform academically?
        (4) How do at-risk students perform academically
    	
compared to students from higher socio-economic statuses?
        (5) What programs are shown to help at-risk students
    	
reach higher levels of academic and career achievement?
        (6) What specific curriculums help the academic
    	
success of at-risk students?
        (7) Of curriculums that help at-risk students, which
    	
of these need to be implemented within the Illinois Learning Standards?
        (8) To what degree do school districts teach cultural
    	
history, and how can this be improved?
        (9) Specific policy recommendations to improve the
    	
academic success of at-risk students.
        (10) Any other information that the Council
    	
determines will assist in the understanding of the barriers to success for or increase the academic performance of at-risk students.
The Council shall submit an annual report regarding barriers to academic success and the academic progress of at-risk students by no later than December 31 of each year beginning the year after the initial report is submitted.
(Source: P.A. 99-721, eff. 8-5-16; 99-929, eff. 1-20-17; 100-201, eff. 8-18-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.169)
    Sec. 2-3.169. State Global Scholar Certification.
    (a) The State Global Scholar Certification Program is established to recognized public high school graduates who have attained global competence. State Global Scholar Certification shall be awarded beginning with the 2017-2018 school year. School district participation in this certification is voluntary.
    (b) The purposes of State Global Scholar Certification are as follows:
        (1) To recognize the value of a global education.
        (2) To certify attainment of global competence.
        (3) To provide employers with a method of identifying
    	
globally competent employees.
        (4) To provide colleges and universities with an
    	
additional method to recognize applicants seeking admission.
        (5) To prepare students with 21st century skills.
        (6) To encourage the development of a globally ready
    	
workforce in the STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics), manufacturing, agriculture, and service sectors.
    (c) State Global Scholar Certification confirms attainment of global competence, sufficient for meaningful use in college and a career, by a graduating public high school student.
    (d) The State Board of Education shall adopt such rules as may be necessary to establish the criteria that students must achieve to earn State Global Scholar Certification, which shall minimally include attainment of units of credit in globally focused courses, service learning experiences, global collaboration and dialogue, and passage of a capstone project demonstrating global competency, as approved by the participating school district for this purpose.
    (e) The State Board of Education shall do both of the following:
        (1) Prepare and deliver to participating school
    	
districts an appropriate mechanism for designating State Global Scholar Certification on the diploma and transcript of a student indicating that the student has been awarded State Global Scholar Certification by the State Board of Education.
        (2) Provide other information the State Board of
    	
Education deems necessary for school districts to successfully participate in the certification.
    (f) A school district that participates in certification under this Section shall do both of the following:
        (1) Maintain appropriate records in order to identify
    	
students who have earned State Global Scholar Certification.
        (2) Make the appropriate designation on the diploma
    	
and transcript of each student who earns State Global Scholar Certification.
    (g) No fee may be charged to a student to receive the designation pursuant to the Section. Notwithstanding this prohibition, costs may be incurred by the student in demonstrating proficiency.
(Source: P.A. 99-780, eff. 8-12-16; 100-201, eff. 8-18-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.170)
    Sec. 2-3.170. Property tax relief pool grants.
    (a) As used in this Section,
    "EAV" means equalized assessed valuation as defined under Section 18-8.15 of this Code.
    "Property tax multiplier" equals one minus the square of the school district's Local Capacity Percentage, as defined in Section 18-8.15 of this Code.
    "Local capacity percentage multiplier" means one minus the school district's Local Capacity Percentage, as defined in Section 18-8.15.
    "State Board" means the State Board of Education.
    (b) Subject to appropriation, the State Board shall provide grants to eligible school districts that provide tax relief to the school district's residents, which may be no greater than 1% of EAV for a unit district, 0.69% of EAV for an elementary school district, or 0.31% of EAV for a high school district, as provided in this Section.
    (b-5) School districts may apply for property tax relief under this Section concurrently to setting their levy for the fiscal year. The intended relief may not be greater than 1% of the EAV for a unit district, 0.69% of the EAV for an elementary school district, or 0.31% of the EAV for a high school district, multiplied by the school district's local capacity percentage multiplier. The State Board shall process applications for relief, providing a grant to those districts with the highest operating tax rate, as determined by those districts with the highest percentage of the simple average operating tax rate of districts of the same type, either elementary, high school, or unit, first, in an amount equal to the intended relief multiplied by the property tax multiplier. The State Board shall provide grants to school districts in order of priority until the property tax relief pool is exhausted. If more school districts apply for relief under this subsection than there are funds available, the State Board must distribute the grants and prorate any remaining funds to the final school district that qualifies for grant relief. The abatement amount for that district must be equal to the grant amount divided by the property tax multiplier.
    If a school district receives the State Board's approval of a grant under this Section by March 1 of the fiscal year, the school district shall present a duly authorized and approved abatement resolution by March 30 of the fiscal year to the county clerk of each county in which the school files its levy, authorizing the county clerk to lower the school district's levy by the amount designated in its application to the State Board. When the preceding requisites are satisfied, the county clerk shall reduce the amount collected for the school district by the amount indicated in the school district's abatement resolution for that fiscal year.
    (c) (Blank).
    (d) School districts seeking grants under this Section shall apply to the State Board each year. All applications to the State Board for grants shall include the amount of the tax relief intended by the school district.
    (e) Each year, based on the most recent available data provided by school districts pursuant to Section 18-8.15 of this Code, the State Board shall calculate the order of priority for grant eligibility under subsection (b-5) and publish a list of the school districts eligible for relief. The State Board shall provide grants in the manner provided under subsection (b-5).
    (f) The State Board shall publish a final list of eligible grant recipients and provide payment of the grants by March 1 of each year.
    (g) If notice of eligibility from the State Board is received by a school district by March 1, then by March 30, the school district shall file an abatement of its property tax levy in an amount equal to the grant received under this Section divided by the property tax multiplier. Payment of all grant amounts shall be made by June 1 each fiscal year. The State Superintendent of Education shall establish the timeline in such cases in which notice cannot be made by March 1.
    (h) The total property tax relief allowable to a school district under this Section shall be calculated based on the total amount of reduction in the school district's aggregate extension. The total grant shall be equal to the reduction, multiplied by the property tax multiplier. The reduction shall be equal to 1% of a district's EAV for a unit school district, 0.69% for an elementary school district, or 0.31% for a high school district, multiplied by the school district's local capacity percentage multiplier.
    (i) If the State Board does not expend all appropriations allocated pursuant to this Section, then any remaining funds shall be allocated pursuant to Section 18-8.15 of this Code.
    (j) The State Board shall prioritize payments under Section 18-8.15 of this Code over payments under this Section, if necessary.
    (k) Any grants received by a school district shall be included in future calculations of that school district's Base Funding Minimum under Section 18-8.15 of this Code. Beginning with Fiscal Year 2020, if a school district receives a grant under this Section, the school district must present to the county clerk a duly authorized and approved abatement resolution by March 30 for the year in which the school district receives the grant and the successive fiscal year following the receipt of the grant, authorizing the county clerk to lower the school district's levy by the amount designated in its original application to the State Board. After receiving a resolution, the county clerk must reduce the amount collected for the school district by the amount indicated in the school district's abatement resolution for that fiscal year. If a school district does not abate in this amount for the successive fiscal year, the grant amount may not be included in the school district's Base Funding Minimum under Section 18-8.15 in the fiscal year following the tax year in which the abatement is not authorized and in any future fiscal year thereafter, and the county clerk must notify the State Board of the increase no later 30 days after it occurs.
    (l) In the immediate 2 consecutive tax years following receipt of a Property Tax Pool Relief Grant, the aggregate extension base of any school district receiving a grant under this Section, for purposes of the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law, shall include the tax relief the school district provided in the previous taxable year under this Section.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17; 100-582, eff. 3-23-18; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18; 101-17, eff. 6-14-19; 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.171)
    Sec. 2-3.171. Entrepreneurial skills teaching resources. The State Board of Education shall post resources regarding the teaching of entrepreneurial skills for use by school districts with secondary schools. The State Board of Education shall gather input from business groups and universities when developing the list of resources.
(Source: P.A. 100-174, eff. 1-1-18; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.172)
    Sec. 2-3.172. High-skilled manufacturing teaching resources. The State Board of Education shall post resources regarding the teaching of high-skilled manufacturing, to be used in high schools and vocational education programs.
(Source: P.A. 100-175, eff. 1-1-18; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.173)
    Sec. 2-3.173. Substitute teachers; recruiting firms.
    (a) In this Section, "recruiting firm" means a company with expertise in finding qualified applicants for positions and screening those potential workers for an employer.
    (b) By January 1, 2019, the State Board of Education shall implement a program and adopt rules to allow school districts to supplement their substitute teacher recruitment for elementary and secondary schools with the use of recruiting firms, subject to the other provisions of this Section. To qualify for the program, a school district shall demonstrate to the State Board that, because of the severity of its substitute teacher shortage, it is unable to find an adequate amount of substitute or retired teachers and has exhausted all other efforts. Substitute teachers provided by a recruiting firm must adhere to all mandated State laws, rules, and screening requirements for substitute teachers not provided by a recruiting firm and must be paid on the same wage scale as substitute teachers not provided by a recruiting firm. This Section shall not be construed to require school districts to use recruiting firms for substitute teachers. A school district may not use a recruiting firm under this Section to circumvent any collective bargaining agreements or State laws, rules, or screening requirements for teachers. A school district may not reduce the number of full-time staff members of a department as a result of hiring a substitute teacher recruiting firm. In the event of a teacher's strike, a school district may not use a recruiting firm to hire a substitute teacher.
    (c) A school district organized under Article 34 of this Code may contract with a substitute teacher recruiting firm under this Section only if the district meets the following requirements:
        (1) certifies to the State Board of Education that it
    	
has adequate funds to fill and pay for all substitute teacher positions;
        (2) prioritizes existing substitute teachers over
    	
substitute teachers from recruiting firms;
        (3) files copies of all substitute teacher contracts
    	
with the State Board of Education; and
        (4) requires that the substitute teacher recruiting
    	
firm file an annual report with the school district that would include the number of substitute teachers that were placed in the district, the total cost of the contract to the district, and the percentage of substitute teacher openings that were filled.
    (d) A substitute teacher recruiting firm may enter into an agreement with a labor organization that has a collective bargaining agreement with a school district.
(Source: P.A. 100-813, eff. 8-13-18; 101-81, eff. 7-12-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.174)
    Sec. 2-3.174. Supporting Future Teachers Program.
    (a) In this Section:
    "English learner" means a child included in the definition of "English learners" under Section 14C-2 of this Code.
    "Low-income student" means a student that would be included in an Organizational Unit's Low-Income Count, as calculated under Section 18-8.15 of this Code.
    "Program" means the Supporting Future Teachers Program established under this Section.
    "Qualified participant" means a high school graduate who: (i) can demonstrate proficiency in a language other than English or is a recipient of a State Seal of Biliteracy or, at any one time during pre-kindergarten through grade 12, was identified as a low-income student; and (ii) is a member of the community in which the participating school district is located. A "qualified participant" must be enrolled in an educator preparation program approved by the State Board of Education at a regionally accredited institution of higher education in this State.
    "State Board" means the State Board of Education.
    (b) Beginning with the 2019-2020 school year, the State Board shall establish and maintain the Supporting Future Teachers Program to assist qualified participants in acquiring a Professional Educator License.
    (c) Each participating school district shall partner with an educator preparation program approved by the State Board at a regionally accredited institution of higher education in this State. Each qualified participant enrolled in the Program through the school district must be enrolled at least part-time each semester at that institution of higher education in its educator preparation program and be working toward a Professional Educator License.
    (d) A qualified participant shall no longer qualify for the Program if at any time the participating school district or the institution of higher education determines that the qualified participant is no longer making substantial progress toward a degree in an approved educator preparation program.
    (e) Throughout each semester of participation in the Program, the qualified participant must be employed by the participating school district and working under the supervision of a school district employee. Duties of the qualified participant may include, but are not limited to (i) working in cooperation with his or her supervisor under this subsection (e) to create classroom curriculum and lesson plans and (ii) working with and mentoring English learners or low-income students on a one-on-one basis.
    Each participating school district may use appropriate State, federal, or local revenue to employ the qualified participant.
    (f) At the end of each school year of the Program, each participating school district shall submit data to the State Board detailing all of the following:
        (1) The number of qualified participants enrolled in
    	
the Program.
        (2) The costs associated with the Program.
        (3) The duties assigned to each qualified participant
    	
by his or her supervisor.
        (4) The current status of each qualified participant
    	
in his or her educator preparation program.
        (5) The qualified participant's Illinois Educator
    	
Identification Number, if available.
        (6) Any other information requested by the State
    	
Board.
    (g) Prior to the 2023-2024 school year, the State Board shall electronically submit a report to the Clerk of the House of Representatives and the Secretary of the Senate detailing the first 4 years of the program, including, but not limited to, the following information:
        (1) The participating school districts in the Program.
        (2) The number of qualified participants enrolled in
    	
the Program.
        (3) The costs associated with the Program per school
    	
district.
        (4) A summary of the duties assigned to qualified
    	
participants by school district supervisors.
        (5) Any other information as determined by the State
    	
Board.
    (h) The State Board may establish and adopt any rules necessary to implement this Section.
    (i) Nothing in this Section shall be construed to require a school district to participate in the Program.
(Source: P.A. 100-982, eff. 8-19-18; 101-81, eff. 7-12-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.175)
    Sec. 2-3.175. Registered apprenticeship program.
    (a) In this Section, "registered apprenticeship program" means an industry-based occupational training program of study with standards reviewed and approved by the United States Department of Labor that meets each of the following characteristics:
        (1) Apprentices in the program are at all times
    	
employed by a company participating in the program.
        (2) The program features a structured combination of
    	
on-the-job learning supported by related technical classroom instruction, met either by a high school or a public community college.
        (3) Apprentices in the program are paid a training
    	
wage of not less than the State minimum wage, which escalates throughout the life of the apprenticeship, and employment is continued with the company following conclusion of the apprenticeship for a period of not less than 2 years.
        (4) Apprentices in the program earn an
    	
industry-related occupational skills certificate and a high school diploma.
        (5) Apprentices in the program may earn postsecondary
    	
credit toward a certificate or degree, as applicable. "Registered apprenticeship program" does not include an apprenticeship program related to construction, as defined under the Employee Classification Act.
    (b) No later than 6 months after August 20, 2018 (the effective date of Public Act 100-992), the State Board of Education shall initiate a rulemaking proceeding to adopt rules as may be necessary to allow students of any high school in this State who are 16 years of age or older to participate in registered apprenticeship programs. The rules shall include the waiver of all non-academic requirements mandated for graduation from a high school under this Code that would otherwise prohibit or prevent a student from participating in a registered apprenticeship program.
(Source: P.A. 100-992, eff. 8-20-18; 101-81, eff. 7-12-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.176)
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-10)
    Sec. 2-3.176. Transfers to Governor's Grant Fund. In addition to any other transfers that may be provided for by law, the State Comptroller shall direct and the State Treasurer shall transfer from the SBE Federal Agency Services Fund and the SBE Federal Department of Education Fund into the Governor's Grant Fund such amounts as may be directed in writing by the State Board of Education.
(Source: P.A. 101-10, eff. 6-5-19.)
 
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-389)
    Sec. 2-3.176. Work-based learning database.
    (a) In this Section, "work-based learning" means an educational strategy that provides students with real-life work experiences in which they can apply academic and technical skills and develop their employability.
    (b) The State Board must develop a work-based learning database to help facilitate relationships between school districts and businesses and expand work-based learning in this State.
(Source: P.A. 101-389, eff. 8-16-19.)
 
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-413)
    Sec. 2-3.176. School safety and security grants. Subject to appropriation or private donations, the State Board of Education shall award grants to school districts to support school safety and security. Grant funds may be used for school security improvements, including professional development, safety-related upgrades to school buildings, equipment, including metal detectors and x-ray machines, and facilities, including school-based health centers. The State Board must prioritize the distribution of grants under this Section to school districts designated as Tier 1 or Tier 2 under Section 18-8.15.
(Source: P.A. 101-413, eff. 1-1-20.)
 
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-438)
    Sec. 2-3.176. Safe Schools and Healthy Learning Environments Grant Program.
    (a) The State Board of Education, subject to appropriation, is authorized to award competitive grants on an annual basis under a Safe Schools and Healthy Learning Environments Grant Program. The goal of this grant program is to promote school safety and healthy learning environments by providing schools with additional resources to implement restorative interventions and resolution strategies as alternatives to exclusionary discipline, and to address the full range of students' intellectual, social, emotional, physical, psychological, and moral developmental needs.
    (b) To receive a grant under this program, a school district must submit with its grant application a plan for implementing evidence-based and promising practices that are aligned with the goal of this program. The application may include proposals to (i) hire additional school support personnel, including, but not limited to, restorative justice practitioners, school psychologists, school social workers, and other mental and behavioral health specialists; (ii) use existing school-based resources, community-based resources, or other experts and practitioners to expand alternatives to exclusionary discipline, mental and behavioral health supports, wraparound services, or drug and alcohol treatment; and (iii) provide training for school staff on trauma-informed approaches to meeting students' developmental needs, addressing the effects of toxic stress, restorative justice approaches, conflict resolution techniques, and the effective utilization of school support personnel and community-based services. For purposes of this subsection, "promising practices" means practices that present, based on preliminary information, potential for becoming evidence-based practices.
    Grant funds may not be used to increase the use of school-based law enforcement or security personnel. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit school districts from involving law enforcement personnel when necessary and allowed by law.
    (c) The State Board of Education, subject to appropriation for the grant program, shall annually disseminate a request for applications to this program, and funds shall be distributed annually. The criteria to be considered by the State Board of Education in awarding the funds shall be (i) the average ratio of school support personnel to students in the target schools over the preceding 3 school years, with priority given to applications with a demonstrated shortage of school support personnel to meet student needs; and (ii) the degree to which the proposal articulates a comprehensive approach for reducing exclusionary discipline while building safe and healthy learning environments. Priority shall be given to school districts that meet the metrics under subsection (b) of Section 2-3.162.
    (d) The State Board of Education, subject to appropriation for the grant program, shall produce an annual report on the program in cooperation with the school districts participating in the program. The report shall include available quantitative information on the progress being made in reducing exclusionary discipline and the effects of the program on school safety and school climate. This report shall be posted on the State Board of Education's website by October 31 of each year, beginning in 2020.
    (e) The State Board of Education may adopt any rules necessary for the implementation of this program.
(Source: P.A. 101-438, eff. 8-20-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.177)
    Sec. 2-3.177. Transfers to DHS Special Purposes Trust Fund. In addition to any other transfers that may be provided for by law, the State Comptroller shall direct and the State Treasurer shall transfer from the SBE Federal Agency Services Fund into the DHS Special Purposes Trust Fund such amounts as may be directed in writing by the State Board of Education.
(Source: P.A. 101-10, eff. 6-5-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.178)
    Sec. 2-3.178. K-12 Recycling Grant Program.
    (a) Subject to appropriation, the State Board of Education must create and administer the K-12 Recycling Grant Program to provide grants to school districts for the implementation or improvement of a school's recycling program. A school district that applies for a grant under this Section may receive a maximum grant amount of $5,000 per school in that district and may use the grant funds only to implement or improve a school's recycling program.
    (b) The State Board must adopt rules to implement this Section.
(Source: P.A. 101-10, eff. 6-5-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.183)
    Sec. 2-3.183. Review of university admission coursework.
    (a) The State Board of Education shall make the review compiled under Section 9.40 of the Board of Higher Education Act available to the public on its Internet website.
    (b) To ensure that every public high school student understands the course expectations for admission into a public university in this State, a school district must make available to students in grades 8 through 12 and their parents or guardians the review compiled under Section 9.40 of the Board of Higher Education Act before the student's course schedule is finalized for the student's particular grade level.
    (c) To ensure that a public high school student is not excluded from enrolling in a public university in this State because of a lack of access to required or recommended coursework, beginning with the 2022-2023 school year and each school year thereafter, every public high school must provide access to each course identified in the review compiled under Section 9.40 of the Board of Higher Education Act to any of its students who request to enroll in the course. If the public high school is unable to offer the course through the school district, the public high school must find an alternative way to offer the course to the student, which may include partnering with another school district, a community college district, an institution of higher education, or some other course provider. No student shall be excluded from participation in a course identified in the review due to financial reasons. Any course offered pursuant to this Section as a dual credit course shall be developed and offered in accordance with the Dual Credit Quality Act.
(Source: P.A. 101-654, eff. 3-8-21.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.185)
    Sec. 2-3.185. Computer science standards and courses. On or before December 1, 2021, the State Board of Education shall:
        (1) develop or adopt rigorous learning standards in
    	
the area of computer science; and
        (2) analyze and revise, if appropriate, existing
    	
course titles dedicated to computer science or develop a short list of existing course titles that are recommended for computer science courses.
(Source: P.A. 101-654, eff. 3-8-21.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.186)
    Sec. 2-3.186. Freedom Schools; grant program.
    (a) The General Assembly recognizes and values the contributions that Freedom Schools make to enhance the lives of Black students. The General Assembly makes all of the following findings:
        (1) The fundamental goal of the Freedom Schools of
    	
the 1960s was to provide quality education for all students, to motivate active civic engagement, and to empower disenfranchised communities. The renowned and progressive curriculum of Freedom Schools allowed students of all ages to experience a new and liberating form of education that directly related to the imperatives of their lives, their communities, and the Freedom Movement.
        (2) Freedom Schools continue to demonstrate the
    	
proven benefits of critical civic engagement and intergenerational effects by providing historically disadvantaged students, including African American students and other students of color, with quality instruction that fosters student confidence, critical thinking, and social and emotional development.
        (3) Freedom Schools offer culturally relevant
    	
learning opportunities with the academic and social supports that Black children need by utilizing quality teaching, challenging and engaging curricula, wrap-around supports, a positive school climate, and strong ties to family and community. Freedom Schools have a clear focus on results.
        (4) Public schools serve a foundational role in the
    	
education of over 2,000,000 students in this State.
    (b) The State Board of Education shall establish a Freedom School network to supplement the learning taking place in public schools by creating a 6-week summer program with an organization with a mission to improve the odds for children in poverty that operates Freedom Schools in multiple states using a research-based and multicultural curriculum for disenfranchised communities most affected by the opportunity gap and learning loss caused by the pandemic, and by expanding the teaching of African American history, developing leadership skills, and providing an understanding of the tenets of the civil rights movement. The teachers in Freedom Schools must be from the local community, with an emphasis on historically disadvantaged youth, including African American students and other students of color, so that (i) these individuals have access to summer jobs and teaching experiences that serve as a long-term pipeline to educational careers and the hiring of minority educators in public schools, (ii) these individuals are elevated as content experts and community leaders, and (iii) Freedom School students have access to both mentorship and equitable educational resources.
    (c) A Freedom School shall intentionally and imaginatively implement strategies that focus on all of the following:
        (1) Racial justice and equity.
        (2) Transparency and building trusting
    	
relationships.
        (3) Self-determination and governance.
        (4) Building on community strengths and community
    	
wisdom.
        (5) Utilizing current data, best practices, and
    	
evidence.
        (6) Shared leadership and collaboration.
        (7) A reflective learning culture.
        (8) A whole-child approach to education.
        (9) Literacy.
    (d) The State Board of Education, in the establishment of Freedom Schools, shall strive for authentic parent and community engagement during the development of Freedom Schools and their curriculum. Authentic parent and community engagement includes all of the following:
        (1) A shared responsibility that values equal
    	
partnerships between families and professionals.
        (2) Ensuring that students and families who are
    	
directly impacted by Freedom School policies and practices are the decision-makers in the creation, design, implementation, and assessment of those policies and practices.
        (3) Genuine respect for the culture and diversity
    	
of families.
        (4) Relationships that center around the goal of
    	
supporting family well-being and children's development and learning.
    (e) Subject to appropriation, the State Board of Education shall establish and implement a grant program to provide grants to public schools, public community colleges, and not-for-profit, community-based organizations to facilitate improved educational outcomes for Black students in grades pre-kindergarten through 12 in alignment with the integrity and practices of the Freedom School model established during the civil rights movement. Grant recipients under the program may include, but are not limited to, entities that work with the Children's Defense Fund or offer established programs with proven results and outcomes. The State Board of Education shall award grants to eligible entities that demonstrate a likelihood of reasonable success in achieving the goals identified in the grant application, including, but not limited to, all of the following:
        (1) Engaging, culturally relevant, and challenging
    	
curricula.
        (2) High-quality teaching.
        (3) Wrap-around supports and opportunities.
        (4) Positive discipline practices, such as
    	
restorative justice.
        (5) Inclusive leadership.
    (f) The Freedom Schools Fund is created as a special fund in the State treasury. the Fund shall consist of appropriations from the General Revenue Fund, grant funds from the federal government, and donations from educational and private foundations. All money in the Fund shall be used, subject to appropriation, by the State Board of Education for the purposes of this Section and to support related activities.
    (g) The State Board of Education may adopt any rules necessary to implement this Section.
(Source: P.A. 101-654, eff. 3-8-21.)

    (105 ILCS 5/2-3.187)
    (Section scheduled to be repealed on January 1, 2023)
    Sec. 2-3.187. Inclusive American History Commission.
    (a) The Inclusive American History Commission is created to provide assistance to the State Board of Education in revising its social science learning standards under subsection (a-5) of Section 2-3.25.
    (b) The State Board of Education shall convene the Inclusive American History Commission to do all of the following:
        (1) Review available resources for use in school
    	
districts that reflect the racial and ethnic diversity of this State and country. The resources identified by the Commission may be posted on the State Board of Education's Internet website.
        (2) Provide guidance for each learning standard
    	
developed for educators on how to ensure that instruction and content are not biased to value specific cultures, time periods, and experiences over other cultures, time periods, and experiences.
        (3) Develop guidance, tools, and support for
    	
professional learning on how to locate and utilize resources for non-dominant cultural narratives and sources of historical information.
    (c) The Commission shall consist of all of the following members:
        (1) One Representative appointed by the Speaker of
    	
the House of Representatives.
        (2) One Representative appointed by the Minority
    	
Leader of the House of Representatives.
        (3) One Senator appointed by the President of the
    	
Senate.
        (4) One Senator appointed by the Minority Leader of
    	
the Senate.
        (5) Two members who are history scholars appointed by
    	
the State Superintendent of Education.
        (6) Eight members who are teachers at schools in this
    	
State recommended by professional teachers' organizations and appointed by the State Superintendent of Education.
        (7) One representative of the State Board of
    	
Education appointed by the State Superintendent of Education who shall serve as chairperson.
        (8) One member who represents a statewide
    	
organization that represents south suburban school districts appointed by the State Superintendent of Education.
        (9) One member who represents a west suburban school
    	
district appointed by the State Superintendent of Education.
        (10) One member who represents a school district
    	
organized under Article 34 appointed by the State Superintendent of Education.
        (11) One member who represents a statewide
    	
organization that represents school librarians appointed by the State Superintendent of Education.
        (12) One member who represents a statewide
    	
organization that represents principals appointed by the State Superintendent of Education.
        (13) One member who represents a statewide
    	
organization that represents superintendents appointed by the State Superintendent of Education.
        (14) One member who represents a statewide
    	
organization that represents school boards appointed by the State Superintendent of Education.
    Members appointed to the Commission must reflect the racial, ethnic, and geographic diversity of this State.
    (d) Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for reasonable expenses from funds appropriated to the State Board of Education for that purpose, including travel, subject to the rules of the appropriate travel control board.
    (e) The State Board of Education shall provide administrative and other support to the Commission.
    (f) The Commission must submit a report about its work to the State Board of Education, the Governor, and the General Assembly on or before December 31, 2021. The Commission is dissolved upon the submission of its report.
    (g) This Section is repealed on January 1, 2023.
(Source: P.A. 101-654, eff. 3-8-21.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 3 heading)
ARTICLE 3. REGIONAL
SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS

    (105 ILCS 5/3-0.01) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-0.01)
    Sec. 3-0.01. "County superintendent of schools" and "regional superintendent of schools" defined - Application of Article.
    (a) Except as otherwise provided by subsection (b), after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1975, the chief administrative officer of an educational service region shall be designated and referred to as the "regional superintendent of schools" or the "regional superintendent" and after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1993 the office held by the chief administrative officer shall be designated and referred to as the "regional office of education". For purposes of the School Code and except as otherwise provided by subsection (b), any reference to "county superintendent of schools" or "county superintendent" means the regional superintendent of schools.
    (b) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Article, but subject to subsection (b-1), in educational service regions containing 2,000,000 or more inhabitants, the office of regional superintendent of schools is abolished. Subject to Section 2-3.105 of this Code, all rights, powers, duties and responsibilities theretofore vested by law in, and exercised and performed by the regional superintendent of schools and by any assistant regional superintendents or other assistants or employees in the office of the regional superintendent of schools being abolished shall be vested in, exercised and performed by the chief administrative officer of the educational service centers established pursuant to Section 2-3.62 of this Code for any educational service region containing 2,000,000 or more inhabitants. Beginning on the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 96th General Assembly, in an educational service region containing 2,000,000 or more inhabitants: (i) all books, records, maps, papers and other documents belonging to or subject to the control or disposition of the former regional superintendent of schools by virtue of his office shall be transferred and delivered to the State Board of Education; (ii) possession or control over all moneys, deposits and accounts in the possession or subject to the control or disposition of the former regional superintendent of schools by virtue of his office, including but not limited to undistributed or unexpended moneys drawn from, and all amounts on deposit in, the county, institute and supervisory expense funds, shall be transferred to and placed under the control and disposition of the State Board of Education, excepting only those moneys or accounts, if any, the source of which is the county treasury, for proper redistribution to the educational service centers; and (iii) all other equipment, furnishings, supplies and other personal property belonging to or subject to the control or disposition of the former regional superintendent of schools by virtue of his office, excepting only those items which were provided by the county board, shall be transferred and delivered to the State Board of Education. Any reference in this Code to "regional superintendent of schools" or "regional superintendent", or "county superintendent of schools" or "county superintendent" shall mean, with respect to any educational service region containing 2,000,000 or more inhabitants in which the office of regional superintendent of schools is abolished, the chief administrative officer of the educational service centers established pursuant to Section 2-3.62 of this Code for the educational service region. Upon and after the first Monday of August 1995, references in this Code and elsewhere to educational service regions of 2,000,000 or fewer inhabitants shall exclude any educational service region containing a city of 500,000 or more inhabitants and references in this Code and elsewhere to educational service regions of 2,000,000 or more inhabitants shall mean an educational service region containing a city of 500,000 or more inhabitants regardless of the actual population of the region.
    (b-1) References to "regional superintendent" shall also include the chief administrative officer of the educational service centers established under Section 2-3.62 of this Code and serving that portion of a Class II county outside a city of 500,000 or more population.
    (c) This Article applies to the regional superintendent of a multicounty educational service region formed under Article 3A as well as to a single county or partial county region, except that in case of conflict between the provisions of this Article and of Article 3A in the case of a multicounty region, the provisions of Article 3A shall apply. Any reference to "county" or to "educational service region" in this Article means a regional office of education.
(Source: P.A. 98-647, eff. 6-13-14.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-1)
    Sec. 3-1. Election; eligibility. Quadrennially there shall be elected in every county, except those which have been consolidated into a multicounty educational service region under Article 3A and except those having a population of 2,000,000 or more inhabitants, a regional superintendent of schools, who shall enter upon the discharge of his duties on the first Monday of August next after his election; provided, however, that the term of office of each regional superintendent of schools in office on June 30, 2003 is terminated on July 1, 2003, except that an incumbent regional superintendent of schools shall continue to serve until his successor is elected and qualified, and each regional superintendent of schools elected at the general election in 2002 and every four years thereafter shall assume office on the first day of July next after his election. No one is eligible to file his petition at any primary election for the nomination as candidate for the office of regional superintendent of schools nor to enter upon the duties of such office either by election or appointment unless he possesses the following qualifications: (1) he is of good character, (2) he has a master's degree, (3) he has earned at least 20 semester hours of credit in professional education at the graduate level, (4) he holds a valid all grade supervisory license, a valid State limited supervisory license, a valid state life supervisory license, or a valid administrative license, (5) he has had at least 4 years experience in teaching, and (6) he was engaged for at least 2 years of the 4 previous years in full time teaching or supervising in the common public schools or serving as a county superintendent of schools or regional superintendent of schools for an educational service region in the State of Illinois.
    No petition of any candidate for nomination for the office of regional superintendent of schools may be filed and no such candidate's name may be placed on a primary or general election ballot, unless such candidate files as part of his petition a certificate from the State Board of Education certifying that from the records of its office such candidate has the qualifications required by this Section; however, any incumbent filing his petition for nomination for a succeeding term of office shall not be required to attach such certificate to his petition of candidacy.
    Nomination papers filed under this Section are not valid unless the candidate named therein files with the county clerk or State Board of Elections a statement of economic interests as required by the Illinois Governmental Ethics Act. Such receipt shall be so filed either previously during the calendar year in which his nomination papers were filed or within the period for the filing of nomination papers in accordance with the general election law.
    The changes in qualifications made by Public Act 76-1563 do not affect the right of an incumbent to seek reelection.
    On and after July 1, 1994, the provisions of this Section shall have no application in any educational service region having a population of 2,000,000 or more inhabitants; provided further that no election shall be held in November of 1994 or at any other time after July 1, 1992 for the office of regional superintendent of schools in any county or educational service region having a population of 2,000,000 or more inhabitants.
(Source: P.A. 99-30, eff. 7-10-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-1.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-1.1)
    Sec. 3-1.1. Eligible voters. Whenever a unit school district is located in more than one educational service region, a qualified elector residing in that unit school district but outside of the educational service region administered by the regional superintendent of schools having supervision and control over that unit school district shall be eligible to vote in any election held to elect the regional superintendent of schools of the educational service region that is administered by the regional superintendent of schools who has supervision and control over that unit school district, but the elector shall not also be eligible to vote in the election held to elect the regional superintendent of schools of the educational service region in which the elector resides.
    Not less than 100 days before each general primary election, the regional superintendent of schools shall certify to the State Board of Elections a list of each unit school district under his or her supervision and control and each county in which all or any part of each of those districts is located. The State Board of Elections shall certify each of those unit school districts and counties to the appropriate election authorities within 20 days after receiving the list certified by the regional superintendent of schools.
    The election authority in a single county educational service region whose regional superintendent of schools exercises supervision and control over a unit school district that is located in that single county educational service region and in one or more other educational service regions shall certify to the election authority of each of those other educational service regions in which the unit school district is located the candidates for the office of the regional superintendent of schools exercising supervision and control over that unit school district.
(Source: P.A. 87-328; 88-535.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-2)
    Sec. 3-2. Oath of office - Bond - Salary. Before entering upon his or her duties a regional superintendent of schools shall take and subscribe the oath prescribed by the Constitution and execute a bond payable to the People of the State of Illinois with 2 or more responsible persons having an interest in real estate as sureties (or, if the county is self-insured, the county through its self-insurance program may provide bonding), to be approved by the county board in a penalty of not less than $100,000, conditioned upon the faithful discharge of his or her duties and upon the delivery to his or her successor in office of all monies, books, papers and property in his or her custody as such regional superintendent of schools.
    This bond shall be filed in the office of the county clerk, and action upon it may be maintained by any corporate body interested, for the benefit of any township or fund injured by any breach of its condition.
    If any vacancy in the office of regional superintendent of schools occurs, such vacancy shall be filled in the manner provided by Section 3A-6.
    Regional Superintendents of Schools shall receive the salary provided by Section 3-2.5.
    On and after July 1, 1994, the provisions of this Section shall have no application in any educational service region having a population of 2,000,000 or more inhabitants.
(Source: P.A. 88-387; 89-233, eff. 1-1-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-2.5)
    Sec. 3-2.5. Salaries.
    (a) Except as otherwise provided in this Section, the regional superintendents of schools shall receive for their services an annual salary according to the population, as determined by the last preceding federal census, of the region they serve, as set out in the following schedule:
SALARIES OF REGIONAL SUPERINTENDENTS OF SCHOOLS	
    POPULATION OF REGION           	ANNUAL SALARY
    61,000 to 99,999              	$78,000
    100,000 to 999,999            	$81,500
    1,000,000 and over            	$83,500
    The changes made by Public Act 86-98 in the annual salary that the regional superintendents of schools shall receive for their services shall apply to the annual salary received by the regional superintendents of schools during each of their elected terms of office that commence after July 26, 1989 and before the first Monday of August, 1995.
    The changes made by Public Act 89-225 in the annual salary that regional superintendents of schools shall receive for their services shall apply to the annual salary received by the regional superintendents of schools during their elected terms of office that commence after August 4, 1995 and end on August 1, 1999.
    The changes made by this amendatory Act of the 91st General Assembly in the annual salary that the regional superintendents of schools shall receive for their services shall apply to the annual salary received by the regional superintendents of schools during each of their elected terms of office that commence on or after August 2, 1999.
    Beginning July 1, 2000, the salary that the regional superintendent of schools receives for his or her services shall be adjusted annually to reflect the percentage increase, if any, in the most recent Consumer Price Index, as defined and officially reported by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, except that no annual increment may exceed 2.9%. If the percentage of change in the Consumer Price Index is a percentage decrease, the salary that the regional superintendent of schools receives shall not be adjusted for that year.
    When regional superintendents are authorized by the School Code to appoint assistant regional superintendents, the assistant regional superintendent shall receive an annual salary based on his or her qualifications and computed as a percentage of the salary of the regional superintendent to whom he or she is assistant, as set out in the following schedule:
SALARIES OF ASSISTANT REGIONAL SUPERINTENDENTS	
    QUALIFICATIONS OF             	PERCENTAGE OF SALARY
    ASSISTANT REGIONAL            	OF REGIONAL
    SUPERINTENDENT               	SUPERINTENDENT
    Bachelor's degree plus	
    State license valid	
    for supervising.              	75%    
    Master's degree plus	
    State license valid	
    for supervising.              	90%    
    However, in any region in which the appointment of more than one assistant regional superintendent is authorized, whether by Section 3-15.10 of this Code or otherwise, not more than one assistant may be compensated at the 90% rate and any other assistant shall be paid at not exceeding the 75% rate, in each case depending on the qualifications of the assistant.
    The salaries provided in this Section plus an amount for other employment-related compensation or benefits for regional superintendents and assistant regional superintendents are payable monthly by the State Board of Education out of the Personal Property Tax Replacement Fund through a specific appropriation to that effect in the State Board of Education budget. The State Comptroller in making his or her warrant to any county for the amount due it from the Personal Property Tax Replacement Fund shall deduct from it the several amounts for which warrants have been issued to the regional superintendent, and any assistant regional superintendent, of the educational service region encompassing the county since the preceding apportionment from the Personal Property Tax Replacement Fund.
    County boards may provide for additional compensation for the regional superintendent or the assistant regional superintendents, or for each of them, to be paid quarterly from the county treasury.
    (b) (Blank).
    (c) If the State pays all or any portion of the employee contributions required under Section 16-152 of the Illinois Pension Code for employees of the State Board of Education, it shall also, subject to appropriation in the State Board of Education budget for such payments to Regional Superintendents and Assistant Regional Superintendents, pay the employee contributions required of regional superintendents of schools and assistant regional superintendents of schools on the same basis, but excluding any contributions based on compensation that is paid by the county rather than the State.
    This subsection (c) applies to contributions based on payments of salary earned after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 91st General Assembly, except that in the case of an elected regional superintendent of schools, this subsection does not apply to contributions based on payments of salary earned during a term of office that commenced before the effective date of this amendatory Act.
    (d) References to "regional superintendent" in this Section shall also include the chief administrative officer of the educational service centers established under Section 2-3.62 of this Code and serving that portion of a Class II county school unit outside of a city with a population of 500,000 or more inhabitants. References to "assistant regional superintendent" in this Section shall include one assistant appointed by the chief administrative officer of the educational service centers established under Section 2-3.62 of this Code and serving that portion of a Class II county school unit outside of a city with a population of 500,000 or more inhabitants. For the purposes of calculating regional superintendent and assistant regional superintendent salaries for educational service centers established under Section 2-3.62 of this Code, populations shall be established by subtracting from the total county population the population of a city with 500,000 or more inhabitants, divided by the number of educational service centers in the county.
(Source: P.A. 99-30, eff. 7-10-15; 100-294, eff. 1-1-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-3) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-3)
    Sec. 3-3. Practice of other profession. It is unlawful for any county superintendent of schools to practice or to hold himself out as practicing any other profession. Violation of this section shall be a cause of forfeiture of office.
    On and after July 1, 1994, the provisions of this Section shall have no application in any educational service region having a population of 2,000,000 or more inhabitants.
(Source: P.A. 87-654; 87-1251.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-5) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-5)
    Sec. 3-5. Report of official acts. The county superintendent shall present under oath or affirmation to the county board at its meeting in September and as nearly quarterly thereafter as it may have regular or special meetings, a report of all his acts as county superintendent, including a list of all the schools visited with the dates of visitation.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-6) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-6)
    Sec. 3-6. Financial report - Presentation of books and vouchers for inspection. The regional superintendent shall report, in writing, to the county board, on or before January 1 of each year, stating, (1) the balance on hand at the time of the last report, and all receipts since that date, with the sources from which they were derived; (2) the amount distributed to each of the school treasurers in his county; (3) any balance on hand. At the same time he shall present for inspection his books and vouchers for all expenditures, and submit in writing a statement of the condition of the institute fund and of any other funds in his care, custody or control.
(Source: P.A. 81-624.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-6.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-6.1)
    Sec. 3-6.1. Presentation of records for financial audit. Each regional superintendent of schools, whether for a multicounty or for a single county educational service region, shall present for inspection or otherwise make available to the Auditor General, or to the agents designated by the Auditor General, all financial statements, books, vouchers and other records required to be so presented or made available pursuant to Section 2-3.17a and the rules and regulations of the Auditor General pursuant to that Section.
(Source: P.A. 92-544, eff. 6-12-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-7) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-7)
    Sec. 3-7. Failure to prepare and forward information. If the trustees of schools of any township in Class II county school units, or any school district which forms a part of a Class II county school unit but which is not subject to the jurisdiction of the trustees of schools of any township in which such district is located, or any school district in any Class I county school units fail to prepare and forward or cause to be prepared and forwarded to the regional superintendent of schools, reports required by this Act, the regional superintendent of schools shall furnish such information or he shall employ a person or persons to furnish such information, as far as practicable. Such person shall have access to the books, records and papers of the school district to enable him or them to prepare such reports, and the school district shall permit such person or persons to examine such books, records and papers at such time and such place as such person or persons may desire for the purpose aforesaid. For such services the regional superintendent of schools shall bill the district an amount to cover the cost of preparation of such reports if he employs a person to prepare such reports.
    Each school district shall, as of June 30 of each year, cause an audit of its accounts to be made by a person lawfully qualified to practice public accounting as regulated by the Illinois Public Accounting Act. Such audit shall include financial statements of the district applicable to the type of records required by other sections of this Act and in addition shall set forth the scope of audit and shall include the professional opinion signed by the auditor, or if such an opinion is denied by the auditor, shall set forth the reasons for such denial. Each school district shall on or before October 15 of each year, submit an original and one copy of such audit to the regional superintendent of schools in the educational service region having jurisdiction in which case the regional superintendent of schools shall be relieved of responsibility in regard to the accounts of the school district. If any school district fails to supply the regional superintendent of schools with a copy of such audit report on or before October 15, or within such time extended by the regional superintendent of schools from that date, not to exceed 60 days, then it shall be the responsibility of the regional superintendent of schools having jurisdiction to cause such audit to be made by employing an accountant licensed to practice in the State of Illinois to conduct such audit and shall bill the district for such services, or shall with the personnel of his office make such audit to his satisfaction and bill the district for such service. In the latter case, if the audit is made by personnel employed in the office of the regional superintendent of schools having jurisdiction, then the regional superintendent of schools shall not be relieved of the responsibility as to the accountability of the school district. The copy of the audit shall be forwarded by the regional superintendent to the State Board of Education on or before November 15 of each year and shall be filed by the State Board of Education.
    Each school district that is the administrative district for several school districts operating under a joint agreement as authorized by this Act shall, as of June 30 each year, cause an audit of the accounts of the joint agreement to be made by a person lawfully qualified to practice public accounting as regulated by the Illinois Public Accounting Act. Such audit shall include financial statements of the operation of the joint agreement applicable to the type of records required by this Act and, in addition, shall set forth the scope of the audit and shall include the professional opinion signed by the auditor, or if such an opinion is denied, the auditor shall set forth the reason for such denial. Each administrative district of a joint agreement shall on or before October 15 each year, submit an original and one copy of such audit to the regional superintendent of schools in the educational service region having jurisdiction in which case the regional superintendent of schools shall be relieved of responsibility in regard to the accounts of the joint agreement. The copy of the audit shall be forwarded by the regional superintendent to the State Board of Education on or before November 15 of each year and shall be filed by the State Board of Education. The cost of such an audit shall be apportioned among and paid by the several districts who are parties to the joint agreement, in the same manner as other costs and expenses accruing to the districts jointly.
    The State Board of Education shall determine the adequacy of the audits. All audits shall be kept on file in the office of the State Board of Education.
(Source: P.A. 86-1441; 87-473.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-8) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-8)
    Sec. 3-8. School treasurer's bond - Duties of regional superintendent. Whenever the bond of any school treasurer, approved by the trustees of schools or school board as required by law, is filed with the regional superintendent of schools, he shall carefully examine it, and if it is found to be in all respects according to law, and the sureties sufficient, he shall endorse his approval thereon, and file it with the papers of his office; but if the bond is in any respect defective, or if the penalty is or sureties are insufficient, he shall return it for correction. When the bond has been received and filed, the superintendent shall, on demand, deliver to the school treasurer a written statement certifying that his bond has been approved and filed and that the school treasurer is entitled to the care and custody, on demand, of all moneys and securities belonging to the township or district for which he is treasurer and all books and papers pertaining to his office. The regional superintendent of schools shall file with the State Board of Education before September 1 in each year an affidavit showing which treasurers of school districts under his supervision and control are properly bonded.
(Source: P.A. 81-1508.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-9) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-9)
    Sec. 3-9. School funds; apportionment and payment. Whenever the regional superintendent receives amounts due to local school districts, the regional superintendent shall apportion and distribute the moneys to the appropriate local school districts as directed. No part of the State or other school funding, however, shall be paid to any school treasurer or other persons authorized to receive it unless such treasurer has filed the required bond, or if reelected, has renewed the bond and filed it as required by law.
(Source: P.A. 95-496, eff. 8-28-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-9.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-9.1)
    Sec. 3-9.1. Investment of funds. Funds of the educational service region are public funds within the meaning of the Public Funds Investment Act and may be invested by the educational service region as provided in that Act, except as otherwise provided in this Code.
    Any educational service region, with the approval of its regional superintendent of schools, is authorized to enter into agreements of any definite or indefinite term regarding the deposit, redeposit, investment, reinvestment or withdrawal of educational service region funds, including, without limitation, agreements with other educational service regions, agreements with community college districts authorized by Section 3-47 of the Public Community College Act and agreements with township and school treasurers authorized by Section 8-7 of this Code.
    Each educational service region is permitted to (i) combine moneys of the educational service region for the purpose of investing the moneys and (ii) join with other educational service regions, community college districts, and township and school treasurers in investing educational service region funds, community college funds and school funds. Those joint investments shall be made only in investments authorized by law for the investment of educational service region funds or, in the case of investments made jointly with community colleges and school and township treasurers, in investments authorized by law for the investment of educational service region funds, community college funds and school funds. When moneys of more than one fund of a single educational service region are combined for investment purposes or when moneys of an educational service region are combined with moneys of other educational service regions or moneys of community college districts and school districts, the moneys combined for that purpose shall be accounted for separately in all respects, and the earnings from that investment shall be separately and individually computed and recorded, and credited to the fund or educational service region, community college district or school district, as the case may be, for which the investment was acquired.
(Source: P.A. 87-968; 88-641, eff. 9-9-94.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-9.5)
    Sec. 3-9.5. Interfund loans allowed. A regional office of education is allowed to make interfund loans. If a regional office of education makes an interfund loan, then it must repay the loan by the end of the fiscal year.
(Source: P.A. 92-169, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-10) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-10)
    Sec. 3-10. Controversies - opinion and advice - Appeal. In all controversies arising under the school law, the opinion and advice of the regional superintendent shall first be sought, whence appeal may be taken upon a written statement of facts certified by the regional superintendent to the State Board of Education.
(Source: P.A. 81-1508.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-11) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-11)
    Sec. 3-11. Institutes or inservice training workshops. In counties of less than 2,000,000 inhabitants, the regional superintendent may arrange for or conduct district, regional, or county institutes, or equivalent professional educational experiences, not more than 4 days annually. Of those 4 days, 2 days may be used as a teacher's and educational support personnel workshop, when approved by the regional superintendent, up to 2 days may be used for conducting parent-teacher conferences, or up to 2 days may be utilized as parental institute days as provided in Section 10-22.18d. Educational support personnel may be exempt from a workshop if the workshop is not relevant to the work they do. A school district may use one of its 4 institute days on the last day of the school term. "Institute" or "Professional educational experiences" means any educational gathering, demonstration of methods of instruction, visitation of schools or other institutions or facilities, sexual abuse and sexual assault awareness seminar, or training in First Aid (which may include cardiopulmonary resuscitation or defibrillator training) held or approved by the regional superintendent and declared by him to be an institute day, or parent-teacher conferences. With the concurrence of the State Superintendent of Education, he or she may employ such assistance as is necessary to conduct the institute. Two or more adjoining counties may jointly hold an institute. Institute instruction shall be free to holders of licenses good in the county or counties holding the institute and to those who have paid an examination fee and failed to receive a license.
    In counties of 2,000,000 or more inhabitants, the regional superintendent may arrange for or conduct district, regional, or county inservice training workshops, or equivalent professional educational experiences, not more than 4 days annually. Of those 4 days, 2 days may be used as a teacher's and educational support personnel workshop, when approved by the regional superintendent, up to 2 days may be used for conducting parent-teacher conferences, or up to 2 days may be utilized as parental institute days as provided in Section 10-22.18d. Educational support personnel may be exempt from a workshop if the workshop is not relevant to the work they do. A school district may use one of those 4 days on the last day of the school term. "Inservice Training Workshops" or "Professional educational experiences" means any educational gathering, demonstration of methods of instruction, visitation of schools or other institutions or facilities, sexual abuse and sexual assault awareness seminar, or training in First Aid (which may include cardiopulmonary resuscitation or defibrillator training) held or approved by the regional superintendent and declared by him to be an inservice training workshop, or parent-teacher conferences. With the concurrence of the State Superintendent of Education, he may employ such assistance as is necessary to conduct the inservice training workshop. With the approval of the regional superintendent, 2 or more adjoining districts may jointly hold an inservice training workshop. In addition, with the approval of the regional superintendent, one district may conduct its own inservice training workshop with subject matter consultants requested from the county, State or any State institution of higher learning.
    Such teachers institutes as referred to in this Section may be held on consecutive or separate days at the option of the regional superintendent having jurisdiction thereof.
    Whenever reference is made in this Act to "teachers institute", it shall be construed to include the inservice training workshops or equivalent professional educational experiences provided for in this Section.
    Any institute advisory committee existing on April 1, 1995, is dissolved and the duties and responsibilities of the institute advisory committee are assumed by the regional office of education advisory board.
    Districts providing inservice training programs shall constitute inservice committees, 1/2 of which shall be teachers, 1/4 school service personnel and 1/4 administrators to establish program content and schedules.
    The teachers institutes shall include teacher training committed to (i) peer counseling programs and other anti-violence and conflict resolution programs, including without limitation programs for preventing at risk students from committing violent acts, and (ii) educator ethics and teacher-student conduct. Beginning with the 2009-2010 school year, the teachers institutes shall include instruction on prevalent student chronic health conditions. Beginning with the 2016-2017 school year, the teachers institutes shall include, at least once every 2 years, instruction on the federal Americans with Disabilities Act as it pertains to the school environment.
(Source: P.A. 99-30, eff. 7-10-15; 99-616, eff. 7-22-16.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-11.5)
    Sec. 3-11.5. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11. Repealed by P.A. 99-30, eff. 7-10-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-12) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-12)
    Sec. 3-12. Institute fund.
    (a) All license registration fees and a portion of renewal and duplicate fees shall be kept by the regional superintendent as described in Section 21-16 or 21B-40 of this Code, together with a record of the names of the persons paying them. Such fees shall be deposited into the institute fund and shall be used by the regional superintendent to defray expenses associated with the work of the regional professional development review committees established pursuant to paragraph (2) of subsection (g) of Section 21-14 of this Code to advise the regional superintendent, upon his or her request, and to hear appeals relating to the renewal of teaching licenses, in accordance with Section 21-14 of this Code; to defray expenses connected with improving the technology necessary for the efficient processing of licenses; to defray all costs associated with the administration of teaching licenses; to defray expenses incidental to teachers' institutes, workshops or meetings of a professional nature that are designed to promote the professional growth of teachers or for the purpose of defraying the expense of any general or special meeting of teachers or school personnel of the region, which has been approved by the regional superintendent.
    (b) In addition to the use of moneys in the institute fund to defray expenses under subsection (a) of this Section, the State Superintendent of Education, as authorized under Section 2-3.105 of this Code, shall use moneys in the institute fund to defray all costs associated with the administration of teaching licenses within a city having a population exceeding 500,000. Moneys in the institute fund may also be used by the State Superintendent of Education to support educator recruitment and retention programs within a city having a population exceeding 500,000, to support educator preparation programs within a city having a population exceeding 500,000 as those programs seek national accreditation, and to provide professional development aligned with the requirements set forth in Section 21B-45 of this Code within a city having a population exceeding 500,000. A majority of the moneys in the institute fund must be dedicated to the timely and efficient processing of applications and for the renewal of licenses.
    (c) The regional superintendent shall on or before January 1 of each year publish in a newspaper of general circulation published in the region or shall post in each school building under his jurisdiction an accounting of (1) the balance on hand in the institute fund at the beginning of the previous year; (2) all receipts within the previous year deposited in the fund, with the sources from which they were derived; (3) the amount distributed from the fund and the purposes for which such distributions were made; and (4) the balance on hand in the fund.
(Source: P.A. 99-58, eff. 7-16-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-13) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-13)
    Sec. 3-13. Truant officer - Duties. Each county superintendent of schools shall appoint a county truant officer. Such appointee shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the county board, together with his necessary traveling expenses, to be paid out of the county treasury. He shall file his acceptance with the county clerk and shall take and subscribe an oath of office. He shall perform the duties of truant officer in all the school districts of the county; provided, that the school board in any school district may appoint one or more truant officers and fix his or their compensation, which shall be paid by the district.
    The county superintendent of schools shall furnish the county truant officer, at the opening of the schools, with a list of the teachers and superintendents employed in his county other than in school districts that employ truant officers.
(Source: P.A. 88-50.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-13.5)
    Sec. 3-13.5. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 96-798, eff. 10-28-09. Repealed internally, eff. 8-2-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-14) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-14)
    Sec. 3-14. Duties of regional superintendent. The regional superintendent of schools shall perform the duties enumerated in the following Sections preceding Section 3-15.
(Source: P.A. 93-404, eff. 8-1-03.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-14.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-14.1)
    Sec. 3-14.1. New bond. To execute, upon notice by the county board, a new bond, conditioned and approved as the first bond.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-14.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-14.2)
    Sec. 3-14.2. Supervision and control of school districts. Except in regions established within that portion of a Class II county school unit outside of a city of 500,000 or more inhabitants, the county superintendent of schools shall exercise supervision and control over all school districts within the county. If a district is divided by a county line or lines the county superintendent in the county where the majority of the children attend school at the time the district is organized shall exercise supervision and control over all aspects of supervision, reports, and financial accounting of the district until it has been determined by the State Superintendent of Education that 60 per cent of the children attend school in another county or that a majority of the children have attended a school in another county for three consecutive years and the school board has adopted a resolution requesting the supervision and control be transferred to the county superintendent in the county in which the majority of children attend school. The county superintendent under whose direction a school district has been established shall retain supervision and control until July 1 following the date of the election establishing the district. Whenever a change in supervision and control shall result from a change in school district boundaries, population shifts, or other cause, such change in supervision and control shall not be effective until July 1 following the date of its determination. All references to the county superintendent of schools, in relation to school districts, in this Act shall be interpreted to mean the county superintendent of schools having supervision and control of the district or districts as defined in this Section.
(Source: P.A. 96-893, eff. 7-1-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-14.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-14.3)
    Sec. 3-14.3. Township fund lands. To sell township fund lands, issue certificates of purchase, report to the county board and the Secretary of State in the manner provided in Article 15 of this Code, and perform all other duties pertaining thereto.
(Source: P.A. 95-496, eff. 8-28-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-14.4)
    Sec. 3-14.4. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31. Repealed by P.A. 95-496, eff. 8-28-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-14.5)
    Sec. 3-14.5. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31. Repealed by P.A. 95-496, eff. 8-28-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-14.6) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-14.6)
    Sec. 3-14.6. Directions to teacher and school officers. To give teachers and school officers such directions in the science, art and methods of teaching, and in regard to courses of study, as he deems expedient.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-14.7) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-14.7)
    Sec. 3-14.7. Official adviser and assistant of school officers and teachers. To act as the official adviser and assistant of the school officers and teachers in his region. In the performance of this duty he shall carry out the advice of the State Board of Education.
(Source: P.A. 81-1508.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-14.8) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-14.8)
    Sec. 3-14.8. Teachers' institute and other meetings. To conduct a teachers' institute, to insure that instruction in the warning signs of suicidal behavior in adolescents and teens and intervention techniques are offered at such an institute, to aid and encourage the formation of other teachers' meetings, and to assist in their management.
(Source: P.A. 85-297.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-14.9) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-14.9)
    Sec. 3-14.9. Elevation of standard of teaching - Improvement of schools. To labor in every practicable way to elevate the standard of teaching and improve the condition of the common schools of his county.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-14.11)
    Sec. 3-14.11. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 87-473. Repealed by P.A. 95-496, eff. 8-28-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-14.12) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-14.12)
    Sec. 3-14.12. Examine evidences of indebtedness. In Class II county school units with respect to townships wherein trustees of schools maintain jurisdiction and in which township funds have not heretofore been liquidated and distributed, to examine all notes, bonds, mortgages, and other evidences of indebtedness which the township or school treasurer holds officially with respect to such fund or funds, and if he or she finds that the papers are not in proper form or that the securities are insufficient, he or she shall so state, in writing, to the trustees of schools or school board.
(Source: P.A. 95-496, eff. 8-28-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-14.15) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-14.15)
    Sec. 3-14.15. Returns, reports, statements. To file and keep all the returns of elections required to be returned to him and the reports and statements returned by school treasurers and trustees of schools.
(Source: P.A. 81-1490.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-14.16) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-14.16)
    Sec. 3-14.16. Census. To take a special census of a school district when petitioned by 10% or 1,500 legal voters, whichever is less, to determine if such district has the proper type of school board, either of directors or a board of education, required by this Act. The expense of such census shall be a school district expense. If such census shows that the proper type of board does not exist, then such regional superintendent shall immediately notify the school district and certify to the proper election authorities that an election shall be held at the time next provided for the regular election of school district officers and in the manner provided by the general election law to select an entirely new board of the type legally required. The length of term of each of the members of the new board shall be determined in the manner provided for such type of board in this Act.
(Source: P.A. 81-1490.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-14.17) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-14.17)
    Sec. 3-14.17. Notice of amount of money distributed. To notify the presidents of boards of trustees and the clerks and secretaries of school districts, on or before September 30, annually, of the amount of money distributed by him to the school treasurer, with the date of distribution.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-14.18) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-14.18)
    Sec. 3-14.18. Map - Numbering of districts. To keep in his office a map of his county on a scale of not less than two inches to the mile and to indicate thereon the boundary lines and numbers of all school districts. Districts shall be numbered consecutively. If a new district composed of parts of two or more counties is formed, the county superintendents of such counties shall agree upon a number by which the district shall be designated, which number shall not be a duplicate of any number in either of such counties.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-14.19)
    Sec. 3-14.19. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31. Repealed by P.A. 95-496, eff. 8-28-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-14.20) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-14.20)
    Sec. 3-14.20. Building plans and specifications. To inspect the building plans and specifications, including but not limited to plans and specifications for the heating, ventilating, lighting, seating, water supply, toilets and safety against fire of public school rooms and buildings submitted to him by school boards, and to approve all those which comply substantially with the building code authorized in Section 2-3.12.
    If a municipality or, in the case of an unincorporated area, a county or, if applicable, a fire protection district wishes to be notified of plans and specifications received by a regional office of education for any future construction or alteration of a public school facility located within that entity's jurisdiction, then the entity must register this wish with the regional superintendent of schools. Within 10 days after the regional superintendent of schools receives the plans and specifications from a school board and prior to the bidding process, he or she shall notify, in writing, the registered municipality and, if applicable, the registered fire protection district where the school that is being constructed or altered lies that plans and specifications have been received. In the case of an unincorporated area, the registered county shall be notified. If the municipality, fire protection district, or county requests a review of the plans and specifications, then the school board shall submit a copy of the plans and specifications. The municipality and, if applicable, the fire protection district or the county may comment in writing on the plans and specifications based on the building code authorized in Section 2-3.12, referencing the specific code where a discrepancy has been identified, and respond back to the regional superintendent of schools within 15 days after a copy of the plans and specifications have been received or, if needed for plan review, such additional time as agreed to by the regional superintendent of schools. This review must be at no cost to the school district.
    If such plans and specifications are not approved or denied approval by the regional superintendent of schools within 3 months after the date on which they are submitted to him or her, the school board may submit such plans and specifications directly to the State Superintendent of Education for approval or denial.
(Source: P.A. 94-225, eff. 7-14-05.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-14.21) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-14.21)
    Sec. 3-14.21. Inspection of schools.
    (a) The regional superintendent shall inspect and survey all public schools under his or her supervision and notify the board of education, or the trustees of schools in a district with trustees, in writing before July 30, whether or not the several schools in their district have been kept as required by law, using forms provided by the State Board of Education which are based on the Health/Life Safety Code for Public Schools adopted under Section 2-3.12. The regional superintendent shall report his or her findings to the State Board of Education on forms provided by the State Board of Education.
    (b) If the regional superintendent determines that a school board has failed in a timely manner to correct urgent items identified in a previous life-safety report completed under Section 2-3.12 or as otherwise previously ordered by the regional superintendent, the regional superintendent shall order the school board to adopt and submit to the regional superintendent a plan for the immediate correction of the building violations. This plan shall be adopted following a public hearing that is conducted by the school board on the violations and the plan and that is preceded by at least 7 days' prior notice of the hearing published in a newspaper of general circulation within the school district. If the regional superintendent determines in the next annual inspection that the plan has not been completed and that the violations have not been corrected, the regional superintendent shall submit a report to the State Board of Education with a recommendation that the State Board withhold from payments of general State aid or evidence-based funding due to the district an amount necessary to correct the outstanding violations. The State Board, upon notice to the school board and to the regional superintendent, shall consider the report at a meeting of the State Board, and may order that a sufficient amount of general State aid or evidence-based funding be withheld from payments due to the district to correct the violations. This amount shall be paid to the regional superintendent who shall contract on behalf of the school board for the correction of the outstanding violations.
    (c) The Office of the State Fire Marshal or a qualified fire official, as defined in Section 2-3.12 of this Code, to whom the State Fire Marshal has delegated his or her authority shall conduct an annual fire safety inspection of each school building in this State. The State Fire Marshal or the fire official shall coordinate its inspections with the regional superintendent. The inspection shall be based on the fire safety code authorized in Section 2-3.12 of this Code. Any violations shall be reported in writing to the regional superintendent and shall reference the specific code sections where a discrepancy has been identified within 15 days after the inspection has been conducted. The regional superintendent shall address those violations that are not corrected in a timely manner pursuant to subsection (b) of this Section. The inspection must be at no cost to the school district.
    (d) If a municipality or, in the case of an unincorporated area, a county or, if applicable, a fire protection district wishes to perform new construction inspections under the jurisdiction of a regional superintendent, then the entity must register this wish with the regional superintendent. These inspections must be based on the building code authorized in Section 2-3.12 of this Code. The inspections must be at no cost to the school district.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-14.22) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-14.22)
    Sec. 3-14.22. Condemnation of school buildings. To request the Department of Public Health, the State Fire Marshal or the State Superintendent of Education to inspect public school buildings and temporary school facilities which appear to him to be unsafe, insanitary or unfit for occupancy. These officials shall inspect such buildings and temporary school facilities and if, in their opinion, such buildings or temporary facilities are unsafe, insanitary or unfit for occupancy, shall state in writing in what particular they are unsafe, insanitary or unfit for occupancy. Upon the receipt of such statement the regional superintendent shall condemn the building or temporary facility and notify the school board thereof in writing and the reasons for such condemnation. He shall also notify, in writing, the board of school trustees that the school or temporary facility so condemned is not kept as required by law.
    The provisions of this Section shall not preclude inspection of school premises and buildings pursuant to Section 9 of the Fire Investigation Act, although not requested as hereinabove provided.
(Source: P.A. 87-984.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-14.23) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-14.23)
    Sec. 3-14.23. School bus driver permits.
    (a) To conduct courses of instruction for school bus drivers pursuant to the standards established by the Secretary of State under Section 6-106.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code and to charge a fee based upon the cost of providing such courses of up to $6 per person for fiscal years 2010, 2011, and 2012; up to $8 per person for fiscal years 2013, 2014, and 2015; and up to $10 per person for fiscal year 2016 and each fiscal year thereafter for the initial classroom course in school bus driver safety and of up to $6 per person for fiscal years 2010, 2011, and 2012; up to $8 per person for fiscal years 2013, 2014, and 2015; and up to $10 per person for fiscal year 2016 and each fiscal year thereafter for the annual refresher course.
    (b) To conduct such investigations as may be necessary to insure that all persons hired to operate school buses have valid school bus driver permits as required under Sections 6-104 and 6-106.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. If a regional superintendent finds evidence of non-compliance with this requirement, he shall submit such evidence together with his recommendations in writing to the school board.
    If the regional superintendent finds evidence of noncompliance with the requirement that all persons employed directly by the school board to operate school buses have valid school bus driver permits as required under Sections 6-104 and 6-106.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, the regional superintendent shall schedule a hearing on a date not less than 5 days nor more than 10 days after notifying the district of his findings. If based on the evidence presented at the hearing the regional superintendent finds that persons employed directly by the school board to operate school buses do not have valid school bus driver permits as required under Sections 6-104 and 6-106.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, the regional superintendent shall submit such evidence and his findings together with his recommendations to the State Superintendent of Education. The State Superintendent of Education may reduce the district's claim for reimbursement under Sections 29-5 and 14-13.01 for transportation by 1.136% for each day of noncompliance.
    If a school board finds evidence of noncompliance with the requirement that all persons employed by a contractor to operate school buses have valid school bus driver permits as required under Sections 6-104 and 6-106.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, the school board shall request a hearing before the regional superintendent. The regional superintendent shall schedule a hearing on a date not less than 5 days nor more than 10 days after receiving the request. If based on the evidence presented at the hearing the regional superintendent finds that persons employed by a contractor to operate school buses do not have valid school bus driver permits as required under Sections 6-104 and 6-106.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, the school board's financial obligations under the contract shall be reduced by an amount equal to 1.136% for each day of noncompliance. The findings of the regional superintendent and the relief provided herein shall not impair the obligations of the contractor to continue to provide transportation services in accordance with the terms of the contract.
    The provisions of the Administrative Review Law, and all amendments and modifications thereof and the rules adopted pursuant thereto shall apply to and govern all proceedings instituted for judicial review of final administrative decisions of the regional superintendent under this Section.
(Source: P.A. 100-863, eff. 8-14-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-14.25) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-14.25)
    Sec. 3-14.25. Unfilled teaching positions list; subject shortage area certifications.
    (a) To maintain, and make available to the public during regular business hours, a list of unfilled teaching positions within the region. The most current version of the list must be posted on or linked to the regional office of education's Internet web site. If the regional office of education does not have an Internet web site, the regional superintendent of schools must make the list available to the State Board of Education and the State Board of Education must post the list on the State Board of Education's Internet web site. The State Board of Education's Internet web site must provide a link to each regional office of education's list.
    (b) To certify to the Teachers' Retirement System of the State of Illinois that a school district has submitted satisfactory evidence of compliance with the requirements of subsection (e) of Section 16-150.1 of the Illinois Pension Code, for the purpose of authorizing the employment of retired teachers in subject shortage areas under the program established in that Section.
(Source: P.A. 92-41, eff. 7-1-01; 93-320, eff. 7-23-03.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-14.26) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-14.26)
    Sec. 3-14.26. To coordinate, aid and encourage the indemnification of members of regional boards of school trustees by county boards, as provided in Section 5-1102 of the Counties Code.
(Source: P.A. 86-1475.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-14.27)
    Sec. 3-14.27. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 86-721. Repealed by P.A. 95-496, eff. 8-28-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-14.28)
    Sec. 3-14.28. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 87-559. Repealed by P.A. 98-1155, eff. 1-9-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-14.29)
    Sec. 3-14.29. Sharing information on school lunch applicants. Whenever requested by the Department of Healthcare and Family Services (formerly Department of Public Aid), to agree in writing with the Department of Healthcare and Family Services (as the State agency that administers the State Medical Assistance Program as provided in Title XIX of the federal Social Security Act and the State Children's Health Insurance Program as provided in Title XXI of the federal Social Security Act) to share with the Department of Healthcare and Family Services information on applicants for free or reduced-price lunches. This sharing of information shall be for the sole purpose of helping the Department of Healthcare and Family Services identify and enroll children in the State Medical Assistance Program or the State Children's Health Insurance Program or both as allowed under 42 U.S.C. Sec. 1758(b)(2)(C)(iii)(IV) and under the restrictions set forth in 42 U.S.C. Sec. 1758(b)(2)(C)(vi) and (vii).
(Source: P.A. 95-331, eff. 8-21-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-14.30)
    Sec. 3-14.30. Grant applications. To assist and support school districts with the preparation and submission of grant applications.
(Source: P.A. 93-1036, eff. 9-14-04.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-14.31)
    Sec. 3-14.31. School facility and resources occupation tax proceeds.
    (a) Within 30 days after receiving any proceeds of a school facility and resources occupation tax under Section 5-1006.7 of the Counties Code, each regional superintendent must disburse those proceeds to each school district that is located in the county in which the tax was collected.
    (b) The proceeds must be disbursed on an enrollment basis and allocated based upon the number of each school district's resident pupils that reside within the county collecting the tax divided by the total number of resident students within the county.
(Source: P.A. 101-455, eff. 8-23-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-15) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-15)
    Sec. 3-15. Powers of county superintendent. The county superintendent shall have the powers enumerated in the subsequent sections of this article.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-15.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-15.1)
    Sec. 3-15.1. Reports. To require the appointed school treasurer in Class II counties, in each school district which forms a part of a Class II county school unit but which is not subject to the jurisdiction of the trustees of schools of any township in which such district is located, and in each school district of the Class I counties to prepare and forward to his office on or before October 15, annually, and at such other times as may be required by him or by the State Board of Education a statement exhibiting the financial condition of the school for the preceding year commencing on July 1 and ending June 30.
    In Class I county school units, and in each school district which forms a part of a Class II county school unit but which is not subject to the jurisdiction of the trustees of schools of any township in which such school district is located, the statement shall in the case of districts on the accrual basis show the assets, liabilities and fund balance of the funds as of the end of the fiscal year. The statement shall show the operation of the funds for the fiscal year with a reconciliation and analysis of changes in the funds at the end of the period. For districts on a cash basis the statement shall show the receipts and disbursements by funds including the source of receipts and purpose for which the disbursements were made together with the balance at the end of the fiscal year. Each school district that is the administrator of a joint agreement shall cause an Annual Financial Statement to be submitted on forms prescribed by the State Board of Education exhibiting the financial condition of the program established pursuant to the joint agreement, for the fiscal year ending on the immediately preceding June 30.
    The regional superintendent shall send all required reports to the State Board of Education on or before November 15, annually.
    For all districts the statements shall show bonded debt, tax warrants, taxes received and receivable by funds and such other information as may be required by the State Board of Education. Any district from which such report is not so received when required shall have its portion of the distributive fund withheld for the next ensuing year until such report is filed.
    If a district is divided by a county line or lines the foregoing required statement shall be forwarded to the regional superintendent of schools having supervision and control of the district.
(Source: P.A. 86-1441; 87-473.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-15.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-15.2)
    Sec. 3-15.2. Recommending imposition or remission of penalty. To recommend to the State Board of Education the imposition or remission of the penalty provided in Section 2-3.24.
(Source: P.A. 88-641, eff. 9-9-94.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-15.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-15.3)
    Sec. 3-15.3. School treasurer's accounts. To direct in what manner school treasurers shall keep their books and accounts.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-15.4) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-15.4)
    Sec. 3-15.4. Suit against county collector. To bring suit against the county collector for failure to pay the amount due upon the auditor's warrant.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-15.5) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-15.5)
    Sec. 3-15.5. Removal of school board members. To remove any member of a school board from office for wilful failure to perform his official duties.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-15.6) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-15.6)
    Sec. 3-15.6. Additional employees. To employ, with the approval of the county board, such additional employees as are needed for the discharge of the duties of the office. The non-clerical employees shall be persons versed in the principles and methods of education, familiar with public school work, competent to visit schools, and licensed pursuant to this Code if their duties are comparable to those for which licensure is required by this Code.
    On and after July 1, 1994, the provisions of this Section shall have no application in any educational service region having a population of 2,000,000 or more inhabitants.
(Source: P.A. 99-30, eff. 7-10-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-15.7) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-15.7)
    Sec. 3-15.7. Maps and records of new districts. To demand of the trustees of schools or regional board of school trustees having custody of maps and records of school districts as organized certified copies of the same. In case of discrepancies or defects in defining the boundaries of school districts the county superintendent, or in case of a district lying in two or more counties, the county superintendents of such counties acting jointly, may define such boundaries in conformity with what appears to have been the intention of the trustees of schools when such boundaries were established.
(Source: P.A. 87-473.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-15.8) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-15.8)
    Sec. 3-15.8. Report to State Board of Education. On or before November 15, annually, to present to the State Board of Education such information relating to schools in his region as the State Board of Education may require.
(Source: P.A. 82-143.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-15.9) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-15.9)
    Sec. 3-15.9. Delivery of money, books, papers and property to successor. Upon his removal or resignation, or at the expiration of his term of office, or in case of his death his representatives to deliver to his successor in office, on demand, all moneys, books, papers and personal property belonging to his office or subject to his control or disposition.
    On and after July 1, 1994, the provisions of this Section shall have no application in any educational service region having a population of 2,000,000 or more inhabitants.
(Source: P.A. 87-654; 87-1251.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-15.10) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-15.10)
    Sec. 3-15.10. Assistant Regional Superintendent. To employ, in counties or regions of 2,000,000 inhabitants or less, in addition to any assistants authorized to be employed with the approval of the county board, an assistant regional superintendent of schools, who shall be a person of good attainment, versed in the principles and methods of education, and qualified to teach and supervise schools under Article 21B of this Code; to fix the term of such assistant; and to direct his work and define his duties. On the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 96th General Assembly, in regions established within that portion of a Class II county school unit outside of a city of 500,000 or more inhabitants, the employment of all persons serving as assistant county or regional superintendents of schools is terminated, the position of assistant regional superintendent of schools in each such region is abolished, and this Section shall, beginning on the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 96th General Assembly, have no further application in the educational service region. Assistant regional superintendents shall each be a person of good attainment, versed in the principles and methods of education, and qualified to teach and supervise schools under Article 21B of this Code. The work of such assistant regional superintendent shall be so arranged and directed that the county or regional superintendent and assistant superintendent, together, shall devote an amount of time during the school year, equal to at least the full time of one individual, to the supervision of schools and of teaching in the schools of the county.
    A regional superintendent of schools shall not employ his or her spouse, child, stepchild, or relative as an assistant regional superintendent of schools. By September 1 each year, a regional superintendent shall certify to the State Board of Education that he or she has complied with this paragraph. If the State Board of Education becomes aware of the fact that a regional superintendent is employing his or her spouse, child, stepchild, or relative as an assistant regional superintendent, the State Board of Education shall report this information to the Governor and the Comptroller, and the State Board of Education shall not request for payment from the State Comptroller any warrants for the payment of the assistant regional superintendent's salary or other employment-related compensation or benefits. In this paragraph, "relative" means a grandparent, parent, aunt, uncle, sibling, first cousin, nephew, niece, grandchild, or spouse of one of these persons. This paragraph applies only to contracts for employment entered into on or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 91st General Assembly.
(Source: P.A. 99-30, eff. 7-10-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-15.11)
    Sec. 3-15.11. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 89-397, eff. 8-20-95. Repealed by P.A. 95-496, eff. 8-28-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-15.12) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-15.12)
    Sec. 3-15.12. High school equivalency. The regional superintendent of schools and the Illinois Community College Board shall make available for qualified individuals residing within the region a High School Equivalency Testing Program and alternative methods of credentialing, as identified under this Section. For that purpose the regional superintendent alone or with other regional superintendents may establish and supervise a testing center or centers to administer the secure forms for high school equivalency testing to qualified persons. Such centers shall be under the supervision of the regional superintendent in whose region such centers are located, subject to the approval of the Executive Director of the Illinois Community College Board. The Illinois Community College Board shall also establish criteria and make available alternative methods of credentialing throughout the State.
    An individual is eligible to apply to the regional superintendent of schools for the region in which he or she resides if he or she is: (a) a person who is 17 years of age or older, has maintained residence in the State of Illinois, and is not a high school graduate; (b) a person who is successfully completing an alternative education program under Section 2-3.81, Article 13A, or Article 13B; or (c) a person who is enrolled in a youth education program sponsored by the Illinois National Guard. For purposes of this Section, residence is that abode which the applicant considers his or her home. Applicants may provide as sufficient proof of such residence and as an acceptable form of identification a driver's license, valid passport, military ID, or other form of government-issued national or foreign identification that shows the applicant's name, address, date of birth, signature, and photograph or other acceptable identification as may be allowed by law or as regulated by the Illinois Community College Board. Such regional superintendent shall determine if the applicant meets statutory and regulatory state standards.
    If qualified the applicant shall at the time of such application pay a fee established by the Illinois Community College Board, which fee shall be paid into a special fund under the control and supervision of the regional superintendent. Such moneys received by the regional superintendent shall be used, first, for the expenses incurred in administering and scoring the examination, and next for other educational programs that are developed and designed by the regional superintendent of schools to assist those who successfully complete high school equivalency testing or meet the criteria for alternative methods of credentialing in furthering their academic development or their ability to secure and retain gainful employment, including programs for the competitive award based on test scores of college or adult education scholarship grants or similar educational incentives. Any excess moneys shall be paid into the institute fund.
    Any applicant who has achieved the minimum passing standards as established by the Illinois Community College Board shall be notified in writing by the regional superintendent and shall be issued a high school equivalency certificate on the forms provided by the Illinois Community College Board. The regional superintendent shall then certify to the Illinois Community College Board the score of the applicant and such other and additional information that may be required by the Illinois Community College Board. The moneys received therefrom shall be used in the same manner as provided for in this Section.
    The Illinois Community College Board shall establish alternative methods of credentialing for the issuance of high school equivalency certification. In addition to high school equivalency testing, the following alternative methods of receiving a high school equivalency credential shall be made available to qualified individuals on or after January 1, 2018:
        (A) High School Equivalency based on High School
    	
Credit. A qualified candidate may petition to have his or her high school transcripts evaluated to determine what the candidate needs to meet criteria as established by the Illinois Community College Board.
        (B) High School Equivalency based on Post-Secondary
    	
Credit. A qualified candidate may petition to have his or her post-secondary transcripts evaluated to determine what the candidate needs to meet criteria established by the Illinois Community College Board.
        (C) High School Equivalency based on a Foreign
    	
Diploma. A qualified candidate may petition to have his or her foreign high school or post-secondary transcripts evaluated to determine what the candidate needs to meet criteria established by the Illinois Community College Board.
        (D) High School Equivalency based on Completion of a
    	
Competency-Based Program as approved by the Illinois Community College Board. The Illinois Community College Board shall establish guidelines for competency-based high school equivalency programs.
    Any applicant who has attained the age of 17 years and maintained residence in the State of Illinois and is not a high school graduate, any person who has enrolled in a youth education program sponsored by the Illinois National Guard, or any person who has successfully completed an alternative education program under Section 2-3.81, Article 13A, or Article 13B is eligible to apply for a high school equivalency certificate (if he or she meets the requirements prescribed by the Illinois Community College Board) upon showing evidence that he or she has completed, successfully, high school equivalency testing, administered by the United States Armed Forces Institute, official high school equivalency testing centers established in other states, Veterans' Administration Hospitals, or the office of the State Superintendent of Education for the Illinois State Penitentiary System and the Department of Corrections. Such applicant shall apply to the regional superintendent of the region wherein he or she has maintained residence, and, upon payment of a fee established by the Illinois Community College Board, the regional superintendent shall issue a high school equivalency certificate and immediately thereafter certify to the Illinois Community College Board the score of the applicant and such other and additional information as may be required by the Illinois Community College Board.
    Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section, any applicant who has been out of school for at least one year may request the regional superintendent of schools to administer restricted high school equivalency testing upon written request of: the director of a program who certifies to the Chief Examiner of an official high school equivalency testing center that the applicant has completed a program of instruction provided by such agencies as the Job Corps, the Postal Service Academy, or an apprenticeship training program; an employer or program director for purposes of entry into apprenticeship programs; another state's department of education in order to meet regulations established by that department of education; or a post high school educational institution for purposes of admission, the Department of Financial and Professional Regulation for licensing purposes, or the Armed Forces for induction purposes. The regional superintendent shall administer such testing, and the applicant shall be notified in writing that he or she is eligible to receive a high school equivalency certificate upon reaching age 17, provided he or she meets the standards established by the Illinois Community College Board.
    Any test administered under this Section to an applicant who does not speak and understand English may at the discretion of the administering agency be given and answered in any language in which the test is printed. The regional superintendent of schools may waive any fees required by this Section in case of hardship. The regional superintendent of schools and the Illinois Community College Board shall waive any fees required by this Section for an applicant who meets all of the following criteria:
        (1) The applicant qualifies as a homeless person,
    	
child, or youth as defined in the Education for Homeless Children Act.
        (2) The applicant has not attained 25 years of age
    	
as of the date of the scheduled test.
        (3) The applicant can verify his or her status as a
    	
homeless person, child, or youth. A homeless services provider that is qualified to verify an individual's housing status, as determined by the Illinois Community College Board, and that has knowledge of the applicant's housing status may verify the applicant's status for purposes of this subdivision (3).
        (4) The applicant has completed a high school
    	
equivalency preparation course through an Illinois Community College Board-approved provider.
        (5) The applicant is taking the test at a testing
    	
center operated by a regional superintendent of schools or the Cook County High School Equivalency Office.
    In counties of over 3,000,000 population, a high school equivalency certificate shall contain the signatures of the Executive Director of the Illinois Community College Board and the superintendent, president, or other chief executive officer of the institution where high school equivalency testing instruction occurred and any other signatures authorized by the Illinois Community College Board.
    The regional superintendent of schools shall furnish the Illinois Community College Board with any information that the Illinois Community College Board requests with regard to testing and certificates under this Section.
(Source: P.A. 99-78, eff. 7-20-15; 99-742, eff. 1-1-17; 100-130, eff. 1-1-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-15.12a)
    Sec. 3-15.12a. Alternate route to high school diploma for adult learners.
    (a) The purpose of Public Act 100-514 is to provide eligible applicants that have been or are unable to establish agreements with a secondary or unit school district in the area in which the applicant is located with a process for attaining the authority to award high school diplomas to adult learners.
    (a-5) In this Section:
    "Adult learner" means a person ineligible for reenrollment under subsection (b) of Section 26-2 of this Code and 34 CFR 300.102.
    "Board" means the Illinois Community College Board.
    "Eligible applicant" means a community college established and operating under the authority of the Public Community College Act; a non-profit entity in partnership with a regional superintendent of schools; the chief administrator of an intermediate service center that has the authority, under rules adopted by the State Board of Education, to issue a high school diploma; or a school district organized under Article 34 of this Code. In order to be an eligible applicant, an entity under this definition, other than a school district organized under Article 34 of this Code, must provide evidence or other documentation that it is or has been unable to establish an agreement with a secondary or unit school district in which the eligible applicant is located to provide a program in which students who successfully complete the program can receive a high school diploma from their school district of residence.
    "Executive Director" means the Executive Director of the Illinois Community College Board.
    "High school diploma program for adult learners" means a program approved to operate under this Section that provides a program of alternative study to adult learners leading to the issuance of a high school diploma.
    (b) An eligible applicant is authorized to design a high school diploma program for adult learners, to be approved by the Board prior to implementation. A non-profit eligible applicant shall operate this program only within the jurisdictional authority of the regional superintendent of schools, the chief administrator of an intermediate service center, or a school district organized Article 34 of this Code with whom the non-profit eligible applicant has entered into a partnership. An approved program shall include, without limitation, all of the following:
        (1) An administrative structure, program activities,
    	
program staff, a budget, and a specific curriculum that is consistent with Illinois Learning Standards, as well as Illinois content standards for adults, but may be different from a regular school program in terms of location, length of school day, program sequence, multidisciplinary courses, pace, instructional activities, or any combination of these.
        (2) Issuance of a high school diploma only if an
    	
adult learner meets all minimum requirements under this Code and its implementing rules for receipt of a high school diploma.
        (3) Specific academic, behavioral, and emotional
    	
support services to be offered to adult learners enrolled in the program.
        (4) Career and technical education courses that lead
    	
to industry certifications in high growth and in-demand industry sectors or dual credit courses from a regionally accredited post-secondary educational institution consistent with the Dual Credit Quality Act. The program may include partnering with a community college district to provide career and technical education courses that lead to industry certifications.
        (5) Specific program outcomes and goals and metrics
    	
to be used by the program to determine success.
        (6) The requirement that all instructional staff must
    	
hold an educator license valid for the high school grades issued under Article 21B of this Code.
        (7) Any other requirements adopted by rule by the
    	
Board.
    (c) Eligible applicants shall apply for approval of a high school diploma program for adult learners to the Board on forms prescribed by the Board.
        (1) Initial approval shall be for a period not to
    	
exceed 2 school years.
        (2) Renewal of approval shall be for a period not to
    	
exceed 4 school years and shall be contingent upon at least specific documented outcomes of student progression, graduation rates, and earning of industry-recognized credentials.
        (3) Program approval may be given only if the
    	
Executive Director determines that the eligible applicant has provided assurance through evidence of other documentation that it will meet the requirements of subsection (b) of this Section and any rules adopted by the Board. The Board shall make public any evaluation criteria it uses in making a determination of program approval or denial.
        (4) Notwithstanding anything in this Code to the
    	
contrary, a non-profit eligible applicant shall provide the following to the Board:
            (A) documentation that the non-profit entity will
        	
fulfill the requirements of subsection (b) of this Section;
            (B) evidence that the non-profit entity has the
        	
capacity to fulfill the requirements of this Section;
            (C) a description of the coordination and
        	
oversight that the eligible entity will provide in the administration of the program by the non-profit entity;
            (D) evidence that the non-profit entity has a
        	
history of providing services to adults 18 years of age or older whose educational and training opportunities have been limited by educational disadvantages, disabilities, and challenges.
        (5) If an eligible applicant that has been approved
    	
fails to meet any of the requirements of subsection (b) of this Section and any rules adopted by the Board, the Executive Director shall immediately initiate a process to revoke the eligible applicant's approval to provide the program, pursuant to rules adopted by the Board.
    (d) The Board may adopt any rules necessary to implement this Section.
(Source: P.A. 100-514, eff. 9-22-17; 101-81, eff. 7-12-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-15.14) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-15.14)
    Sec. 3-15.14. Cooperative Educational and Operational Programs. To administer and direct a cooperative or joint educational or operational program or project when 2 or more districts request and authorize him or her to provide and administer these services. Each regional superintendent of schools is encouraged to offer school districts the opportunity to share in joint educational or operational programs and to urge school districts to participate in such programs when the school district determines that such participation is fiscally prudent. The regional superintendent of schools may provide and contract for the staff, space, necessary materials, supplies, books and apparatus for such agreements. The school boards of the respective districts shall pay to the regional superintendent the pro rata share of the expenses of the operation of such programs, and the regional superintendent shall use such funds in payment of such operational expenses. The regional superintendent shall collect and remit the required pension contributions from the participating districts if the board of control of the program participates in Article 7 of the Illinois Pension Code.
    A board of control composed of one member from each cooperating district and one member from the office of the regional superintendent will set policy for the cooperative. The agreement establishing the cooperative may provide that the cooperative shall act as its own administrative district and shall be an entity separate and apart from the Educational Service Region.
    Each regional superintendent that is the administrator of a joint agreement shall cause an annual financial statement to be submitted on forms prescribed by the State Board of Education exhibiting the financial condition of the program established pursuant to the joint agreement for the fiscal year ending on the immediately preceding June 30.
    The regional superintendent may also administer, direct and account for educational programs of single or multi-county educational service region, or of multi-regional design which are sponsored and financed by State or federal educational agencies, or by both such agencies. In cases where funding for any such approved program is delayed, the regional superintendent may borrow the funds required to begin operation of the program in accordance with the terms of the grant; and the principal amount so borrowed, together with the interest due thereon, shall be paid from the grant moneys when received.
(Source: P.A. 97-357, eff. 1-1-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-15.14a)
    Sec. 3-15.14a. Shared services. The regional superintendent of schools may, at the request of a school district, present to the school district possible services and functions that multiple schools may share or consolidate. Such services and functions may include, but are not limited to, bidding and purchasing, office functions such as payroll and accounting, information technology, professional development, grant writing, food service management, or administrative positions. Regional superintendents of schools may share best financial practices with school districts that are exploring new methods to become more financially efficient.
(Source: P.A. 97-357, eff. 1-1-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-15.15) (from Ch. 122, par. 3-15.15)
    Sec. 3-15.15. Local education agency. To apply as a local education agency for any grant, loan, program authorization or other assistance provided to local education agencies by the State Board of Education.
(Source: P.A. 87-1124; 88-670, eff. 12-2-94.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-15.16)
    Sec. 3-15.16. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 88-670, eff. 12-2-94. Repealed by P.A. 96-734, eff. 8-25-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-15.17)
    Sec. 3-15.17. Civic education advancement.
    (a) The General Assembly finds that civic education and participation are fundamental elements of a healthy democracy, and schools are in need of support to identify civic learning opportunities and to implement new strategies to prepare and sustain high quality citizenship among their student body.
    (b) Subject to appropriation, funding for civic education professional development for high school teachers must be provided by line item appropriation made to the State Board of Education for that purpose. When appropriated, the State Board of Education must provide this funding to each regional superintendent of schools based on high school enrollment as reported on the State Board of Education's most recent fall enrollment and housing report, except that 20% of each annual appropriation must be reserved for a school district organized under Article 34 of this Code.
    (c) In order to establish eligibility for one or more of its schools to receive funding under this Section, a school district shall submit to its regional superintendent of schools an application, accompanied by a completed civic audit, for each school. A regional superintendent shall award funds to a district based on the number of teachers identified by the district to receive professional development multiplied by $250. A district must not be awarded more than $3,000 in any year, unless additional funds remain available after all eligible applicants have received funding. A district may not use funds authorized under this Section in any school more than once every 2 years. Funds provided under this Section must be used exclusively for professional development provided by entities that are approved providers for purposes of license renewal under Section 21B-45 of this Code.
    (d) The civic audit form and its content must be designed and updated as deemed necessary by the Illinois Civic Mission Coalition. Data from completed civic audits must be processed by the Illinois Civic Mission Coalition. The civic audit must be made available by the Illinois Civic Mission Coalition and must be designed to provide teachers and principals with a blueprint to better understand how current curriculum, service learning, and extracurricular activities are providing civic learning experiences for their students.
(Source: P.A. 99-30, eff. 7-10-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3-16)
    Sec. 3-16. Grants to alternative schools, safe schools, and alternative learning opportunities programs. The State Board of Education, subject to appropriation, shall award grants to alternative schools, safe schools, and alternative learning opportunities programs operated by a regional office of education. For fiscal year 2018, to calculate grant amounts to the programs operated by regional offices of education, the State Board shall calculate an amount equal to the greater of the regional program's best 3 months of average daily attendance for the 2016-2017 school year or the average of the best 3 months of average daily attendance for the 2014-2015 school year through the 2016-2017 school year, multiplied by the amount of $6,119. For fiscal year 2019, to calculate grant amounts to the programs operated by regional offices of education, the State Board shall calculate an amount equal to the greater of the regional program's best 3 months of average daily attendance for the 2017-2018 school year or the average of the best 3 months of average daily attendance for the 2015-2016 school year through the 2017-2018 school year, multiplied by the amount of $6,119. These amounts shall be termed the "Regional Program Increased Enrollment Recognition". If the amount of the Regional Program Increased Enrollment Recognition is greater than the amount of the regional office of education program's Base Funding Minimum for fiscal year 2018 or fiscal year 2019, calculated under Section 18-8.15, then the State Board of Education shall pay the regional program a grant equal to the difference between the regional program's Regional Program Increased Enrollment Recognition and the Base Funding Minimum for fiscal year 2018 or fiscal year 2019, respectively. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to alter any payments or calculations under Section 18-8.15.
(Source: P.A. 100-587, eff. 6-4-18; 101-10, eff. 6-5-19.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 3A heading)
ARTICLE 3A. EDUCATIONAL SERVICE REGIONS

    (105 ILCS 5/3A-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 3A-1)
    Sec. 3A-1. County or portion of county as educational service region. Each county of the State shall, except as otherwise provided in this Article, be designated as an educational service region, referred to in this Article as a "region". Beginning the first Monday of August, 1995, that portion of a Class II county outside a city of at least 500,000 shall constitute a region. References in this Code to a county as a region shall also mean a portion of a county as a region when appropriate.
(Source: P.A. 88-89.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3A-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 3A-2)
    Sec. 3A-2. Regional superintendent-County superintendent of schools. The chief administrative officer of an educational service region shall be designated and referred to as "Regional Superintendent of Schools" or "regional superintendent."
    Such person shall, in his region, have the powers and duties and perform the functions required of or exercisable by a county superintendent of schools, except as otherwise provided by law.
    Any reference to "county superintendent of schools" in The School Code or any other Illinois statute means and refers to the regional superintendent of schools for an educational service region.
(Source: P.A. 79-1057.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3A-3) (from Ch. 122, par. 3A-3)
    Sec. 3A-3. Voluntary consolidation of educational service regions. Any 2 or more educational service regions may be consolidated into a single region in the manner provided in this Section. All of the territory of any educational service region shall be determined by county boundaries, but supervision and control over school districts that are divided by a county line shall be determined under Section 3-14.2 of this Act.
    Each regional superintendent of a region that does not conform to the population requirements of Section 3A-4 and seeks voluntary consolidation under this Section shall appoint a nonpartisan citizens committee consisting of 5 members to consider the advisability of such a consolidation. Such regional superintendent shall serve as ex officio secretary to the citizens committee. This citizens committee may petition the regional board of school trustees serving each of the regions involved for consolidation of those regions into a single educational service region. When such a petition is filed, the regional board of school trustees shall conduct a hearing on the petition, after notice of the hearing has been published once, not more than 15 nor less than 10 days before the day of the hearing, in a newspaper having general circulation in the region. The secretary of the regional board of school trustees shall also notify the secretary of each school board affected by the proposed consolidation, the chairman of the county board of each county affected thereby and the State Board of Education that such petition has been filed. The notice shall state the date when the petition was filed, the prayer of the petition and the date, time and place of the hearing. Such hearing shall be held jointly by all of the regional boards of school trustees affected by such petition and the State Board of Education shall arrange for such joint hearing and pay the expenses thereof. Evidence admissible at the hearing shall include, but not be limited to, the school needs and conditions in the territory affected by the proposed consolidation, whether or not such area is compact and contiguous; and whether or not the proposed consolidation would be in the best interests of the schools of the area and the educational welfare of the pupils of such schools. At the hearing each resident of the region shall have the rights provided for residents under Section 7-6 and the final order of the regional board of school trustees shall be subject to review as provided in Sections 7-6 and 7-7.
    Within 10 days after the conclusion of the joint hearing each regional board of school trustees shall meet and render a decision with regard to the hearing on the petition. A copy of the final order of each regional board of school trustees shall be filed with the State Board of Education within 30 days after the conclusion of the joint hearing. If the regional board of school trustees in each of those regions enters an order approving the consolidation, those regions shall be consolidated into a single educational service region, and the State Board of Education shall authorize the establishment of such single educational service region and to notify all interested parties, including the county clerks of the counties affected thereby and the State Board of Elections.
(Source: P.A. 88-89.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3A-4) (from Ch. 122, par. 3A-4)
    Sec. 3A-4. Mandatory consolidation of educational service regions.
    (a) After July 1, 2015, each region must contain at least 61,000 inhabitants. Before June 30, 2013, regions may be consolidated voluntarily under Section 3A-3 or by joint resolution of the county boards of regions seeking to join a voluntary consolidation, effective July 1, 2015, to meet these population requirements. The boundaries of regions already meeting these population requirements on the effective date of Public Act 97-703 may not be changed except to consolidate with another region or a whole county portion of another region which does not meet these population requirements. If, before November 1, 2013, locally determined consolidation decisions result in more than 35 regions of population greater than 61,000 each, the State Board of Education shall, before November 23, 2013, direct further consolidation, beginning with the region of lowest population, until the number of 35 regions is achieved.
    (b) (Blank).
    (c) If, within 90 days after the most recent certified federal census, a region does not meet the population requirements of this Section, then regions may be consolidated voluntarily under Section 3A-3 of this Code or by joint resolution of the county boards of regions seeking to join a voluntary consolidation to meet these population requirements. If locally determined consolidation decisions result in a region not meeting the population requirements of this Section or result in more than 35 regions, then the State Board of Education shall have the authority to impose further consolidation by order of the State Superintendent of Education. Such an order shall be a final order and is subject to the Administrative Review Law.
    (d) All population determinations shall be based on the most recent federal census.
(Source: P.A. 97-703, eff. 6-25-12; 98-594, eff. 11-15-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3A-5) (from Ch. 122, par. 3A-5)
    Sec. 3A-5. Effective date of consolidation. Any consolidation of regions, whether under Section 3A-3 or 3A-4, shall take effect at the expiration of the terms of office of the regional superintendents in office at the time the consolidation is approved under Section 3A-3 or directed under Section 3A-4. However, at the regular election immediately preceding the effective date of the consolidation at which regional superintendents are to be elected in accordance with the general election law, regional superintendents shall not be elected from each of the regions comprising the consolidated region, but one regional superintendent shall be elected to take office on the effective date of the consolidation.
(Source: P.A. 88-89.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3A-6) (from Ch. 122, par. 3A-6)
    Sec. 3A-6. Election of Superintendent for consolidated region - Bond - Vacancies in any educational service region.
    (a) The regional superintendent to be elected under Section 3A-5 shall be elected at the time provided in the general election law and must possess the qualifications described in Section 3-1 of this Act.
    (b) The bond required under Section 3-2 shall be filed in the office of the county clerk in the county where the regional office is situated, and a certified copy of that bond shall be filed in the office of the county clerk in each of the other counties in the region.
    (c) When a vacancy occurs in the office of regional superintendent of schools of any educational service region which is not located in a county which is a home rule unit, such vacancy shall be filled within 60 days (i) by appointment of the chairman of the county board, with the advice and consent of the county board, when such vacancy occurs in a single county educational service region; or (ii) by appointment of a committee composed of the chairmen of the county boards of those counties comprising the affected educational service region when such vacancy occurs in a multicounty educational service region, each committeeman to be entitled to one vote for each vote that was received in the county represented by such committeeman on the committee by the regional superintendent of schools whose office is vacant at the last election at which a regional superintendent was elected to such office, and the person receiving the highest number of affirmative votes from the committeemen for such vacant office to be deemed the person appointed by such committee to fill the vacancy. The appointee shall be a member of the same political party as the regional superintendent of schools the appointee succeeds was at the time such regional superintendent of schools last was elected. The appointee shall serve for the remainder of the term. However, if more than 28 months remain in that term, the appointment shall be until the next general election, at which time the vacated office shall be filled by election for the remainder of the term. Nominations shall be made and any vacancy in nomination shall be filled as follows:
        (1) If the vacancy in office occurs before the first
    	
date provided in Section 7-12 of the Election Code for filing nomination papers for county offices for the primary in the next even-numbered year following commencement of the term of office in which the vacancy occurs, nominations for the election for filling the vacancy shall be made pursuant to Article 7 of the Election Code.
        (2) If the vacancy in office occurs during the time
    	
provided in Section 7-12 of the Election Code for filing nomination papers for county offices for the primary in the next even-numbered year following commencement of the term of office in which the vacancy occurs, the time for filing nomination papers for the primary shall not be more than 91 days nor less than 85 days prior to the date of the primary.
        (3) If the vacancy in office occurs after the last
    	
day provided in Section 7-12 of the Election Code for filing nomination papers for county offices for the primary in the next even-numbered year following commencement of the term of office in which the vacancy occurs, a vacancy in nomination shall be deemed to have occurred and the county central committee of each established political party (if the vacancy occurs in a single county educational service region) or the multi-county educational service region committee of each established political party (if the vacancy occurs in a multi-county educational service region) shall nominate, by resolution, a candidate to fill the vacancy in nomination for election to the office at the general election. In the nomination proceedings to fill the vacancy in nomination, each member of the county central committee or the multi-county educational service region committee, whichever applies, shall have the voting strength as set forth in Section 7-8 or 7-8.02 of the Election Code, respectively. The name of the candidate so nominated shall not appear on the ballot at the general primary election. The vacancy in nomination shall be filled prior to the date of certification of candidates for the general election.
        (4) The resolution to fill the vacancy shall be duly
    	
acknowledged before an officer qualified to take acknowledgments of deeds and shall include, upon its face, the following information: (A) the name of the original nominee and the office vacated; (B) the date on which the vacancy occurred; and (C) the name and address of the nominee selected to fill the vacancy and the date of selection. The resolution to fill the vacancy shall be accompanied by a statement of candidacy, as prescribed in Section 7-10 of the Election Code, completed by the selected nominee, a certificate from the State Board of Education, as prescribed in Section 3-1 of this Code, and a receipt indicating that the nominee has filed a statement of economic interests as required by the Illinois Governmental Ethics Act.
The provisions of Sections 10-8 through 10-10.1 of the Election Code relating to objections to nomination papers, hearings on objections, and judicial review shall also apply to and govern objections to nomination papers and resolutions for filling vacancies in nomination filed pursuant to this Section. Unless otherwise specified in this Section, the nomination and election provided for in this Section is governed by the general election law.
    Except as otherwise provided by applicable county ordinance or by law, if a vacancy occurs in the office of regional superintendent of schools of an educational service region that is located in a county that is a home rule unit and that has a population of less than 2,000,000 inhabitants, that vacancy shall be filled by the county board of such home rule county.
    Any person appointed to fill a vacancy in the office of regional superintendent of schools of any educational service region must possess the qualifications required to be elected to the position of regional superintendent of schools, and shall obtain a certificate of eligibility from the State Superintendent of Education and file same with the county clerk of the county in which the regional superintendent's office is located.
    If the regional superintendent of schools is called into the active military service of the United States, his office shall not be deemed to be vacant, but a temporary appointment shall be made as in the case of a vacancy. The appointee shall perform all the duties of the regional superintendent of schools during the time the regional superintendent of schools is in the active military service of the United States, and shall be paid the same compensation apportioned as to the time of service, and such appointment and all authority thereunder shall cease upon the discharge of the regional superintendent of schools from such active military service. The appointee shall give the same bond as is required of a regularly elected regional superintendent of schools.
(Source: P.A. 96-893, eff. 7-1-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3A-7) (from Ch. 122, par. 3A-7)
    Sec. 3A-7. Expenses of regional office - Budget. When 2 or more regions have been consolidated into a single educational service region, the costs of secretarial service, office space and other expenses necessarily incurred in the operation of the office of the regional superintendent shall be allocated to and borne by the counties comprising the region in the proportion that the equalized and assessed value of the taxable property in the county bears to the total equalized and assessed value of all taxable property in the region. For the purposes of calculating equalized assessed valuation of taxable property under this Section for any tax year beginning January 1, 1981 or thereafter, the equalized assessed valuation for a county shall be determined by adding to the real property equalized assessed valuation for the county an amount computed by dividing the amount of money received by the county under the provisions of "An Act in relation to the abolition of ad valorem personal property tax and the replacement of revenues lost thereby, and amending and repealing certain Acts and parts of Acts in connection therewith", certified August 14, 1979, as amended, by the total tax rate for the county.
    By October 1 annually, the regional superintendent shall prepare a budget, setting out the anticipated income for his educational service region and a statement of the costs of secretarial services, office space and other expenses to be incurred in the operation of his office, and shall submit that budget to the county board of each of the counties in his region for approval. No such costs or expenses may be incurred except pursuant to that budget as approved by each of the county boards concerned. The budget may be amended, modified or supplemented upon the vote of a 2/3 majority of each of those county boards.
(Source: P.A. 82-646.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3A-8) (from Ch. 122, par. 3A-8)
    Sec. 3A-8. The location of the office for a multi-county educational service region, which has been consolidated pursuant to the terms of this Article, shall be determined by a committee composed of the chairmen of the county boards of all counties in the region. In the event of a tie vote by such committee, the chairman of the regional board of school trustees shall cast the deciding vote.
(Source: P.A. 86-1028.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3A-9) (from Ch. 122, par. 3A-9)
    Sec. 3A-9. Disconnection. An educational service region, consisting of 2 or more counties, may be restructured by the disconnection of a county from the educational service region as provided in this Article. However, no educational service region involved in the disconnection may contain less than 33,000 inhabitants after the disconnection, unless it is a region which after the disconnection contains an area that was formed from the consolidation of 3 or more regions.
    Disconnection may be initiated by a petition requesting an election on whether the county should be disconnected from the present educational service region and whether the county should be consolidated with a different specified educational service region. A petition shall be signed by 10% of the legal resident voters of the county to which the petition refers; the petitioners' addresses shall be included.
    A petition shall be filed with the regional superintendent of the educational service region of which the county is a part not more than 99 nor less than 92 days prior to a regular scheduled election. The regional superintendent and the county clerk shall determine the sufficiency of the petition. If the petition is deemed sufficient by the regional superintendent and the county clerk, the regional superintendent shall call an election at the next regular scheduled election for the purpose of presenting a public measure, in accord with the petition, to the voters of the county to be disconnected as specified in the petition.
(Source: P.A. 81-1489.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3A-10) (from Ch. 122, par. 3A-10)
    Sec. 3A-10. Notice of Election. A notice of the election shall be given in accordance with the general election law. In addition to the requirements of the general election law the notice shall be in substantially the following form:
NOTICE OF EDUCATIONAL SERVICE REGION ELECTION
    Notice is hereby given that on (insert date) an election will be held in ............... County, Illinois, for the purpose of voting upon this question:
    Shall ............. County be disconnected from the Educational Service Region for the Counties of ................ and ............. and shall the regional board of school trustees for ............. County be requested to approve the consolidation of the counties into a single educational service region?
(Source: P.A. 91-357, eff. 7-29-99.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3A-12) (from Ch. 122, par. 3A-12)
    Sec. 3A-12. Limitation on successive petitions. If a majority of those voting in a disconnection election do not favor disconnection, no petition for a disconnection election shall be submitted to the regional superintendent unless the resulting election would be held at a regular election in accordance with the general election law.
(Source: P.A. 82-458.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3A-13) (from Ch. 122, par. 3A-13)
    Sec. 3A-13. Petition for Consolidation. If a majority of those voting in the disconnection election favor disconnection and requesting consolidation with another educational service region, the regional superintendent shall notify, within 30 days of the declaration of official results, the regional board of school trustees for the educational service region approved by the voters in the election of the official results. When the official results are received, the regional board of school trustees shall conduct a hearing on the petition, after notice of hearing has been published once, not more than 15 nor less than 10 days before the day of the hearing, in one or more newspapers having general circulation in the region and in one or more newspapers having general circulation in the county which is petitioning for the consolidation. The secretary of the regional board of school trustees shall notify the secretary of each school board affected by the proposed consolidation, the chairman of the county board of each county affected thereby and the State Superintendent of Education that the petition has been filed. The notice shall state the prayer of the petition and the date, time and place of the hearing. The State Board of Education shall pay the expenses of the hearing. Evidence admissible at the hearing shall include, but not be limited to, the school needs and conditions in the territory affected by the proposed consolidation, whether or not the area is compact and contiguous; and whether or not the proposed consolidation would be in the best interests of the schools in the area and the educational welfare of the pupils of these schools. A record of the proceedings shall be kept and a competent reporter shall be employed to take stenographic or stenotype notes of all testimony. At the hearing each resident of the region or of the county petitioning for consolidation shall have the rights provided for residents under Section 7-6 and the final order of the regional board of school trustees shall be subject to review as provided in Sections 7-6 and 7-7.
    Within 10 days of the hearing the regional board of school trustees shall meet and render a decision with regard to the hearing on the petition. A copy of the final decision of the regional board of school trustees shall be filed with the State Board of Education within 30 days after the conclusion of the hearing. If the regional board of school trustees renders a decision approving the consolidation, the region and the county shall be consolidated into a single educational service region and the State Board of Education shall notify all interested parties, including the county clerks of the counties affected thereby and the Secretary of State. The effective date of the consolidation shall be immediately after the time for appeal of the order of consolidation has passed or after the final disposition of any appeal taken from a consolidation order.
    If the regional board of school trustees renders a decision denying the consolidation, a majority of the school boards located within the county disconnected, upon the adoption of appropriate resolutions, may petition another educational service region for consolidation. The proceedings on this petition shall be consistent with this Section.
(Source: P.A. 86-1028.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3A-14) (from Ch. 122, par. 3A-14)
    Sec. 3A-14. Interim Period. An educational service region shall continue to serve a county as herein provided until the time the consolidation is effective as provided for in Section 3A-13.
(Source: P.A. 80-951.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3A-15) (from Ch. 122, par. 3A-15)
    Sec. 3A-15. Legal representation. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, upon request the State's attorney of the county where the regional superintendent's office is located shall act as the legal representative of the regional superintendent of schools; however, where matters arise which are within the exclusive jurisdiction of another State's attorney, said State's attorney shall provide legal representation. If, in multicounty educational service regions, the county boards grant approval through an intergovernmental agreement, or if, in educational service regions serving only one county, the county board grants approval, then the regional superintendent of schools is authorized to hire private legal counsel to represent him or her in legal matters, and each county located within the region shall pay a per capita share of the legal fees incurred, based on the number of people in the county according to the most recent U.S. census.
(Source: P.A. 94-153, eff. 7-8-05.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3A-16)
    Sec. 3A-16. Regional office of education advisory board.
    (a) Beginning October 1, 2009, a regional office of education advisory board shall be established within each region serving Class I counties or within each group of regions participating in an intergovernmental agreement for the provision of professional development to advise the regional superintendent of schools of the region or regions involved concerning the planning and delivery of professional development programs and services.
    (b) The advisory board shall consist of at least 9 members. All members of the advisory board shall be certified pursuant to Article 21 of this Code and be currently employed in positions requiring certification by a school district, special education cooperative, joint agreement, or regional office of education program. A majority of members shall be nominated by statewide organizations representing teachers within the region or regions and selected by the regional superintendent of the region or regions involved. Administrators shall be nominated by statewide organizations representing administrators within the region or regions and selected by the regional superintendent of the region or regions involved.
    (c) The regional office of education advisory board shall meet at least annually for the performance of its advisory duties.
(Source: P.A. 96-568, eff. 8-18-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3A-17)
    Sec. 3A-17. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 89-335, eff. 1-1-96. Repealed by P.A. 96-893, eff. 7-1-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/3A-18)
    Sec. 3A-18. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-619, eff. 11-14-11. Repealed internally, eff. 8-2-12.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 4 heading)
ARTICLE 4. DUTIES OF COUNTY BOARD

    (105 ILCS 5/4-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 4-1)
    Sec. 4-1. Duties of county board. The county board of each county shall perform the duties prescribed in this article.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/4-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 4-2)
    Sec. 4-2. Office and supplies. Provide for the county superintendent of schools a suitable office with necessary furniture and office supplies.
    On and after July 1, 1994, the provisions of this Section shall have no application in any county having a population of 2,000,000 or more inhabitants.
(Source: P.A. 87-654; 87-1251.)

    (105 ILCS 5/4-3) (from Ch. 122, par. 4-3)
    Sec. 4-3. Report of county superintendent.
    Examine and approve or reject the report of the county superintendent of schools made to it.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/4-4) (from Ch. 122, par. 4-4)
    Sec. 4-4. Traveling expenses. Allow, when they deem it proper, reasonable traveling expenses for the office of county superintendent of schools.
    On and after July 1, 1994, the provisions of this Section shall have no application in any county having a population of 2,000,000 or more inhabitants.
(Source: P.A. 87-654; 87-1251.)

    (105 ILCS 5/4-5) (from Ch. 122, par. 4-5)
    Sec. 4-5. Audit of bills.
    Audit at the regular meeting in September, and as near quarterly thereafter as it may have regular or special meetings, the itemized bills of the county superintendent of schools for his office and traveling expenses.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/4-6) (from Ch. 122, par. 4-6)
    Sec. 4-6. Employment of assistants. Authorize the county superintendent of schools to employ such assistants as he needs for the discharge of his duties and fix the compensation thereof, which compensation shall be paid out of the county treasury.
    On and after July 1, 1994, the provisions of this Section shall have no application in any county having a population of 2,000,000 or more inhabitants.
(Source: P.A. 87-654; 87-1251.)

    (105 ILCS 5/4-7) (from Ch. 122, par. 4-7)
    Sec. 4-7. Examination of financial statements.
    (a) Examine the financial statements of the county superintendent of schools required by Section 15-21 and compare them with vouchers.
    (b) The county board, or so many thereof as are present at its meeting, shall be liable individually to the fund injured and to the sureties of the county superintendent, if judgment is recovered from the sureties, for all damages occasioned by neglect of the duties, or any of them, required of the board by this section; but nothing herein shall be construed to exempt the sureties and they shall remain liable to the fund injured the same as if the members of the county board were not liable to them for neglect of their duty. On and after July 1, 1994, the provisions of this subsection (b) shall have no application in any county having a population of 2,000,000 or more inhabitants.
(Source: P.A. 87-654; 87-1251.)

    (105 ILCS 5/4-8) (from Ch. 122, par. 4-8)
    Sec. 4-8. Bond -- approval -- increase. Approve the bond of the county superintendent of schools, and increase the penalty thereof if, in its judgment the penalty should be increased.
    On and after July 1, 1994, the provisions of this Section shall have no application in any county having a population of 2,000,000 or more inhabitants.
(Source: P.A. 87-654; 87-1251.)

    (105 ILCS 5/4-9) (from Ch. 122, par. 4-9)
    Sec. 4-9. New bond. Require the county superintendent of schools, after notice given, to execute a new bond, conditioned and approved as the first bond, whenever it deems a new bond necessary, but the execution of such new bond shall not affect the old bond or the liability of the sureties thereon.
    On and after July 1, 1994, the provisions of this Section shall have no application in any county having a population of 2,000,000 or more inhabitants.
(Source: P.A. 87-654; 87-1251.)

    (105 ILCS 5/4-10) (from Ch. 122, par. 4-10)
    Sec. 4-10. Reports -- Removal from office.
    (a) Require the county superintendent of schools to make the reports to it provided for by law.
    (b) Remove the county superintendent of schools from office in case of neglect or refusal so to do, or for any palpable violation of law or omission of duty. On and after July 1, 1994, the provisions of this subsection (b) shall have no application in any county having a population of 2,000,000 or more inhabitants.
(Source: P.A. 87-654; 87-1251.)

    (105 ILCS 5/4-10.5)
    Sec. 4-10.5. Expenses for life-skills programs. Allow, when the county board deems it proper, reasonable expenses of the regional superintendent of schools to administer life-skills programs related to the healthy social and emotional development of children.
(Source: P.A. 95-391, eff. 8-23-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/4-11) (from Ch. 122, par. 4-11)
    Sec. 4-11. Depositories. The county board, when requested by the county superintendent of schools, shall designate one or more banks or savings and loan associations in which the funds and moneys received by him by virtue of his office may be deposited. When a bank or savings and loan association has been designated as a depository, it shall continue as such until 10 days have elapsed after a new depository is designated and qualified by furnishing the statement of resources and liabilities required by this Section. When a new depository is designated, the county board shall notify the sureties of the county superintendent of that fact, in writing, at least 5 days before the transfer of funds. The county superintendent of schools shall be discharged from responsibility for all funds and moneys deposited in the banks or savings and loan association so designated while such funds and moneys are so deposited.
    No bank or savings and loan association shall receive public funds as permitted by this Section, unless it has complied with the requirements established pursuant to Section 6 of "An Act relating to certain investments of public funds by public agencies", approved July 23, 1943, as now or hereafter amended.
(Source: P.A. 83-541.)

    (105 ILCS 5/4-12)
    Sec. 4-12. Educational service center support. Notwithstanding Sections 4-2, 4-4, 4-6, 4-7, 4-8, 4-9, and 4-10 of this Code, a county having a population of 2,000,000 or more inhabitants may provide financial or in-kind support to the educational service centers serving that county.
(Source: P.A. 96-893, eff. 7-1-10.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 5 heading)
ARTICLE 5. TRUSTEES OF SCHOOLS

    (105 ILCS 5/5-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 5-1)
    Sec. 5-1. County school units.
    (a) The territory in each county, exclusive of any school district governed by any special act which requires the district to appoint its own school treasurer, shall constitute a county school unit. County school units of less than 2,000,000 inhabitants shall be known as Class I county school units and the office of township trustees, where existing on July 1, 1962, in such units shall be abolished on that date and all books and records of such former township trustees shall be forthwith thereafter transferred to the county board of school trustees. County school units of 2,000,000 or more inhabitants shall be known as Class II county school units and shall retain the office of township trustees unless otherwise provided in subsection (b) or (c).
    (b) Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (c), the school board of any elementary school district having a fall, 1989 aggregate enrollment of at least 2,500 but less than 6,500 pupils and having boundaries that are coterminous with the boundaries of a high school district, and the school board of any high school district having a fall, 1989 aggregate enrollment of at least 2,500 but less than 6,500 pupils and having boundaries that are coterminous with the boundaries of an elementary school district, may, whenever the territory of such school district forms a part of a Class II county school unit, by proper resolution withdraw such school district from the jurisdiction and authority of the trustees of schools of the township in which such school district is located and from the jurisdiction and authority of the township treasurer in such Class II county school unit; provided that the school board of any such school district shall, upon the adoption and passage of such resolution, thereupon elect or appoint its own school treasurer as provided in Section 8-1. Upon the adoption and passage of such resolution and the election or appointment by the school board of its own school treasurer: (1) the trustees of schools in such township shall no longer have or exercise any powers and duties with respect to the school district governed by such school board or with respect to the school business, operations or assets of such school district; and (2) all books and records of the township trustees relating to the school business and affairs of such school district shall be transferred and delivered to the school board of such school district. Upon the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1993, the legal title to, and all right, title and interest formerly held by the township trustees in any school buildings and school sites used and occupied by the school board of such school district for school purposes, that legal title, right, title and interest thereafter having been transferred to and vested in the regional board of school trustees under P.A. 87-473 until the abolition of that regional board of school trustees by P.A. 87-969, shall be deemed transferred by operation of law to and shall vest in the school board of that school district.
    Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (c), the school boards of Oak Park & River Forest District 200, Oak Park Elementary School District 97, and River Forest School District 90 may, by proper resolution, withdraw from the jurisdiction and authority of the trustees of schools of Proviso and Cicero Townships and the township treasurer, provided that the school board shall, upon the adoption and passage of the resolution, elect or appoint its own school treasurer as provided in Section 8-1 of this Code. Upon the adoption and passage of the resolution and the election or appointment by the school board of its own school treasurer: (1) the trustees of schools in the township or townships shall no longer have or exercise any powers or duties with respect to the school district or with respect to the school business, operations, or assets of the school district; (2) all books and records of the trustees of schools and all moneys, securities, loanable funds, and other assets relating to the school business and affairs of the school district shall be transferred and delivered to the school board; and (3) all legal title to and all right, title, and interest formerly held by the trustees of schools in any common school lands, school buildings, or school sites used and occupied by the school board and all rights of property and causes of action pertaining to or constituting a part of the common school lands, buildings, or sites shall be deemed transferred by operation of law to and shall vest in the school board.
    Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (c), the respective school boards of Berwyn North School District 98, Berwyn South School District 100, Cicero School District 99, and J.S. Morton High School District 201 may, by proper resolution, withdraw from the jurisdiction and authority of the trustees of schools of Cicero Township and the township treasurer, provided that the school board shall, upon the adoption and passage of the resolution, elect or appoint its own school treasurer as provided in Section 8-1 of this Code. Upon the adoption and passage of the resolution and the election or appointment by the school board of its own school treasurer: (1) the trustees of schools in the township shall no longer have or exercise any powers or duties with respect to the school district or with respect to the school business, operations, or assets of the school district; (2) all books and records of the trustees of schools and all moneys, securities, loanable funds, and other assets relating to the school business and affairs of the school district shall be transferred and delivered to the school board; and (3) all legal title to and all right, title, and interest formerly held by the trustees of schools in any common school lands, school buildings, or school sites used and occupied by the school board and all rights of property and causes of action pertaining to or constituting a part of the common school lands, buildings, or sites shall be deemed transferred by operation of law to and shall vest in the school board.
    Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (c) of this Section and upon final judgment, including the exhaustion of all appeals or a settlement between all parties, regarding claims set forth in the case of Township Trustees of Schools Township 38 North, Range 12 East v. Lyons Township High School District No. 204 case N. 13 CH 23386 pending in 2018 in the Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois, County Department, Chancery Division, and all related pending claims, the school board of Lyons Township High School District 204 may commence, by proper resolution, to withdraw from the jurisdiction and authority of the trustees of schools of Lyons Township and the township treasurer, provided that the school board shall, upon the adoption and passage of the resolution, elect or appoint its own school treasurer as provided in Section 8-1 of this Code. Upon the adoption and passage of the resolution and the election or appointment by the school board of its own school treasurer commencing with the first day of the succeeding fiscal year, but not prior to July 1, 2019: (1) the trustees of schools in the township shall no longer have or exercise any powers or duties with respect to the school district or with respect to the school business, operations, or assets of the school district; (2) all books and records of the trustees of schools and all moneys, securities, loanable funds, and other assets relating to the school business and affairs of the school district shall be transferred and delivered to the school board, allowing for a reasonable period of time not to exceed 90 days to liquidate any pooled investments; and (3) all legal title to and all right, title, and interest formerly held by the trustees of schools in any common school lands, school buildings, or school sites used and occupied by the school board and all rights of property and causes of action pertaining to or constituting a part of the common school lands, buildings, or sites shall be deemed transferred by operation of law to and shall vest in the school board. The changes made to this Section by this amendatory Act of the 100th General Assembly are prospective only, starting from the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 100th General Assembly, and shall not affect any legal action pending on the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 100th General Assembly in the Illinois courts in which Lyons Township High School District 204 is a listed party.
    (c) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), the offices of township treasurer and trustee of schools of any township located in a Class II county school unit shall be abolished as provided in this subsection if all of the following conditions are met:
        (1) During the same 30 day period, each school board
    	
of each elementary and unit school district that is subject to the jurisdiction and authority of the township treasurer and trustees of schools of the township in which those offices are sought to be abolished gives written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested to the township treasurer and trustees of schools of that township of the date of a meeting of the school board, to be held not more than 90 nor less than 60 days after the date when the notice is given, at which meeting the school board is to consider and vote upon the question of whether there shall be submitted to the electors of the school district a proposition to abolish the offices of township treasurer and trustee of schools of that township. None of the notices given under this paragraph to the township treasurer and trustees of schools of a township shall be deemed sufficient or in compliance with the requirements of this paragraph unless all of those notices are given within the same 30 day period.
        (2) Each school board of each elementary and unit
    	
school district that is subject to the jurisdiction and authority of the township treasurer and trustees of schools of the township in which those offices are sought to be abolished, by the affirmative vote of at least 5 members of the school board at a school board meeting of which notice is given as required by paragraph (1) of this subsection, adopts a resolution requiring the secretary of the school board to certify to the proper election authorities for submission to the electors of the school district at the next consolidated election in accordance with the general election law a proposition to abolish the offices of township treasurer and trustee of schools of that township. None of the resolutions adopted under this paragraph by any elementary or unit school districts that are subject to the jurisdiction and authority of the township treasurer and trustees of schools of the township in which those offices are sought to be abolished shall be deemed in compliance with the requirements of this paragraph or sufficient to authorize submission of the proposition to abolish those offices to a referendum of the electors in any such school district unless all of the school boards of all of the elementary and unit school districts that are subject to the jurisdiction and authority of the township treasurer and trustees of schools of that township adopt such a resolution in accordance with the provisions of this paragraph.
        (3) The school boards of all of the elementary and
    	
unit school districts that are subject to the jurisdiction and authority of the township treasurer and trustees of schools of the township in which those offices are sought to be abolished submit a proposition to abolish the offices of township treasurer and trustee of schools of that township to the electors of their respective school districts at the same consolidated election in accordance with the general election law, the ballot in each such district to be in substantially the following form:
    ----------------------------------------------------------
OFFICIAL BALLOT
            Shall the offices of township
            treasurer and                       YES
            trustee of                      ------------------
            schools of Township .....           NO
            Range ..... be abolished?
    ----------------------------------------------------------
        (4) At the consolidated election at which the
    	
proposition to abolish the offices of township treasurer and trustee of schools of a township is submitted to the electors of each elementary and unit school district that is subject to the jurisdiction and authority of the township treasurer and trustee of schools of that township, a majority of the electors voting on the proposition in each such elementary and unit school district votes in favor of the proposition as submitted to them.
    If in each elementary and unit school district that is subject to the jurisdiction and authority of the township treasurer and trustees of schools of the township in which those offices are sought to be abolished a majority of the electors in each such district voting at the consolidated election on the proposition to abolish the offices of township treasurer and trustee of schools of that township votes in favor of the proposition as submitted to them, the proposition shall be deemed to have passed; but if in any such elementary or unit school district a majority of the electors voting on that proposition in that district fails to vote in favor of the proposition as submitted to them, then notwithstanding the vote of the electors in any other such elementary or unit school district on that proposition the proposition shall not be deemed to have passed in any of those elementary or unit school districts, and the offices of township treasurer and trustee of schools of the township in which those offices were sought to be abolished shall not be abolished, unless in each of those elementary and unit school districts remaining subject to the jurisdiction and authority of the township treasurer and trustees of schools of that township proceedings are again initiated to abolish those offices and all of the proceedings and conditions prescribed in paragraphs (1) through (4) of this subsection are repeated and met in each of those elementary and unit school districts.
    Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Section or any other provision of the School Code, the offices of township treasurer and trustee of schools of a township that has a population of less than 200,000 and that contains a unit school district and is located in a Class II county school unit shall also be abolished as provided in this subsection if all of the conditions set forth in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of this subsection are met and if the following additional condition is met:
        The electors in all of the school districts subject
    	
to the jurisdiction and authority of the township treasurer and trustees of schools of the township in which those offices are sought to be abolished shall vote at the consolidated election on the proposition to abolish the offices of township treasurer and trustee of schools of that township. If a majority of the electors in all of the school districts combined voting on the proposition vote in favor of the proposition, then the proposition shall be deemed to have passed; but if a majority of the electors voting on the proposition in all of the school district fails to vote in favor of the proposition as submitted to them, then the proposition shall not be deemed to have passed and the offices of township treasurer and trustee of schools of the township in which those offices were sought to be abolished shall not be abolished, unless and until the proceedings detailed in paragraphs (1) through (3) of this subsection and the conditions set forth in this paragraph are met.
    If the proposition to abolish the offices of township treasurer and trustee of schools of a township is deemed to have passed at the consolidated election as provided in this subsection, those offices shall be deemed abolished by operation of law effective on January 1 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which that consolidated election is held, provided that if after the election, the trustees of schools by resolution elect to abolish the offices of township treasurer and trustee of schools effective on July 1 immediately following the election, then the offices shall be abolished on July 1 immediately following the election. On the date that the offices of township treasurer and trustee of schools of a township are deemed abolished by operation of law, the school board of each elementary and unit school district and the school board of each high school district that is subject to the jurisdiction and authority of the township treasurer and trustees of schools of that township at the time those offices are abolished: (i) shall appoint its own school treasurer as provided in Section 8-1; and (ii) unless the term of the contract of a township treasurer expires on the date that the office of township treasurer is abolished, shall pay to the former township treasurer its proportionate share of any aggregate compensation that, were the office of township treasurer not abolished at that time, would have been payable to the former township treasurer after that date over the remainder of the term of the contract of the former township treasurer that began prior to but ends after that date. In addition, on the date that the offices of township treasurer and trustee of schools of a township are deemed abolished as provided in this subsection, the school board of each elementary school, high school and unit school district that until that date is subject to the jurisdiction and authority of the township treasurer and trustees of schools of that township shall be deemed by operation of law to have agreed and assumed to pay and, when determined, shall pay to the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund a proportionate share of the unfunded liability existing in that Fund at the time these offices are abolished in that calendar year for all annuities or other benefits then or thereafter to become payable from that Fund with respect to all periods of service performed prior to that date as a participating employee in that Fund by persons serving during those periods of service as a trustee of schools, township treasurer or regular employee in the office of the township treasurer of that township. That unfunded liability shall be actuarially determined by the board of trustees of the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund, and the board of trustees shall thereupon notify each school board required to pay a proportionate share of that unfunded liability of the aggregate amount of the unfunded liability so determined. The amount so paid to the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund by each of those school districts shall be credited to the account of the township in that Fund. For each elementary school, high school and unit school district under the jurisdiction and authority of a township treasurer and trustees of schools of a township in which those offices are abolished as provided in this subsection, each such district's proportionate share of the aggregate compensation payable to the former township treasurer as provided in this paragraph and each such district's proportionate share of the aggregate amount of the unfunded liability payable to the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund as provided in this paragraph shall be computed in accordance with the ratio that the number of pupils in average daily attendance in each such district for the school year last ending prior to the date on which the offices of township treasurer and trustee of schools of that township are abolished bears to the aggregate number of pupils in average daily attendance in all of those districts as so reported for that school year.
    Upon abolition of the offices of township treasurer and trustee of schools of a township as provided in this subsection: (i) the regional board of school trustees, in its corporate capacity, shall be deemed the successor in interest to the former trustees of schools of that township with respect to the common school lands and township loanable funds of the township; (ii) all right, title and interest existing or vested in the former trustees of schools of that township in the common school lands and township loanable funds of the township, and all records, moneys, securities and other assets, rights of property and causes of action pertaining to or constituting a part of those common school lands or township loanable funds, shall be transferred to and deemed vested by operation of law in the regional board of school trustees, which shall hold legal title to, manage and operate all common school lands and township loanable funds of the township, receive the rents, issues and profits therefrom, and have and exercise with respect thereto the same powers and duties as are provided by this Code to be exercised by regional boards of school trustees when acting as township land commissioners in counties having at least 220,000 but fewer than 2,000,000 inhabitants; (iii) the regional board of school trustees shall select to serve as its treasurer with respect to the common school lands and township loanable funds of the township a person from time to time also serving as the appointed school treasurer of any school district that was subject to the jurisdiction and authority of the township treasurer and trustees of schools of that township at the time those offices were abolished, and the person selected to also serve as treasurer of the regional board of school trustees shall have his compensation for services in that capacity fixed by the regional board of school trustees, to be paid from the township loanable funds, and shall make to the regional board of school trustees the reports required to be made by treasurers of township land commissioners, give bond as required by treasurers of township land commissioners, and perform the duties and exercise the powers of treasurers of township land commissioners; (iv) the regional board of school trustees shall designate in the manner provided by Section 8-7, insofar as applicable, a depositary for its treasurer, and the proceeds of all rents, issues and profits from the common school lands and township loanable funds of that township shall be deposited and held in the account maintained for those purposes with that depositary and shall be expended and distributed therefrom as provided in Section 15-24 and other applicable provisions of this Code; and (v) whenever there is vested in the trustees of schools of a township at the time that office is abolished under this subsection the legal title to any school buildings or school sites used or occupied for school purposes by any elementary school, high school or unit school district subject to the jurisdiction and authority of those trustees of school at the time that office is abolished, the legal title to those school buildings and school sites shall be deemed transferred by operation of law to and invested in the school board of that school district, in its corporate capacity under Section 10-22.35B of this Code, the same to be held, sold, exchanged leased or otherwise transferred in accordance with applicable provisions of this Code.
    Notwithstanding Section 2-3.25g of this Code, a waiver of a mandate established under this Section may not be requested.
(Source: P.A. 100-374, eff. 8-25-17; 100-921, eff. 8-17-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/5-1a) (from Ch. 122, par. 5-1a)
    Sec. 5-1a. High school districts. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article or the School Code, the school board of any high school district that is located in a Class II county school unit and that on or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1991 is subject to the jurisdiction and authority of a township treasurer and trustees of schools of a township in which all or any part of that school district is located may not withdraw from the jurisdiction and authority of that township treasurer and those trustees of schools and transfer or otherwise submit to the jurisdiction and authority of a township treasurer or trustees of school of another township, unless the school board of each underlying elementary school district whose territory includes all or any part of the territory included within that high school district, by resolution, consents to the proposed withdrawal by the school board of that high school district from the jurisdiction and authority of the township treasurer and trustees of schools of the township to which that high school district is subject and the transfer or other submission by the school board of that high school district to the jurisdiction and authority of a township treasurer or trustees of schools of another township.
    A high school district that is subject to the jurisdiction and authority of the township treasurer and trustees of schools of a township in which those offices are abolished as provided in subsection (c) of Section 5-1 shall thereupon be required to appoint its own school treasurer as provided in paragraph (4) of subsection (c) of Section 5-1 and subsection (c) of Section 8-1, and shall be subject to and governed by the other changes made to the School Code by this amendatory Act of 1991, insofar as the same are applicable to a high school district.
(Source: P.A. 87-473.)

    (105 ILCS 5/5-1b)
    Sec. 5-1b. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 94-432, eff. 8-2-05. Repealed internally, eff. 1-1-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/5-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 5-2)
    Sec. 5-2. Governing board.
    The school business of all school townships having school trustees shall be transacted by three trustees, to be elected by the qualified voters of the township, as hereinafter provided. The trustees shall be a body politic and corporate, by the name of "trustees of schools of township No. ...., range No. ....," according to the number, or in case of school townships created from two or more congressional townships, such name shall be "trustees of .... township .... county, Illinois." Such corporation shall have perpetual existence, with power to sue and be sued, and to plead and be impleaded, in all courts and places where judicial proceedings are had.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/5-2.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 5-2.1)
    Sec. 5-2.1. Eligible Voters: For the purposes of this Article persons who are qualified to vote in school elections shall be eligible to vote for the trustees of schools who have jurisdiction over the elementary school district or unit school district in which the person resides.
    If the application of this Section results in an elector voting for trustees of a school township in which he does not reside because the elementary or unit school district crosses township boundaries and has been assigned to the jurisdiction of the trustees of an adjoining township, that elector shall also be eligible to vote for the trustees of the township within which he resides. Moreover, an elector who resides in a high school district that crosses township boundaries and has been assigned to the jurisdiction of the trustees of an adjoining township shall be eligible to vote for both the trustees of the township in which he or she resides and the trustees of the township having jurisdiction over the high school district in which he or she resides.
(Source: P.A. 94-432, eff. 8-2-05.)

    (105 ILCS 5/5-2.2)
    Sec. 5-2.2. Designation of trustees; Township 36 North, Range 13 East. After the April 5, 2011 consolidated election, the trustees of schools in Township 36 North, Range 13 East shall no longer be elected pursuant to the provisions of Sections 5-2, 5-2.1, 5-3, 5-4, 5-12, and 5-13 of this Code. Any such trustees elected before such date may complete the term to which that trustee was elected, but shall not be succeeded by election. Instead, the board of education or board of school directors of each of the elementary and high school districts that are subject to the jurisdiction of Township 36 North, Range 13 East shall appoint one of the members to serve as trustee of schools. The trustees of schools shall be appointed by each board of education or board of school directors within 60 days after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 97th General Assembly and shall reorganize within 30 days after all the trustees of schools have been appointed or within 30 days after all the trustees of schools were due to have been appointed, whichever is sooner. Trustees of schools so appointed shall serve at the pleasure of the board of education or board of school directors appointing them, but in no event longer than 2 years unless reappointed.
    A majority of members of the trustees of schools shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The trustees shall organize by appointing one of their number president, who shall hold the office for 2 years. If the president is absent from any meeting, or refuses to perform any of the duties of the office, a president pro-tempore may be appointed. Trustees who serve on the board as a result of appointment or election at the time of the reorganization shall continue to serve as a member of the trustees of schools, with no greater or lesser authority than any other trustee, until such time as their elected term expires.
    Each trustee of schools appointed by a board of education or board of school directors shall be entitled to indemnification and protection against claims and suits by the board that appointed that trustee of schools for acts or omissions as a trustee of schools in the same manner and to the same extent as the trustee of schools is entitled to indemnification and protection for acts or omissions as a member of the board of education or board of school directors under Section 10-20.20 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 99-642, eff. 7-28-16.)

    (105 ILCS 5/5-3) (from Ch. 122, par. 5-3)
    Sec. 5-3. Eligibility of trustees. No person shall be eligible to the office of trustee of schools who is not a resident of the township and at least 18 years of age. If there are 3 or more school districts in a township which are subject to the jurisdiction of the trustees of schools of that township, no 2 trustees shall reside, when elected, in the same school district; except that in townships in which at least 90% of the electors reside in one school district which is subject to the jurisdiction of the trustees of schools of that township, this restriction shall not apply. No person shall be eligible to the office of trustee of schools and school director or school board member at the same time.
(Source: P.A. 86-1441.)

    (105 ILCS 5/5-4) (from Ch. 122, par. 5-4)
    Sec. 5-4. Election of trustees. The election of trustees of schools shall be held in odd-numbered years at the election specified in the general election law. In townships in which no election for school trustees has been held, or in townships in which from any cause there are no trustees of schools and the law requires that there be school trustees, the election of trustees of schools shall be held at the same time.
    No person shall be nominated for the office of trustee of schools, in townships containing 20,000 inhabitants or over, except by petition signed by at least twenty-five voters of the school township in which he is seeking nomination and election filed with the township treasurer, or, in case of a first election, with the county clerk.
    A candidate for election as a school trustee, who has petitioned for nomination to fill a full term and to fill a vacant term to be voted upon at the same election, must withdraw his or her petition for nomination from either the full term or the vacant term by written declaration, which shall be signed and acknowledged by an officer authorized to take such acknowledgments and which is filed with the township treasurer in the township in which he or she is a candidate within the time provided by the general election law.
(Source: P.A. 80-1469.)

    (105 ILCS 5/5-12) (from Ch. 122, par. 5-12)
    Sec. 5-12. Trustees' names and townships to regional superintendent. The returns of an election for trustees of schools shall be made to the county clerk. He shall furnish to the regional superintendent of schools, within 7 days after the returns have been made, the names of the trustees so returned to him, and shall specify the townships in which they have been elected.
(Source: P.A. 81-1490.)

    (105 ILCS 5/5-13) (from Ch. 122, par. 5-13)
    Sec. 5-13. Term of office of trustees. In townships already organized, the school trustee shall be elected in each odd numbered year for a term of 6 years to succeed the trustee whose term expires in such odd numbered year.
    The first-elected trustees in a newly organized township shall at their first meeting cast lots for their respective terms of office, for 2, 4 and 6 years; and thereafter 1 trustee shall be elected in each odd-numbered year.
(Source: P.A. 81-1490.)

    (105 ILCS 5/5-14) (from Ch. 122, par. 5-14)
    Sec. 5-14. Term of office of successors - Vacancies. Successors to the trustees whose terms of office expire at the time prescribed in Section 5-13, and their successors, shall hold their offices for 6 years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. Trustees of schools shall enter upon the duties of their office on the third Monday of the month following their election.
    Whenever a vacancy occurs, the remaining trustees shall fill the vacancy until the next regular school election, at which election a successor shall be elected to serve the remainder of the unexpired term. However, if the vacancy occurs with less than 28 months remaining in the term, or if the vacancy occurs less than 88 days before the next regularly scheduled election for this office then the person so appointed shall serve the remainder of the unexpired term, and no election to fill the vacancy shall be held. The successor shall have the same residential qualifications as his predecessor. Should they fail so to act, within 30 days after the vacancy occurs, the regional superintendent of the region in which the township lies, or if the township is divided by a county line or lines, the regional superintendent of the region in which a majority of the children, who reside in districts subject to the jurisdiction of the trustees of schools of such township, attend school, shall within 15 days after the remaining trustees have failed to fill the vacancy, fill the vacancy as provided for herein. The successor shall have the same type of residential qualifications as his predecessor.
(Source: P.A. 93-847, eff. 7-30-04.)

    (105 ILCS 5/5-15) (from Ch. 122, par. 5-15)
    Sec. 5-15. Organization. Within 10 days following commencement of their terms, the trustees shall organize by appointing 1 of their number president, who shall hold his office for 2 years. The president shall preside at all meetings of the board and shall sign the proceedings thereof when recorded. If the president is absent from any meeting, or refuses to perform any of the duties of his office, a president pro tempore may be appointed. The president may be removed by the trustees of schools for sufficient cause.
(Source: P.A. 81-1490.)

    (105 ILCS 5/5-16) (from Ch. 122, par. 5-16)
    Sec. 5-16. Meetings - Quorum. The trustees of school shall hold regular meetings on the first Monday of each calendar quarter or if such Monday falls on a holiday, then on the following Monday. Special meetings may be called at any time by the president or by two members. Two members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
(Source: P.A. 81-338.)

    (105 ILCS 5/5-17) (from Ch. 122, par. 5-17)
    Sec. 5-17. Payment of claims - Apportionment and distribution of funds. At the regular meetings, the trustees shall appropriate and pay from the income of the permanent township fund, if it is sufficient, all valid claims for the following:
        1. The compensation of the treasurer.
        2. The cost of publishing the annual statement.
        3. The cost of a record book, if any.
        4. The cost of dividing school lands and making
    	
plats.
    If the income of the permanent township fund is not sufficient to meet such items the additional amount needed may be taken from the total of other funds subject to distribution, each district -- exclusive of any district which has withdrawn from the jurisdiction and authority of the trustees of schools of the township and which has elected or appointed its own school treasurer as provided in subsection (b) of Section 5-1 -- being charged as its share of such items the proportion which the amount of school funds of the district handled by the township treasurer bears to the total amount of all school funds handled by such treasurer.
    In Class II county school units (excluding therefrom, however, any township therein in which the offices of township treasurer and trustee of schools have been abolished as provided in subsection (c) of Section 5-1) if any balance of the income from the permanent township fund in any township remains after paying such items, such balance shall be apportioned and distributed to the districts and parts of districts in the township -- including any district which has withdrawn from the jurisdiction and authority of the trustees of schools of the township and which has elected or appointed its own school treasurer as provided in subsection (b) of Section 5-1 -- in which schools have been kept as required by law during the preceding year ending June 30, according to the number of pupils in average daily attendance in grades one to eight inclusive. At the semi-annual meetings in all such townships all remaining funds subject to distribution shall be apportioned and distributed to the districts and parts of districts in the township in which schools have been kept as required by law during the preceding year ending June 30, in the manner and subject to the limitations prescribed in Sections 18-2 through 18-11 for the distribution of the common school fund among the counties, provided that -- except for any balance of the income from the permanent township fund remaining after payment of the items set forth in subparagraphs 1, 2, 3 and 4 of this Section -- no funds shall be apportioned or distributed to any school district which has withdrawn from the jurisdiction and authority of the trustees of schools and appointed its own school treasurer pursuant to Section 5-1; and the trustees shall direct the treasurer to make a regular monthly apportionment and distribution between semi-annual meetings, in the manner prescribed by those sections, of any available funds on hand from the common school fund. The funds distributed shall be credited to the respective districts and parts of districts.
    In Class I county school units and in any township forming a part of a Class II county school unit in which township the offices of township treasurer and trustee of schools have been abolished as provided in subsection (c) of Section 5-1, if any balance of income from the permanent township fund in any township remains after paying such items, such balance or a part thereof equal to but not greater than the then current tax levy or tax levies for common school purposes by all the school districts or parts of school districts in said township on property in said township in process of collection in the county wherein the township having such fund is located, shall, upon an order drawn by the treasurer and signed by the president and secretary of the township land commissioners or regional board of school trustees, be paid annually on or before February 1 to the County Treasurer of the county in which such township is situated. It shall then be the duty of the County Treasurer to apply and credit the sum so received upon all tax bills for school purposes of the taxpayers in the township, said sum to be applied and credited proportionately upon the basis of the value of assessed property represented by each such tax bill. Any sum received by the County Treasurer in excess of the amount required to discharge in full the amount of all taxes for school purposes so extended against taxable property within the township shall be held by the County Treasurer and applied to taxes subsequently extended for such purposes: Provided, that if a petition, signed by at least 5% of the legal voters of the township, is presented to the regional superintendent of schools of the educational service region in which the township is located requesting a vote on the proposition that such balance of the income from the permanent township fund shall be apportioned and distributed to the districts and parts of districts in the township in which schools have been kept as required by law during the preceding year ending June 30, according to the number of pupils in average daily attendance in grades one to eight, inclusive, upon an order drawn by the treasurer and signed by the president and secretary of the township land commissioners or regional board of school trustees, to be paid annually on or before February 1, the regional superintendent of schools shall certify to the proper election authority the proposition for submission to the voters of the township in accordance with the general election law. The treasurer shall cause a copy of the order to be published in one or more newspapers published in the county school unit within 10 days after the order is drawn. If no newspaper is published in the county school unit, the order shall be published in a newspaper having general circulation within the county school unit. The publication of the order shall include a notice of (1) the specific number of voters required to sign a petition requesting that the proposition to apportion and distribute to the several school districts the excess of the income from the permanent township fund be submitted to the voters of the township; (2) the time within which the petition must be filed; and (3) the date of the prospective referendum. The treasurer shall provide a petition form to any individual requesting one. If the proposition receives a majority of the votes cast thereon, it shall supersede the preceding provisions for the distribution of such balance.
(Source: P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/5-18) (from Ch. 122, par. 5-18)
    Sec. 5-18. Statements of conditions of schools. Trustees of schools shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, by the township treasurer, the directors or board members of the several districts or other person, and forwarded to the regional superintendent of the region in which the township lies, on or before July 15 annually, and at such other times as may be required by the regional superintendent of schools or by the State Board of Education, a statement exhibiting the condition of the schools subject to the jurisdiction and authority of such trustees in the respective townships for the preceding year, commencing on July 1 and ending June 30 which statement shall be in the form, and shall contain the information required by the State Board of Education. Any township from which such report is not so received shall forfeit its portion of the distributive fund for the next ensuing year.
(Source: P.A. 86-1441.)

    (105 ILCS 5/5-19) (from Ch. 122, par. 5-19)
    Sec. 5-19. Township divided by county lines - Statistics and information. If a township is divided by a county line or lines, the trustees of schools shall make, or cause to be made, separate enumerations of all statistics and other information required by the State Board of Education, and report them separately to the several regional superintendents. All parts of such statistical information which cannot practically be reported separately shall be reported to the regional superintendent of the county in which the sixteenth section of such township is situated.
(Source: P.A. 81-1508.)

    (105 ILCS 5/5-20) (from Ch. 122, par. 5-20)
    Sec. 5-20. Examination of books, securities and effects - Accounts and vouchers. At each regular meeting, and at such other meetings as they may think proper, the trustees of schools shall examine all books, notes, mortgages, securities, papers, moneys and effects of the corporation, and the accounts and vouchers of the township treasurer or other township school officer, and shall make such order for their security, preservation, collection, correction of errors, if any, and for their proper disposition, as may be necessary.
(Source: P.A. 81-338.)

    (105 ILCS 5/5-21) (from Ch. 122, par. 5-21)
    Sec. 5-21. Gifts, grants, donations, legacies - Title to property. The trustees of schools in townships in which that office has not been abolished as provided in subsection (c) of Section 5-1 may receive any gift, grant, donation or legacy made for the use of any school or library or for any other school purpose within their jurisdiction. They are invested in their corporate capacity with the title of all school buildings and school sites, except as otherwise provided by clause (3) of subsection (b) of Section 5-1 with respect to school districts which have withdrawn from the jurisdiction and authority of the trustees of school. All conveyances of real estate made to the trustees of schools shall be made to them in their corporate name and to their successors in office. School districts may take and convey title to real estate to be improved by buildings or other structures for vocational or other educational training of pupils as provided in Section 10-23.3. If legal title to the real estate to be so improved for vocational or other educational training of pupils as provided in Section 10-23.3 is not held by the school board of the school district, the trustees of schools or other school officials having legal title to those school sites or other school property shall convey to the school district the title to any such school site or other school property or portion thereof held for such district, to be used as provided in Section 10-23.3, upon being presented with a resolution adopted by at least 2/3 of the members of such board requesting such conveyance.
    If the trustees of schools for a township are no longer in existence, the school district shall take and convey title to all school buildings and school sites to be acquired within such township. If the trustees of schools had previously taken title to a school building or a school site and such trustees are no longer in existence, the school district shall by operation of law automatically be vested with title to all school buildings and school sites within such township and shall have authority to convey title thereto.
(Source: P.A. 87-473; 88-155.)

    (105 ILCS 5/5-22) (from Ch. 122, par. 5-22)
    Sec. 5-22. Sales of school sites, buildings or other real estate. When, in the opinion of the school board, a school site, or portion thereof, building, or site with building thereon or any other real estate of the district has become unnecessary, unsuitable, or inconvenient for a school or unnecessary for the uses of the district, the school board, by a resolution adopted by at least two-thirds of the board members, may sell or direct that the property be sold in the manner provided in the Local Government Property Transfer Act or in the manner herein provided or, in the case of residential property constructed or renovated by students as part of a curricular program, may engage the services of a licensed real estate broker to sell the property for a commission not to exceed 7%, contingent on the public listing of the property on a multiple listing service for a minimum of 14 calendar days and the sale of the property within 120 days.
    Unless legal title to the land is held by the school board, the school board shall forthwith notify the trustees of schools or other school officials having legal title to such land of the terms upon which they desire the property to be sold. If the property is to be sold to another unit of local government or school district, the school board, trustees of schools, or other school officials having legal title to the land shall proceed in the manner provided in the Local Government Property Transfer Act. In all other cases, except if the property is to be sold to a tenant that has leased the property for 10 or more years and that tenant is a non-profit agency, the school board, trustees of schools, or other school officials having legal title to the land shall, within 60 days after adoption of the resolution (if the school board holds legal title to the land), or within 60 days after the trustees of school or other school officials having legal title receive the notice (if the school board does not hold legal title to the land), sell the property at public sale, by auction or sealed bids, after first giving notice of the time, place, and terms thereof by notice published once each week for 3 successive weeks prior to the date of the sale if sale is by auction, or prior to the final date of acceptance of bids if sale is by sealed bids, in a newspaper published in the district or, if no such newspaper is published in the district, then in a newspaper published in the county and having a general circulation in the district; however, if territory containing a school site, building, or site with building thereon, is detached from the school district of which it is a part after proceedings have been commenced under this Section for the sale of that school site, building, or site with building thereon, but before the sale is held, then the school board, trustees of schools, or other school officials having legal title shall not advertise or sell that school site, building, or site with building thereon, pursuant to those proceedings. The notices may be in the following form:
NOTICE OF SALE
    Notice is hereby given that on (insert date), the (here insert title of the school board, trustees of school, or other school officials holding legal title) of (county) (Township No. ...., Range No. .... P.M. ....) will sell at public sale (use applicable alternative) (at ......... (state location of sale which shall be within the district), at .... ..M.,) (by taking sealed bids which shall be accepted until .... ..M., on (insert date), at (here insert location where bids will be accepted which shall be within the district) which bids will be opened at .... ..M. on (insert date) at (here insert location where bids will be opened which shall be within the district)) the following described property: (here describe the property), which sale will be made on the following terms to-wit: (here insert terms of sale)
....
....
....
(Here insert title of school
officials holding legal title)

    For purposes of determining "terms of sale" under this Section, the General Assembly declares by this clarifying and amendatory Act of 1983 that "terms of sale" are not limited to sales for cash only but include contracts for deed, mortgages, and such other seller financed terms as may be specified by the school board.
    If a school board specifies a reasonable minimum selling price and that price is not met or if no bids are received, the school board may adopt a resolution determining or directing that the services of a licensed real estate broker be engaged to sell the property for a commission not to exceed 7%, contingent on the sale of the property within 120 days. If legal title to the property is not held by the school board, the trustees of schools or other school officials having legal title shall, upon receipt of the resolution, engage the services of a licensed real estate broker as directed in the resolution. The board may accept a written offer equal to or greater than the established minimum selling price for the described property. The services of a licensed real estate broker may be utilized to seek a buyer. If the board lowers the minimum selling price on the described property, the public sale procedures set forth in this Section must be followed. The board may raise the minimum selling price without repeating the public sale procedures.
    In the case of a sale of property to a tenant that has leased the property for 10 or more years and that is a non-profit agency, an appraisal is required prior to the sale. If the non-profit agency purchases the property for less than the appraised value and subsequently sells the property, the agency may retain only a percentage of the profits that is proportional to the percentage of the appraisal, plus any improvements made by the agency while the agency was the owner, that the agency paid in the initial sale. The remaining portion of the profits made by the non-profit agency shall revert to the school district.
    The deed of conveyance shall be executed by the president and clerk or secretary of the school board, trustees of schools, or other school officials having legal title to the land, and the proceeds paid to the school treasurer for the benefit of the district. The school board shall use the proceeds from the sale first to pay the principal and interest on any outstanding bonds on the property being sold, and after all such bonds have been retired, the remaining proceeds from the sale next shall be used by the school board to meet any urgent district needs as determined under Sections 2-3.12 and 17-2.11 and then for any other authorized purpose and for deposit into any district fund. But whenever the school board of any school district determines that any schoolhouse site with or without a building thereon is of no further use to the district, and agrees with the school board of any other school district within the boundaries of which the site is situated, upon the sale thereof to that district, and agrees upon the price to be paid therefor, and the site is selected by the purchasing district in the manner required by law, then after the payment of the compensation the school board, township trustees, or other school officials having legal title to the land of the schools shall, by proper instrument in writing, convey the legal title of the site to the school board of the purchasing district, or to the trustees of schools for the use of the purchasing district, in accordance with law. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to any sale made pursuant to Section 5-23 or Section 5-24 or Section 32-4.
(Source: P.A. 99-794, eff. 1-1-17; 100-963, eff. 1-1-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/5-23) (from Ch. 122, par. 5-23)
    Sec. 5-23. Exchange of properties.
    Whenever the school board, by a two-thirds majority of its members shall find and declare the following propositions and shall cause to be recorded in the Recorder's Office a certificate embodying such findings and declarations duly signed by its president and attested by its secretary or clerk, then said school board may cause the exchange of a present school site or site with building thereon for a substitutional site without a referendum approving such exchange. The above findings and declarations shall establish the following: (1) That in the opinion of the school board a school site or site with building thereon has become unsuitable or inconvenient for a school; (2) that a substitutional school site has been offered in exchange for the present site which is a suitable, convenient and desirable site for a school and (3) that the value of the substitutional site is equal to or exceeds the value of the present site for which it is to be exchanged, the criterion of value to be that of a fair market value. When such certificate has been recorded as aforesaid, the school board shall transmit a copy of said certificate to the trustees of schools or other school officials having legal title to such land and shall request the execution of a deed of conveyance by the president and clerk, or secretary, as the case may be, to be delivered upon the receipt of a good and sufficient deed conveying to the trustees of schools or other school officials entitled under the statute to hold legal title to lands in the particular school district a good title to the substitutional site; and such president and clerk, or secretary, as the case may be, shall comply with such request. If the school board of a school district holds legal title to any lands to be exchanged under this Section, the certificate shall be recorded by the school board, and the deed of conveyance shall be executed by the president and by the secretary or clerk of the school board, as the case may be, and shall be delivered when a good and sufficient deed conveying the legal title of the substitutional site to the school board is delivered to the school board. The certificate provided for shall set forth an accurate legal description of the present school site and of the substitutional site offered as aforesaid.
(Source: P.A. 88-155.)

    (105 ILCS 5/5-24) (from Ch. 122, par. 5-24)
    Sec. 5-24. Sale to another school district or municipality. Whenever a petition is presented to the school board of a school district requesting the sale of school grounds and buildings to another school district or other municipality, which petition is signed by 10% of the voters of the district, the school board of the district shall adopt a resolution for the sale of such school grounds and buildings, and fix the price therefor, and shall thereupon order the secretary to certify to the proper election authorities the proposition for submission to the voters of the district in accordance with the general election law; and if a majority of the votes cast upon the proposition are in favor of the sale, then the school board, trustees of schools of the township in which the school district is located, or other school officials having legal title shall convey by its president and clerk or secretary, upon receipt of the purchase price, the property so to be sold; and the purchase price thereof shall be placed with the proper treasurer for the benefit of the school district so selling the property. The proposition shall be substantially in the following form:
--------------------------------------------------------------
    Shall School District Number
...., of.... County, Illinois,           YES
sell to School District
Number...., (or other municipality)  -------------------------
of.... County, Illinois,
the following described property
(here describe the ground)                NO
for the sum of.... Dollars?
--------------------------------------------------------------
(Source: P.A. 88-155.)

    (105 ILCS 5/5-25) (from Ch. 122, par. 5-25)
    Sec. 5-25. Moneys paid to treasurer.
    The trustees of schools or township land commissioners shall cause all moneys for the use of the school districts to be paid to the proper treasurer thereof.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/5-26) (from Ch. 122, par. 5-26)
    Sec. 5-26. Purchase of real estate in satisfaction of judgment. The trustees of schools or township land commissioners may purchase real estate in satisfaction of any judgment in any action wherein the trustees or township land commissioners or the county superintendent of schools are parties, if, in their opinion the interests of the township fund will be promoted thereby.
(Source: P.A. 79-1366.)

    (105 ILCS 5/5-27) (from Ch. 122, par. 5-27)
    Sec. 5-27. Compromise, settlements and cancellations.
    The trustees of schools or township land commissioners may: make all settlements with persons indebted to them in their official capacity; receive deeds to real estate in compromise; and may cancel notes, bonds, mortgages, and judgments for the benefit of any school township or district.
(Source: P.A. 84-452.)

    (105 ILCS 5/5-28) (from Ch. 122, par. 5-28)
    Sec. 5-28. Lease or sale of lands. The trustees of schools or township land commissioners may lease or sell any lands that come into their possession in the manner described in Sections 5-26 or 5-27. When in their opinion it is to the best interest of the schools of the township or district interested in any such lands that they be sold, the trustees shall adopt a resolution to such effect and in such resolution shall specify the time, place and terms of sale. The sale shall be at public auction and the trustees shall give notice thereof by publishing notice once each week for three successive weeks prior to the date of the sale in a newspaper published in the township to which the real estate belongs, and if the lands to be sold lie outside of the township to which they belong then such notice is to be published as herein provided in a newspaper published in the township in which the land lies or, if no such newspaper is published either in the township where the real estate belongs or in the township where the land lies, then in a newspaper published in the county and having a general circulation in the township affected. The notices shall describe the property and state the time, place and terms of the sale. The trustees have the right to reject any and all bids. Upon the sale being made, deed of conveyance shall be executed by the president and clerk of the trustees and the proceeds shall be paid to the township treasurer for the benefit of the township or the district interested in the lands.
(Source: P.A. 100-963, eff. 1-1-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/5-29) (from Ch. 122, par. 5-29)
    Sec. 5-29. Sale of school land for roads.
    Whenever the State, county, city, village, incorporated town, township or road district authorities lay out a new road, street or highway, or alter, widen or relocate existing roads, streets or highways, and for such purposes require lands used for school sites, or land owned for school purposes, the trustees of schools or school officials having legal title to such lands have the power, with the consent of the school board of the district, to sell and convey to the State, county, city, village, incorporated town, township or road district the land required for such purposes, or may dedicate to public use for street and highway purposes as much of said school land as may be necessary to open, extend, alter, widen or relocate any street or highway which may be required by the municipal authorities to be opened, extended, altered, widened or relocated, if they are of the opinion that the benefit to accrue for the opening, extending, altering, widening or relocating of such street or highway will compensate for the strip so dedicated.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/5-30) (from Ch. 122, par. 5-30)
    Sec. 5-30. Easements.
    The trustees of schools or other school officials having legal title to school sites or land owned for school purposes shall have the power, with the consent of the school board of the district wherein the lands are located, to grant temporary or permanent easements for sewer, water drainage or utility purposes to municipalities, corporations or persons on such terms as the school board may determine.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/5-31) (from Ch. 122, par. 5-31)
    Sec. 5-31. Division of township into districts - Territory taken from special charter district. The trustees of schools in newly organized townships shall divide the township into school districts to suit the wishes or convenience of a majority of the inhabitants of the township, and shall prepare or cause to be prepared a map of the township, on which the district or districts shall be designated by their respective numbers. The trustees of schools shall also cause any territory taken from a school district acting under a special charter to be formed and established into a school district to be governed under such general school laws of the State within thirty days from the time such territory is taken from the district acting under a special charter; and the trustees shall order an election for the purpose of electing directors for such district and shall certify such offices within ten days after the organization thereof. The first election shall be held at the next regular election for school district officers, and until the directors elected at that time take office, the Regional Superintendent may fill the office by appointment. If such territory has not sufficient inhabitants and children to establish and maintain a school, the trustees may annex it to an adjoining district or districts.
(Source: P.A. 81-1490.)

    (105 ILCS 5/5-32) (from Ch. 122, par. 5-32)
    Sec. 5-32. Failure to maintain schools - Transportation and tuition. If any school district other than a non-high school district shall for 1 year fail to maintain within the boundaries of the school district a recognized public school as required by law, such district shall become automatically dissolved and the property and territory of such district shall be disposed of in the manner provided for the disposal of territory and property in Section 7-11 of this Act. However, a school district shall not be dissolved where the State Board of Education and the regional superintendent of the region in which a district has legally authorized the building of a school and legally selected a school house site and has issued bonds for such building shall jointly find and certify that such building has been authorized, site selected and bonds issued.
    If a district has its territory included within a petition to form a community unit district under Article 11E of this Code, that district may not be dissolved under this Section until the end of the school year in which all proceedings relating to formation of that community unit district are finally concluded, whether by disallowance of the petition, by referendum, by a final court decision or otherwise. Until such proceedings are finally concluded, the regional superintendent having jurisdiction of the district that is not maintaining a recognized school shall assign the pupils of that district to an adjoining school district, subject to the requirement that the district from which the pupils are so assigned shall pay tuition for such pupils to the district to which the pupils are assigned, in accordance with Section 10-20.12a of this Act or in such lesser amount as may be agreed to by the 2 districts.
    However, until July 1, 1969 or one year after the entry of a final decision by a court of competent jurisdiction in the event of litigation with respect to any of the matters set forth in this Section, whichever is the later, notwithstanding the provisions of this Section, any protectorate high school district composed of contiguous and compact territory having not less than 2,000 inhabitants and which has an equalized assessed valuation of not less than $6,000,000, shall be and remain a protectorate high school district if a majority of the pupils attend a high school in a special charter district maintaining grades 1 through 12 and if during that period the voters of the district, by referendum to be ordered by the board, vote in favor of the proposition that such district maintain and operate a high school within such district, and also authorize the purchase of a school site, the building of a school building and the issuance of bonds for such purpose, which bonds are duly issued. The Board shall certify the proposition to the proper election authorities for submission, in accordance with the general election law.
    The proposition to maintain and operate a high school within such district shall be in substantially the following form:
--------------------------------------------------------------
Shall ......................
High School District Number ......,     YES
........... County, Illinois,
maintain and operate a high school   -------------------------
within that High School
District and for the benefit            NO
of the pupils residing therein?
--------------------------------------------------------------
and is approved if a majority of the voters voting on the proposition is in favor thereof. The proposition of purchasing a school site, the building of a school building and the issuance of bonds for such purpose shall be submitted to the voters and may be voted upon at the same election that the proposition of maintaining and operating a high school within the district is submitted or at any regularly scheduled election subsequent thereto as may be ordered by the board. Thereupon, that protectorate high school district shall thereafter exist as a community high school district and possess and enjoy all of the powers, duties and authorities of a community high school district under Article 12 of this Act.
    Throughout its existence as a protectorate district and until the legal voters residing in the district have determined to maintain and operate a high school within the district and have been authorized to purchase a school site, build a school building and to issue bonds for such purpose and which bonds are duly issued, or until the dissolution of the district as required by this Section, such protectorate district may use its funds to pay for the tuition and transportation of the pupils in such district that attend a high school in a special charter district maintaining grades 1 through 12. A protectorate high school district is defined to be a district which does not own or operate its own school buildings.
(Source: P.A. 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/5-34) (from Ch. 122, par. 5-34)
    Sec. 5-34. Evidence of indebtedness not in proper form-Securities insufficient- Action taken.
    When any county superintendent of schools notifies the trustees of schools of a township, in writing, that the notes, bonds, mortgages or other evidences of indebtedness which have been taken officially by the township treasurer are not in proper form, or that securities which he has taken are insufficient, the trustees shall at once take such action as may be necessary to protect the property or fund of the township and the district. For a failure or refusal to take such action within 20 days after such notice the trustees of schools, each in his individual capacity, shall be guilty of a petty offense and shall be liable to a fine of not less than twenty-five nor more than one hundred dollars, to be recovered before any circuit court, which when collected shall be paid to the county superintendent of the proper county for the use of the schools. The payment of this fine shall not relieve the trustees from any civil liability they may have incurred from such neglect of duty.
(Source: P.A. 77-2267.)

    (105 ILCS 5/5-35) (from Ch. 122, par. 5-35)
    Sec. 5-35. Liability of trustees for sufficiency of securities taken from township treasurer. Trustees of schools shall be liable, jointly and severally, for the sufficiency of securities taken from township treasurers; and in case of judgment against any treasurer and his sureties for or on account of any default of such treasurer, on which the money is not made for want of sufficient property whereon to levy for the enforcement of a judgment, a civil action may be maintained against the trustees, jointly and severally, and the amount not collected on the judgment shall be recovered with costs of the action from such trustees. If the trustees can show, satisfactorily, that the security taken from the treasurer, was, at the time it was taken, sufficient, they shall not be held liable.
(Source: P.A. 84-546.)

    (105 ILCS 5/5-36) (from Ch. 122, par. 5-36)
    Sec. 5-36. Failure to follow law as to distribution when new district formed.
    If the trustees of schools fail to observe the provisions of this Act in reference to the distribution of funds and property when a new district is formed, they shall be individually and jointly liable to the district interested, in a civil action to the full amount of the damages sustained by the district aggrieved.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/5-37) (from Ch. 122, par. 5-37)
    Sec. 5-37. Returns of children-Penalty for failure or false return.
    Any trustee of schools who fails or refuses to make returns of children in his township according to the provisions of this Act, or who knowingly makes a false return thereof, is guilty of a petty offense and shall be liable to a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $100.00, to be recovered by an action before the circuit court of the county; which penalty, when collected, shall be added to the distributive fund of the township in which the trustee resides.
(Source: P.A. 77-2267.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 6 heading)
ARTICLE 6. REGIONAL BOARD OF SCHOOL TRUSTEES

    (105 ILCS 5/6-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 6-1)
    Sec. 6-1. Fractional townships of less than 200 persons. Each congressional township is a township for school purposes. When a fractional congressional township contains fewer than 200 persons under 21 years of age and has not heretofore been united with any township for school purposes it is hereby attached for school purposes to the adjacent congressional township having the longest territorial line bordering on such fractional township and all the provisions of this Article shall apply to such united townships the same as though they were one township.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/6-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 6-2)
    Sec. 6-2. Regional board; creation; membership; abolition and transfer of duties.
    (a) There is created a regional board of school trustees for that territory in each educational service region exclusive of any school district organized under Article 34 and exclusive of any school district whose school board has been given the powers of school trustees; provided that on the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1992 the regional board of school trustees theretofore created and existing for any territory in an educational service region containing 2,000,000 or more inhabitants is abolished, the terms of office of all members of the regional board of school trustees so abolished are terminated on that effective date, and from and after that effective date all rights, powers, duties, and responsibilities that were vested in or required by law to be exercised and performed by the former regional board of school trustees shall be vested in and exercised and performed by the successors to the former regional board of school trustees as provided in subsection (b) of this Section 6-2. Any school district whose board of education acts as a board of school trustees shall have within its district the powers and duties of a regional board of school trustees.
    Unless abolished as provided in this Section, the regional board of school trustees, in both single county and multi-county educational service regions, shall consist of 7 members. In single county regions not more than one trustee may be a resident of any one congressional township; however, in case there are fewer than 7 congressional townships in the region then not more than two of such trustees may be residents of the same congressional township. Notwithstanding the foregoing residency provision, in a single county region with a population of greater than 750,000 inhabitants, but less than 1,200,000 inhabitants, 2 trustees may be residents of the same congressional township if and only if such trustees were elected at the April 9, 2013 consolidated election. In 2 county regions at least 2 trustees shall be residents of each county. In 3 or more county regions at least one trustee shall be a resident of each county. If more than 7 counties constitute the educational service region, the regional board of school trustees shall consist of one resident of each county.
    The regional board of school trustees shall be a body politic and corporate by the name of "Regional Board of School Trustees of.... County (or Counties), Illinois." Such corporation shall have perpetual existence with power to sue and be sued and to plead and be impleaded in all courts and places where judicial proceedings are had.
    (b) Upon the abolition of the regional board of school trustees and the termination of the terms of office of the members of that former regional board of school trustees in an educational service region containing 2,000,000 or more inhabitants as provided in subsection (a), the trustees of schools of each township included within the territory of that educational service region that was served by the former regional board of school trustees, or if any such township is a township referred to in subsection (b) of Section 5-1 and there are no trustees of schools acting in that township then the school board of each school district located in that township, shall be the successors to the former regional board of school trustees. As successors to the former regional board of school trustees, the trustees of schools of each such township and the school board of each such school district, with respect to all territory included within the school township or school district served by the trustees of schools of the township or school board, shall be vested with and shall exercise and perform all rights, powers, duties, and responsibilities formerly held, exercised, and performed with respect to that territory by the regional board of school trustees abolished under subsection (a) of this Section.
    Upon abolition of the regional board of school trustees in an educational service region having 2,000,000 or more inhabitants as provided in subsection (a) of this Section, all books, records, maps, papers, documents, equipment, supplies, accounts, deposits, and other personal property belonging to or subject to the control or disposition of the former regional board of school trustees (excepting only such items as may have been provided by the county board) shall be transferred and delivered to the trustees of schools of the townships and the school boards that are the successors to the former regional board of school trustees for the territory included within their respective school townships or school districts.
    From and after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1992, any reference in the School Code or any other law of this State to the regional board of school trustees or county board of school trustees shall mean, with respect to all territory within an educational service region containing 2,000,000 or more inhabitants that formerly was served by a regional board of school trustees abolished under subsection (a) of this Section, the trustees of schools of the township or the school board of the school district that is the successor to the former regional board of school trustees with respect to the territory included within that school township or school district.
(Source: P.A. 98-115, eff. 7-29-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/6-2.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 6-2.1)
    Sec. 6-2.1. On and after the effective date of this amendatory Act, the provisions of Sections 6-3, 6-4, 6-5, 6-10, 6-11 (now repealed), 6-12, 6-17, 6-18, 6-19, 6-20, and 6-21 of this School Code shall have no application in any educational service region having a population of 2,000,000 or more inhabitants.
(Source: P.A. 95-496, eff. 8-28-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/6-3) (from Ch. 122, par. 6-3)
    Sec. 6-3. Eligibility for trustee's office.
    No person shall be eligible to the office of member of the regional board of school trustees who is not a voter of the educational service region and qualified to vote in the election for members of the regional board of school trustees, or who is a member of a school board, or who is a school board employee, or who holds any county office.
(Source: P.A. 78-514.)

    (105 ILCS 5/6-4) (from Ch. 122, par. 6-4)
    Sec. 6-4. Election date. Members of the regional board of school trustees shall be elected at the regular election specified in the general election law in each odd-numbered year.
(Source: P.A. 81-1490.)

    (105 ILCS 5/6-5) (from Ch. 122, par. 6-5)
    Sec. 6-5. Qualifications and eligibility of voters.
    A person is qualified to vote at an election for members of the regional board of school trustees who is a registered voter as provided in the Election Code and has resided within the State and in the voting precinct for 28 days immediately preceding the election, and who is a citizen of the United States and has attained the age of 18 years.
    Whenever a unit school district is located in more than one educational service region, a qualified elector residing in that unit school district but outside of the educational service region administered by the regional superintendent of schools having supervision and control over that unit school district shall be eligible to vote in any election held to elect members of the regional board of school trustees for the educational service that is administered by the regional superintendent of schools who has supervision and control over that unit school district, but the elector shall not also be eligible to vote in the election held to elect the members of the regional board of school trustees for the educational service region in which the elector resides.
    Not less than 100 days before each nonpartisan election, the regional superintendent of schools shall certify to the State Board of Elections a list of each unit school district under his or her supervision and control and each county in which all or any part of each of those districts is located. The State Board of Elections shall certify each of those unit school districts and counties to the appropriate election authorities within 20 days after receiving the list certified by the regional superintendent of schools.
    The election authority in a single county educational service region whose regional superintendent of schools exercises supervision and control over a unit school district that is located in that single county educational service region and in one or more other educational service regions shall certify to the election authority of each of those other educational service regions in which the unit school district is located the candidates for members of the regional board of school trustees for the educational service region that is administered by the regional superintendent of schools exercising supervision and control over that unit school district.
(Source: P.A. 88-535.)

    (105 ILCS 5/6-10) (from Ch. 122, par. 6-10)
    Sec. 6-10. Nominating petition. The nomination of candidates for members of the regional board of school trustees in single county or multi-county educational service regions shall be made by a petition filed with the county clerk, in the case of a single county region, and, in the case of multi-county regions with the State Board of Elections and signed by at least 50 voters qualified to vote at the election. In addition to the requirements of the general election law, the petition shall specify the county and township (or road district) of the candidate's residence.
    Nomination papers filed under this Section are not valid unless the candidate named therein files with the county clerk or State Board of Elections a statement of economic interests as required by the Illinois Governmental Ethics Act. Such receipt shall be so filed either previously during the calendar year in which his nomination papers were filed or within the period for the filing of nomination papers in accordance with the general election law.
    A candidate for membership on the regional board of school trustees, who has petitioned for nomination to fill a full term and to fill a vacant term to be voted upon at the same election, must withdraw his or her petition for nomination to the regional board of school trustees from either the full term or the vacant term by written declaration, within the time and in the manner provided by the general election law.
(Source: P.A. 81-1490.)

    (105 ILCS 5/6-11)
    Sec. 6-11. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 81-1490. Repealed by P.A. 95-496, eff. 8-28-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/6-12) (from Ch. 122, par. 6-12)
    Sec. 6-12. Ballot form. The ballots for members of the regional board of school trustees shall be in substantially one of the following forms:
OFFICIAL BALLOT FOR SINGLE COUNTY REGIONS
For members of the Regional Board of School
Trustees
    (Vote for.... Not more than.... may serve from the same congressional township.)
    ( ) JOHN C. CALHOUN
    of Township.... Range....
    ( ) JAMES MADISON
    of Township.... Range....
    ( ) ....
    of Township.... Range....
    ( ) ....
    of Township.... Range....
OFFICIAL BALLOT FOR MULTI-COUNTY REGIONS
For members of the Regional Board of School Trustees
    (Vote for.... At least.... shall serve from each county.)
    ( ) JOHN C. CALHOUN
    of.... County ....
    ( ) JAMES MADISON
    of.... County ....
    ( ) ....
    of.... County ....
    ( ) ....
    of.... County ....
(Source: P.A. 83-1362.)

    (105 ILCS 5/6-17) (from Ch. 122, par. 6-17)
    Sec. 6-17. Election of president - Terms of members. Except as otherwise provided in Section 2A-54 of the Election Code, on the third Monday in May, following the first election, or if such day is a holiday then the next day, the regional superintendent of schools who shall be the ex-officio secretary of the board shall convene the newly elected regional board of school trustees for the purpose of organization. Except as provided in Section 2A-54 of the Election Code, at this meeting the members shall elect a president from among their number who shall serve as president for a term of 2 years and shall determine by lot the length of the term of each member so that 2 shall serve for a term of 2 years, 2 for 4 years and 3 for 6 years from the third Monday of the month following the date of their election. Except as provided in Section 2A-54 of the Election Code, thereafter members shall be elected to serve for a term of 6 years from the third Monday of the month following the date of their election or until their successors are elected and qualified.
    All succeeding meetings for the purpose of organization shall be held on the third Monday in May following the election; however, in case the third Monday in May is a holiday the organization meeting shall be held on the next day.
    If educational service regions are consolidated under Section 3A-3 or 3A-4 of this Act, however, the expiring terms of members of each regional board of school trustees in those regions being consolidated shall be extended so as to terminate on the first Monday of August of the year that consolidation takes effect, as defined in Section 3A-5 of this Act, and, on such day, the Regional Superintendent of the consolidated region shall convene all the members of each regional board of school trustees in the consolidated region, and shall by lot select from among such trustees an interim regional board of school trustees for the consolidated region in accord with the specifications as to membership and residency in Section 6-2. The interim board so selected shall serve until their successors are elected at the succeeding regular election of regional school trustees and have qualified. A single regional board of school trustees shall be elected at such succeeding regular election to take office on the third Monday of the month following such election. The board elected for the consolidated region shall be convened on such third Monday of the month following such election for organizational purposes, to elect a president and determine terms for its members by lot as provided in this Section. The respective regional boards of school trustees of educational service regions involved in consolidations under Section 3A-3 or 3A-4 shall cease to exist at the time the board elected for the consolidated region is so organized.
(Source: P.A. 93-847, eff. 7-30-04.)

    (105 ILCS 5/6-18) (from Ch. 122, par. 6-18)
    Sec. 6-18. Meeting dates - Place - Quorum. The regional board of school trustees shall hold a regular meeting in July, October, January and April. With appropriate public notice, the board may cancel its regular quarterly meeting if no issues for action have been presented to the board and it has no pending business.
    All regular meetings of the board shall be held at the office of the regional superintendent.
    Special meetings may be called by the president or by 4 members of the board by giving a 48-hour written notice of the meeting stating the time and place of the meeting and the purpose thereof. Public notice of meetings must also be given as prescribed in Sections 2.02 and 2.03 of the Open Meetings Act.
    A majority of the members elected to the board shall constitute a quorum. Unless otherwise provided a majority vote of all the board shall be required to decide a measure.
(Source: P.A. 92-172, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/6-19) (from Ch. 122, par. 6-19)
    Sec. 6-19. Vacancy on regional board. Subject to the residency provisions in Section 6-2 of this Code, any vacancy on the regional board of school trustees shall be filled from the same territory by the remaining members until the next regular election for members of the regional board of school trustees, when the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired time. Removal of a member from the township from which such member was elected into a township which has its quota of members on the board shall constitute a vacancy.
(Source: P.A. 98-115, eff. 7-29-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/6-20) (from Ch. 122, par. 6-20)
    Sec. 6-20. Expenses of members.
    Members of the regional board of school trustees shall serve without remuneration; however, the necessary expenses including travel attendant upon any meeting of the board shall be paid from the fund from which all other expenses of the board are paid.
(Source: P.A. 78-514.)

    (105 ILCS 5/6-21) (from Ch. 122, par. 6-21)
    Sec. 6-21. Legal Representation. Upon request, the State's Attorney of the county, other than a county of over 3,000,000 inhabitants, where the regional superintendent's office is located shall act as the legal representative of the regional board of school trustees; however, where matters arise which are within the exclusive jurisdiction of another State's Attorney, that State's Attorney shall provide legal representation.
(Source: P.A. 82-236.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 7 heading)
ARTICLE 7. BOUNDARY CHANGE

    (105 ILCS 5/7-01)
    Sec. 7-01. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 78-514. Repealed by P.A. 100-374, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-01a)
    Sec. 7-01a. Purpose and applicability. The purpose of this Article is to permit greater flexibility and efficiency in the detachment and dissolution of school districts for the improvement of the administration and quality of educational services and for the best interests of pupils. This Article applies only to school districts with under 500,000 inhabitants, but includes special charter districts (except those districts organized under Article 34 of this Code) and non-high school districts.
(Source: P.A. 100-374, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-01b)
    Sec. 7-01b. Definition. In this Article, "legal resident voter" means a person who is registered to vote at the time a circulated petition is filed and when the regional board of school trustees renders a decision, at the address shown opposite his or her signature on the petition, and resides in the detaching territory or dissolving school district.
(Source: P.A. 100-374, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-02) (from Ch. 122, par. 7-02)
    Sec. 7-02. Limitations. The provisions of this Article providing for the change in school district boundaries by detachment, annexation, division or dissolution, or by any combination of those methods, are subject to the provisions of this Section. Whenever due to fire, explosion, tornado or any Act of God the school buildings or one or more of the principal school buildings comprising an attendance center within a school district are destroyed or substantially destroyed and rendered unfit for school purposes, the provisions of this Article shall not be available to permit a division of that district, or a dissolution, detachment or annexation of any part thereof, or any combination of such results during a period from the date of such destruction or substantial destruction until 30 days after the second regular election of board members following such destruction or substantial destruction. Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to prohibit the combining of the entire district with another entire district or with other entire districts during such period pursuant to the provisions of Article 11E.
(Source: P.A. 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-03)
    Sec. 7-03. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 85-1020. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-04) (from Ch. 122, par. 7-04)
    Sec. 7-04. Districts in educational service regions of 2,000,000 or more inhabitants.
    (a) In all proceedings under this Article to change by detachment, annexation, division, dissolution, or any combination of those methods the boundaries of any school district (other than a school district organized under Article 34) located in an educational service region of 2,000,000 or more inhabitants in which the regional board of school trustees is abolished as provided in subsection (a) of Section 6-2, the trustees of schools of the township that has jurisdiction and authority over the detaching or dissolving school district, as the successor under subsection (b) of Section 6-2 to the former regional board of school trustees with respect to all territory located in that school township, shall have, exercise, and perform all powers, duties, and responsibilities required under this Article to be exercised and performed in those proceedings by a regional board of school trustees; provided that if any detaching or dissolving school district involved in those proceedings is not under the jurisdiction and authority of the trustees of schools of a township referred to in subsection (b) of Section 5-1, a hearing panel as established in this Section shall have, exercise, and perform all powers, duties, and responsibilities required under this Article to be exercised and performed in those proceedings with respect to the detaching or dissolving school district by a regional board of school trustees.
    (a-5) As applicable, the hearing panel shall be made up of 3 persons who have a demonstrated interest and background in education. Each hearing panel member must reside within an educational service region of 2,000,000 or more inhabitants but not within the boundaries of a school district organized under Article 34 of this Code and may not be a current school board member of the detaching or dissolving or annexing school district or a current employee of the detaching or dissolving or annexing school district or hold any county office. None of the hearing panel members may reside within the same school district. All 3 persons must be selected by the chief administrative officer of the educational service center in which the chief administrative officer has supervision and control, as defined in Section 3-14.2 of this Code, of the detaching or dissolving school district. The members of a hearing panel as established in this Section shall serve without remuneration; however, the necessary expenses, including travel, attendant upon any meeting or hearing in relation to a proceeding under this Article must be paid.
    (a-10) The petition must be filed with the trustees of schools of the township with jurisdiction and authority over the detaching or dissolving school district or with the chief administrative officer of the educational service center in which the chief administrative officer has supervision and control, as defined in Section 3-14.2 of this Code, of the detaching or dissolving school district, as applicable. The chief administrative officer of the educational service center or a person designated by the trustees of schools of the township, as applicable, shall have, exercise, and perform all powers, duties, and responsibilities required under this Article that are otherwise assigned to regional superintendents of schools.
    (b) Except as otherwise provided in this Section, all other provisions of this Article shall apply to any proceedings under this Article to change the boundaries of any school district located in an educational service region having 2,000,000 or more inhabitants in the same manner that those provisions apply to any proceedings to change the boundaries of any school district located in any other educational service region; provided, that any reference in those other provisions to the regional board of school trustees shall mean, with respect to all territory within an educational service region containing 2,000,000 or more inhabitants that formerly was served by a regional board of school trustees abolished under subsection (a) of Section 6-2, the trustees of schools of the township that is the successor under subsection (b) of Section 6-2 to the former regional board of school trustees with respect to the territory included within that school township or school district or the hearing panel as established by this Section.
(Source: P.A. 100-374, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 7-1)
    Sec. 7-1. Changing boundaries by detachment or dissolution.
    (a) School district boundaries may be changed by detachment, annexation, division or dissolution or any combination thereof by the regional board of school trustees or by the State Superintendent of Education as provided in subsection (l) of Section 7-6.
    The petition must be filed with and decided solely by the regional board of school trustees of the region in which the regional superintendent of schools has supervision and control, as defined in Section 3-14.2 of this Code, of the detaching or dissolving school district. The petition may be filed in any office operated by the regional superintendent with supervision and control, as defined in Section 3-14.2 of this Code, of the detaching or dissolving school district.
    A petition for boundary change must be filed by the school board of the detaching or dissolving district, by a majority of the legal resident voters in the dissolving district, or by two-thirds of a combination of the legal resident voters and the owners of record of any real estate with no legal resident voters in any territory proposed to be detached. If any of the territory proposed to be detached contains real estate with no legal resident voters, petitioners shall deliver the petition by certified mail, return receipt requested, to all owners of record of any real estate with no legal resident voters. Proof of such delivery must be presented as evidence at the hearing required under Section 7-6 of this Code. Any owner of record of real estate with no legal resident voters in any territory proposed to be detached may either sign the petition in person and before the circulator as described in this Section or return the petition with his or her notarized signature to be included as a petitioner. No person may sign a petition in the capacity of both a legal resident voter and owner of record. If there are no legal resident voters within the territory proposed to be detached, then the petition must be signed by all of the owners of record of the real estate of the territory. Legal resident voters shall be determined by the official voter registration lists as of the date the petition is filed. No signatures shall be added or withdrawn after the date the petition is filed. The length of time for signatures to be valid, before filing of the petition, shall not exceed 6 months. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary contained in the Election Code, the regional superintendent of schools shall make all determinations regarding the validity of the petition, including, without limitation, signatures on the petition. If the regional superintendent determines that the petition is not in proper order or not in compliance with any applicable petition requirements, the regional superintendent may not accept the petition for filing and may return the petition to the petitioners. Any party who is dissatisfied with the determination of the regional superintendent regarding the validity of the petition may appeal the regional superintendent's decision to the regional board of school trustees by motion, and the motion must be heard by the regional board of school trustees prior to any hearing on the merits of the petition.
    Petitions for detachment and dissolution shall include the full prayer of the petition with a general description of the territory at the top of each page. Each signature contained therein shall match the official signature and address of the legal resident voters as recorded in the office of the county clerk or board of election commissioners, and each petitioner shall record the date of his or her signing. Except in instances of a notarized signature of an owner of record of real estate with no legal resident voters in any territory proposed to be detached, each page of the circulated petition shall be signed by a circulator stating that he or she has witnessed the signature of each petitioner on that page. Detachment petitions containing 10 or fewer signatures may be notarized in lieu of a circulator statement. Each petition shall include an accurate legal description and map of the territory proposed to be detached. If a petition proposes to dissolve an entire district, then the full name and number of the district and a map are sufficient. Each petition shall include the names of petitioners; the district to be dissolved or the district from which the territory is proposed to be detached; the district or districts to which the territory is proposed to be annexed; evidence that the detaching or dissolving territory is compact and contiguous with the annexing district or districts or otherwise meets the requirements set forth in Section 7-4 of this Code; the referendum date, if applicable; and facts that support favorable findings for the factors to be considered by the regional board of school trustees pursuant to Section 7-6 of this Code.
    Where there is only one school building in an approved operating district, the building and building site may not be included in any detachment proceeding.
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, if, pursuant to a petition filed under this subsection (a), all of the territory of a school district is to be annexed to another school district, then any action by the regional board of school trustees in granting or approving the petition and any change in school district boundaries pursuant to that action is subject to and the change in school district boundaries may not be made except upon approval, at a regular scheduled election, in the manner provided by Section 7-7.7 of this Code, of a proposition for the annexation of all of the territory of that school district to the other school district.
    No petition may be filed under this Section to form a new school district under this Article; however, such a petition may be filed under this Section to form a new school district if the boundaries of such new school district lie entirely within the boundaries of a military base or installation operated and maintained by the government of the United States.
    (b) Any elementary or high school district with 100 or more of its students residing upon territory located entirely within a military base or installation operated and maintained by the government of the United States, or any unit school district or any combination of the above mentioned districts with 300 or more of its students residing upon territory located entirely within a military base or installation operated and maintained by the government of the United States, shall, upon the filing with the regional board of school trustees of a petition adopted by resolution of the board of education or a petition signed by a majority of the registered voters residing upon such military base or installation, have all of the territory lying entirely within such military base or installation detached from such school district, and a new school district comprised of such territory shall be created. The petition shall be filed with and decided solely by the regional board of school trustees of the region in which the regional superintendent of schools has supervision and control, as defined by Section 3-14.2 of this Code, of the school district affected. The regional board of school trustees shall have no authority to deny the detachment and creation of a new school district requested in a proper petition filed under this subsection. This subsection shall apply only to those school districts having a population of not fewer than 1,000 and not more than 500,000 residents, as ascertained by any special or general census.
    The new school district shall tuition its students to the same districts that its students were previously attending and the districts from which the new district was detached shall continue to educate the students from the new district, until the federal government provides other arrangements. The federal government shall pay for the education of such children as required by Section 6 of Public Law 81-874.
    If a school district created under this subsection (b) has not elected a school board and has not become operational within 2 years after the date of detachment, then this district is automatically dissolved and the territory of this district reverts to the school district from which the territory was detached or any successor district thereto. Any school district created under this subsection (b) on or before September 1, 1996 that has not elected a school board and has not been operational since September 1, 1996 is automatically dissolved on the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1999, and on this date the territory of this district reverts to the school district from which the territory was detached. For the automatic dissolution of a school district created under this subsection (b), the regional superintendent of schools who has supervision and control, as defined by Section 3-14.2 of this Code, of the school district from which the territory was detached shall certify to the regional board of school trustees that the school district created under this subsection (b) has been automatically dissolved.
(Source: P.A. 100-374, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-2)
    Sec. 7-2. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 90-459, eff. 8-17-97. Repealed by P.A. 100-374, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-2a) (from Ch. 122, par. 7-2a)
    Sec. 7-2a. (a) (Blank).
    (b) Any school district with a population of less than 5,000 residents or an enrollment of less than 750 students, as determined by the district's most recent fall enrollment counts as posted on the State Board of Education's website, shall be dissolved and its territory annexed as provided in Section 7-11 of this Code by the regional board of school trustees upon the filing of a petition adopted by resolution of the board of education or signed by a majority of the legal resident voters of the district seeking such dissolution. No petition shall be adopted or signed under this subsection until the board of education or the petitioners, as the case may be, shall have given at least 10 days' notice to be published once in a newspaper having general circulation in the district and shall have conducted a public informational meeting to inform the residents of the district of the proposed dissolution and to answer questions concerning the proposed dissolution. The petition shall be filed with and decided solely by the regional board of school trustees of the region in which the regional superintendent of schools has supervision and control, as defined by Section 3-14.2 of this Code, of the school district being dissolved.
    The regional board of school trustees shall not act on a petition filed by a board of education if within 45 days after giving the first notice of the hearing required under Section 7-11 of this Code a petition in opposition to the petition of the board to dissolve, signed by a majority of the legal resident voters of the district, is filed with the regional board of school trustees. In such an event, the dissolution petition is dismissed on procedural grounds by operation of law and the regional board of school trustees shall have no further authority to consider the petition. A dissolution petition dismissed as the result of a valid opposition petition is not subject to the limitation on successive petitions as provided in Section 7-8 of this Code, and a new petition may be filed upon receipt of the regional board of school trustees' notice stating that the original petition was dismissed by operation of law.
    For all petitions under this Section, the legal resident voters must be determined by the official voter registration lists as of the date the petition is filed. No signatures may be added or withdrawn after the date the petition is filed. The length of time for signatures to be valid, before filing of the petition, may not exceed 6 months. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary contained in the Election Code, the regional superintendent of schools shall make all determinations regarding the validity of the petition, including, without limitation, signatures on the petition. Any party who is dissatisfied with the determination of the regional superintendent regarding the validity of the petition may appeal the regional superintendent's decision to the regional board of school trustees by motion, and the motion must be heard by the regional board of school trustees prior to any hearing on annexing the territory of a district being dissolved. If no opposition petition is timely filed, the regional board of school trustees shall have no authority to deny dissolution requested in a proper petition for dissolution filed under this Section, but shall exercise its discretion in accordance with Section 7-11 of this Code on the issue of annexing the territory of a district being dissolved, giving consideration to but not being bound by the wishes expressed by the residents of the various school districts that may be affected by such annexation.
(Source: P.A. 99-657, eff. 7-28-16; 100-374, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-2b) (from Ch. 122, par. 7-2b)
    Sec. 7-2b. Annexation of non-coterminous territory from an elementary or high school district.
    (a) Any contiguous portion of a high school district that constitutes 5% or less of the equalized assessed value of the district and 5% or less of the territory of the district shall upon petition of two-thirds of the registered voters of the territory proposed to be detached and annexed be so detached and annexed by the regional board of school trustees if granting such petition shall make the affected segment of the boundaries of the high school district the territory is proposed to be annexed to identical, for the entirety of such affected segment, to the boundaries of the elementary school district in which the territory is located.
    Any contiguous portion of an elementary school district that constitutes 5% or less of the equalized assessed value of the district and 5% or less of the territory of the district shall upon petition of two-thirds of the registered voters of the territory proposed to be detached and annexed be so detached and annexed by the regional board of school trustees if granting such petition shall make the affected segment of the boundaries of the elementary school district the territory is proposed to be annexed to identical, for the entirety of such affected segment, to the boundaries of the high school district in which the territory is located.
    The regional board of school trustees shall have no authority or discretion to hear any evidence or consider any issues except those that may be necessary to determine whether the limitations and conditions of this Section have been met.
    No district may lose more than 5% of its equalized assessed value or more than 5% of its territory through petitions filed under this Section. If a petition seeks to detach territory that would result in a cumulative total of more than 5% of a district's equalized assessed value or more than 5% of the district's territory being detached under this Section, the petition shall be denied without prejudice to its being filed pursuant to Section 7-6 of this Code. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, this paragraph shall apply to any detachments effected pursuant to the provisions of this Section as they existed prior to the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 91st General Assembly.
    (b) At any time prior to the granting of the petition calling for the detachment and annexation of non-coterminous territory under this Section, the Committee of Ten designated in the petition may amend the petition to withdraw the detachment and annexation proposal and substitute in its place a proposal to require the school district from which the territory would have been detached to pay the per capita tuition costs for each pupil residing in the non-coterminous territory to attend the school district to which the territory would have been annexed. If such amended petition is granted, the school district from which the territory would have been detached shall pay to the school district to which the territory would have been annexed the per capita tuition costs as determined under Section 10-20.12a for each pupil residing in the territory who chooses to attend the school district to which the territory would have been annexed. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 10-22.5, the school district to which the territory would have been annexed shall admit any pupil that resides in the non-coterminous territory and provide such pupils with any services of the school. The payment and collection of tuition and any other such matters as may need to be resolved shall be established by an intergovernmental agreement developed between the two affected school districts. Section 7-6 of this Code shall apply to petitions filed under this Section except as otherwise provided in this Section.
    The changes made by this amendatory Act of the 91st General Assembly shall not apply to petitions pending on the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 91st General Assembly.
(Source: P.A. 91-46, eff. 6-30-99.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-2c)
    Sec. 7-2c. Change of school district boundaries following annexation of vacant and unincorporated territory to a contiguous municipality.
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, any contiguous portion of an elementary school district may be detached from that district and annexed to an adjoining elementary school district, and any contiguous portion of a high school district may be detached from that district and annexed to an adjoining high school district, upon a petition or petitions filed under this Section, when all of the following conditions are met with respect to each petition so filed:
        (1) The portion of the district to be so detached and
    	
annexed to an adjoining elementary or high school district consists of not more than 160 acres of vacant land that is located in an unincorporated area of a county of 2,000,000 or more inhabitants and, on the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1997, is contiguous to one municipality that is (i) wholly outside the elementary or high school district from which the vacant land is to be detached and (ii) located entirely within the territorial boundaries of the adjoining elementary or high school district to which the vacant land is to be annexed.
        (2) The equalized assessed valuation of the taxable
    	
property located in the portion of the district that is to be so detached and annexed to the adjoining elementary or high school district constitutes less than 1% of the equalized assessed valuation of the taxable property of the district from which it is to be detached.
        (3) The portion of the district to be so detached and
    	
annexed to the adjoining elementary or high school district is annexed to the contiguous municipality pursuant to a petition for annexation filed and pending with the annexing municipality upon the effective date of this amendatory Act.
    A petition filed under this Section shall be filed with the State Superintendent of Education and shall be signed by all of the owners of record of the vacant land that comprises the portion of the district that is to be detached and annexed to the adjoining elementary or high school district under the provisions of this Section. The State Superintendent shall: (i) hold a hearing on the petition within 90 days after the date of filing; (ii) render a decision granting or denying the petition within 30 days after the hearing; and (iii) promptly serve a copy of the decision by certified mail, return receipt requested, upon the petitioners and upon the school boards of the school districts from which the territory described in the petition is sought to be detached and to which that territory is sought to be annexed.
    The State Superintendent of Education has no authority or discretion to hear any evidence or consider any issues at the hearing except those that may be necessary to determine whether the limitations and conditions of this Section have been met.
    The State Superintendent of Education: (i) shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing, not less than 30 days prior to the date of the hearing, to the school board of the school district from which the territory described in the petition is to be detached and to the school board of the school district to which that territory is to be annexed; and (ii) shall publish notice of the hearing in a newspaper that is published in the county in which the territory described in the petition is located and that has circulation within the school districts whose school boards are entitled to written notice of the hearing.
    In the event that the granting of a petition filed under this Section has become final, either through failure to seek administrative review or by the final decision of a court on review, the change in boundaries shall become effective forthwith and for all purposes, except that if the granting of the petition becomes final between September 1 and June 30 of any year, the administration of and attendance at the schools shall not be affected until the following July 1, when the change in boundaries shall become effective for all purposes. After the granting of a petition has become final, the date when the change shall become effective for purposes of administration and attendance may be accelerated or postponed by stipulation of the school boards of the school districts from which the territory described in the petition is detached and to which that territory is annexed.
    The decision of the State Superintendent of Education shall be deemed an "administrative decision" as defined in Section 3-101 of the Administrative Review Law, and any petitioner or the school board of a school district affected by the detachment and annexation of the territory described in the petition may within 35 days after a copy of the decision sought to be reviewed was served by certified mail upon the party affected thereby, or upon the attorney of record for such party, apply for a review of such decision in accordance with the Administrative Review Law, and all amendments and modifications thereof and the rules adopted pursuant thereto.
    The commencement of any action for review shall operate as a supersedeas, and no further proceedings shall be had until final disposition of such review. The circuit court of the county in which the petition is filed with the State Superintendent of Education shall have sole jurisdiction to entertain a complaint for such review.
    This Section: (i) is not limited by and operates independently of all other provisions of this Article, and (ii) constitutes complete authority for the granting or denial by the State Superintendent of Education of a petition filed under this Section when the conditions prescribed by this Section for the filing of that petition are met.
(Source: P.A. 90-459, eff. 8-17-97.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-2.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 7-2.3)
    Sec. 7-2.3. Annexation to special charter district.
    (a) Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary contained in any special act or special charter of any school district, annexation of territory to any city or village under the Illinois Municipal Code after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1967 does not constitute annexation of the territory to the special charter school district nor detachment from any school district adjacent to the special charter district. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this Section, the boundaries of a special charter district may be changed as provided in Sections 7-2.4 through 7-2.7.
    (b) If all or any part of a special charter school district is located in a special charter city, then upon the filing with the governing body of the special charter school district of a petition to detach the territory described in the petition from the school district of which that territory forms a part and to annex that territory to the special charter school district, the territory described in the petition shall be deemed to be so detached and annexed to the special charter school district by operation of law, if all of the following conditions are met: (i) the petition is signed by at least 51% of the owners of record and 51% of the electors, if any, residing in the territory described in the petition; and (ii) the territory described in the petition is located in the special charter city, is contiguous to the special charter school district, and does not include any commercially zoned properties that are contiguous to each other and together constitute in excess of 100 acres of land and are not separated by a State highway and that are used solely for office/research and hotel purposes. A certified copy of the petition and the resolution or order of the governing body of the special charter school district evidencing the annexation of the territory described in the petition to the special charter school district by operation of law shall be mailed by that governing body to each school district affected and to the regional board or boards of school trustees for the educational service region or regions in which the affected school districts are located. A person who is a resident of any territory described in the petition at the time of its detachment from one school district and its annexation to a special charter school district under this subsection, and whose child or children are then attending school in the district from which that territory is being detached, may elect to have that child or those children and their siblings attend the schools of the district from which the territory is being detached. However, in that event the special charter school district shall pay tuition in the amount provided by law to the school district from which the territory is detached for each of those children and siblings who attend the schools of that district.
(Source: P.A. 89-494, eff. 6-21-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-2.4) (from Ch. 122, par. 7-2.4)
    Sec. 7-2.4. A petition for detachment of territory from a special charter district with annexation to another school district, for detachment of territory from a school district with annexation to a special charter district, or for dissolution of a school district with annexation to a special charter district must be filed with the governing body of the special charter district, and a certified copy thereof must be sent to each other detaching, dissolving, or annexing school district and to the regional board of school trustees of the region in which the regional superintendent has supervision and control, as defined in Section 3-14.2 of this Code, of the detaching or dissolving district. A petition for such annexation or detachment of territory must be filed by the school board of the detaching or dissolving district, by a majority of the legal resident voters in the dissolving district, or by two-thirds of a combination of the legal resident voters and the owners of record of any real estate with no legal resident voters in any territory proposed to be detached. If any of the territory proposed to be detached contains real estate with no legal resident voters, petitioners shall deliver the petition by certified mail, return receipt requested, to all owners of record of any real estate with no legal resident voters. Proof of the delivery must be presented as evidence at any hearing required by Section 7-2.6 of this Code. Any owner of record of real estate with no legal resident voters in any territory proposed to be detached may either sign the petition in person and before the circulator as described in Section 7-1 of this Code or return the petition with his or her notarized signature to be included as a petitioner. No person may sign a petition in the capacity of both a legal resident voter and owner of record. If there are no legal resident voters within the territory proposed to be detached, then the petition must be signed by all of the owners of record of the real estate of the territory. Petitions must contain all of the elements set forth in subsection (a) of Section 7-1 of this Code.
    Where there is only one school building in an approved operating school district, the building and building site may not be included in any detachment proceeding.
(Source: P.A. 100-374, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-2.5) (from Ch. 122, par. 7-2.5)
    Sec. 7-2.5. If no objection to the dissolution or detachment of territory prayed for in a petition under Section 7-2.4 of this Code is filed with the special charter school district or with the regional board of school trustees within 30 days after the filing of such petition, the dissolution or detachment of territory takes effect, subject to Section 7-9 of this Code. However, if an objection to the proposed dissolution or detachment of territory is filed with either the special charter district or the regional board of school trustees, the regional board of school trustees, within 15 days after receiving the objection, shall appoint 2 legal resident voters from the district or districts under its jurisdiction and involved in the proposed dissolution or detachment of territory, subject to the approval of the boards of education of the districts involved in the proposed dissolution or detachment of territory, and the board or governing body of the special charter district shall appoint 2 legal resident voters from the special charter district. Those 4 appointees shall meet within 20 days of their appointment and by a majority vote select 3 persons who reside outside the jurisdiction of the districts involved in the proposed dissolution or detachment of territory and who have a demonstrated interest and background in education. If a majority of the original 4 appointees cannot agree on the selection of the 3 additional members within 20 days of their appointment, the State Board of Education shall select the 3 additional persons, subject to the same criteria as required when selection is by the 4 appointees. The 4 appointees and the 3 additional persons selected under this Section constitute the Hearing Board and 4 members shall constitute a quorum.
    Within 10 days after the Hearing Board has been selected the regional superintendent of schools of the region in which the special charter district is located shall call an organization meeting of said Hearing Board.
(Source: P.A. 100-374, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-2.6) (from Ch. 122, par. 7-2.6)
    Sec. 7-2.6. At its organization meeting, the Hearing Board shall choose from its membership a chairman and a secretary. The secretary shall cause a copy of such petition to be sent to the president of the school board of each detaching or dissolving and annexing school district and shall cause a notice thereof to be published once in a newspaper having general circulation within the area of the detaching or dissolving and annexing territory described in the petition. The petitioners shall pay the expenses of publishing the notice and any transcript taken at the hearing and mailing the final order. In case of an appeal from the decision of the Hearing Board, the appellants shall pay the cost of preparing the record for appeal. The notice must state when the petition was filed, the description of the detaching territory or name of the dissolving district, the name of the annexing district, the prayer of the petition, and the day and time on and location in which the hearing upon the petition will be held, which may not be more than 30 nor less than 15 calendar days after the publication of notice. Any additional expense not enumerated above shall be borne equally by the school districts involved.
    The Hearing Board shall hear the petition and determine the sufficiency thereof and may adjourn the hearing from time to time or continue the matter for want of sufficient notice or for other good cause. The Hearing Board (a) shall hear evidence as to the school needs and conditions of the territory in the area within and adjacent thereto, and as to the ability of the districts affected to meet the standards of recognition as prescribed by the State Board of Education, (b) shall take into consideration the division of funds and assets which will result from any change of boundaries, and the will of the people of the area affected, and (c) shall determine whether it is to the best interests of the schools of the area and the educational welfare of the pupils should such change in boundaries be granted.
    The Hearing Board may administer oaths, determine the admissibility of evidence, and issue subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses and subpoena duces tecum for the production of documents. At the hearing, any resident in any detaching, dissolving, or annexing school district or any representative of a detaching, dissolving, or annexing school district may appear in person or by attorney in support of the petition or to object to the granting of the petition and may present evidence in support of his or her position through either oral or written testimony. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Board shall, within 30 days, enter an order either granting or denying the petition. The Hearing Board shall deliver a certified copy of the order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the petitioners; the president of the school board of each detaching or dissolving and annexing district; any person providing testimony in support of or opposition to the petition at the hearing; any attorney who appears for any person; and the regional superintendent of schools who has supervision and control, as defined in Section 3-14.2 of this Code, of each detaching or dissolving and annexing district. The Hearing Board is not required to send a copy of the Hearing Board's order to those attending the hearing but not participating. The final order shall be in writing and include findings of fact, conclusions of law, and the decision to grant or deny the petition.
    Within 10 days after service of the certified copy of the order granting or denying the petition, any person so served may petition for rehearing. The petition for rehearing shall specify the reason for the request. The Hearing Board shall first determine whether there is sufficient cause for a rehearing. If so determined, then the Hearing Board shall allow the petition to be heard anew in its entirety in accordance with all procedures in this Section. The party requesting a rehearing shall pay the expenses of publishing the notice and of any transcript taken at the hearing. The filing of a petition for rehearing operates as a stay of enforcement until the Hearing Board enters its final order on that petition for rehearing.
(Source: P.A. 100-374, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-2.7) (from Ch. 122, par. 7-2.7)
    Sec. 7-2.7. The decision of the Hearing Board under Section 7-2.6 is an "administrative decision" as defined in Section 3-101 of the Code of Civil Procedure, and any resident, petitioner, or board of education entitled to receive a certified copy of the Hearing Board's order may, within 35 days after a copy of the decision sought to be reviewed was served by certified mail, return receipt requested, upon the resident, petitioner, or board of education, thereby file a complaint for a judicial review of that decision in accordance with the Administrative Review Law and the rules adopted pursuant thereto. The commencement of any action for judicial review operates as a stay of enforcement, and further proceedings must not be had until final disposition of such review. Any change in boundaries resulting from the proceedings under Sections 7-2.4 through 7-2.7 takes effect on the date determined pursuant to Section 7-9 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 100-374, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-3) (from Ch. 122, par. 7-3)
    Sec. 7-3. Limitation on change of boundaries when bond election pending.
    No petition affecting the boundaries of any school district may be filed under this Article after the district has published the required legal notice calling an election to authorize the issuance of bonds to be held on a date not later than 21 days after such publication until the first of the following events shall have occurred (1) the voters did not authorize the issuance of the bonds at the election, (2) the bonds have been issued, (3) the school board of the district has adopted a resolution abandoning its plan to issue such bonds, or (4) seventy-five days have elapsed since such election, provided that if proceedings are pending hereunder affecting the boundaries of such district at the time the notice of such election is published or if the district is a party to litigation affecting the legality of its existence or its boundaries at such time, the said seventy-five days shall not begin to run until the final determination of such proceedings or litigation and the expiration of the time for review, appeal or rehearing, and provided that the provisions of this section shall be applicable only to the first such election called to be held in any one calendar year.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-4) (from Ch. 122, par. 7-4)
    Sec. 7-4. Requirements for granting petitions. No petition shall be granted under Section 7-1 of this Code:
        (a) If there will be any non-high school territory
    	
resulting from the granting of the petition.
        (b) (Blank).
        (c) Unless the territory within any district whose
    	
boundaries are affected by the granting of a petition shall after the granting thereof be compact and contiguous, except as provided in Section 7-6 of this Code or as otherwise provided in this subdivision (c). The fact that a district is divided by territory lying within the corporate limits of the city of Chicago shall not render it non-compact or non-contiguous. If, pursuant to a petition filed under Section 7-1 of this Code, all of the territory of a district is to be annexed to another district, then the annexing district and the annexed district need not be contiguous if the following requirements are met and documented within 2 calendar years prior to the petition filing date:
            (1) the distance between each district
        	
administrative office is documented as no more than 30 miles;
            (2) every district contiguous to the district
        	
wishing to be annexed determines that it is not interested in participating in a petition filed under Section 7-1 of this Code, through a vote of its school board, and documents that non-interest in a letter to the regional board of school trustees containing approved minutes that record the school board vote; and
            (3) documentation of meeting these requirements
        	
are presented as evidence at the hearing required under Section 7-6 of this Code.
        (d) (Blank).
(Source: P.A. 100-374, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-4.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 7-4.1)
    Sec. 7-4.1. Copies of petition. Each petition submitted under the provisions of Section 7-1 of this Code shall include proof of notice to owners of record of real estate with no legal resident voters in any territory proposed to be detached, if applicable, and be accompanied by sufficient copies thereof for distribution to the president of the school board of each detaching or dissolving and annexing school district. The copies need not contain original signatures by the petitioners as is required of the original petition.
(Source: P.A. 100-374, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-5) (from Ch. 122, par. 7-5)
    Sec. 7-5. Detachment set aside upon petition. If there is a recognized school district which as a result of detachment is without a school building, the detachment may be set aside by the regional board of school trustees of the region in which the regional superintendent of schools had supervision and control, as defined in Section 3-14.2 of this Code, prior to the detachment upon petition by two-thirds of the eligible voters in the school district after such detachment and the detached area. The regional board of school trustees shall conduct a hearing upon the petition as prescribed and in the manner provided in Section 7-6 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 100-374, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-6) (from Ch. 122, par. 7-6)
    Sec. 7-6. Petition filing; notice; hearing; decision.
    (a) The secretary of the regional board of school trustees or his or her designee, the chief administrative officer of an educational service center under Section 7-04 of this Code or his or her designee, or the person designated by the trustees of schools of the township in accordance with subsection (a-10) of Section 7-04 of this Code, as appropriate, shall receive the filing of the petition, make the determination of validity in accordance with subsection (a) of Section 7-1 of this Section, publish the notice, conduct the hearing, and issue the final order. Upon the filing of a petition with the secretary of the regional board of school trustees under the provisions of Section 7-1 of this Code, the secretary shall cause a copy of such petition to be given to the president of the school board of each detaching or dissolving and annexing school district and shall cause a notice thereof to be published once in a newspaper having general circulation within the area of the detaching or dissolving and annexing territory described in the petition.
    (b) (Blank).
    (b-5) If a petition filed under Section 7-1 of this Code proposes to annex all the territory of a school district to another school district, the petition shall request the submission of a proposition at a regular scheduled election for the purpose of voting for or against the annexation of the territory described in the petition to the school district proposing to annex that territory. No petition filed or election held under this Article shall be null and void, invalidated, or deemed in noncompliance with the Election Code because of a failure to publish a notice with respect to the petition or referendum as required under subsection (g) of Section 28-2 of that Code for petitions that are not filed under this Article or Article 11E of this Code.
    (c) When a petition contains more than 10 signatures the petition shall designate a committee of 10 of the petitioners as attorney in fact for all petitioners, any 7 of whom may make binding stipulations on behalf of all petitioners as to any question with respect to the petition or hearing, and the regional board of school trustees may accept such stipulation in lieu of evidence or proof of the matter stipulated. The committee of petitioners shall have the same power to stipulate to accountings or waiver thereof between school districts; however, the regional board of school trustees may refuse to accept such stipulation. Those designated as the committee of 10 shall serve in that capacity until such time as the regional superintendent of schools or the committee of 10 determines that, because of death, resignation, transfer of residency from the territory, or failure to qualify, the office of a particular member of the committee of 10 is vacant. Upon determination that a vacancy exists, the remaining members shall appoint a petitioner to fill the designated vacancy on the committee of 10. The appointment of any new members by the committee of 10 shall be made by a simple majority vote of the remaining designated members.
    (d) The petition may be amended to withdraw not to exceed a total of 10% of the territory in the petition at any time prior to the hearing; provided that the petition shall after amendment comply with the requirements as to the number of signatures required on an original petition.
    (e) The petitioners shall pay the expenses of publishing the notice and any transcript taken at the hearing and mailing the final order; and, in case of an appeal from the decision of the regional board of school trustees or State Superintendent of Education in cases determined under subsection (l) of this Section, the appellants shall pay the cost of preparing the record for appeal. The regional superintendent of schools with whom the petition is filed may request a deposit at the time of filing to cover expenses as provided in this subsection (e).
    (f) The notice shall state when the petition was filed, the description of the detaching territory or name of the dissolving district, the name of the annexing district, the prayer of the petition, and the day and time on and location in which the hearing upon the petition will be held, which shall not be more than 30 nor less than 15 calendar days after the publication of notice.
    (g) Prior to the hearing, the secretary of the regional board of school trustees shall submit to the regional board of school trustees maps showing the districts involved and a written report of the financial and educational conditions of the districts involved and the probable effect of the proposed changes. The reports and maps submitted must be made a part of the record of the proceedings of the regional board of school trustees. A copy of the report and maps submitted must be sent by the secretary of the regional board of school trustees to the president of the school board of each detaching or dissolving and annexing school district not less than 5 days prior to the day upon which the hearing is to be held.
    (h) On the hearing day or on a day to which the regional board of school trustees shall continue the hearing, the regional board of school trustees shall hear the petition but may adjourn the hearing from time to time or may continue the matter for want of sufficient notice or other good cause.
    (h-5) Except for motions and briefs challenging the validity of a petition or otherwise challenging the jurisdiction of the regional board of school trustees to conduct a hearing on a petition and except for motions and briefs related to the type of evidence the regional board of school trustees may consider under subsection (i) of this Section, no other motions, pleadings, briefs, discovery requests, or other like documents may be filed with the regional board of school trustees or served on other parties, and the regional board of school trustees shall have no authority to consider such documents, except that if a legal issue arises during a hearing, then the regional board of school trustees may, at its discretion, request briefs to be submitted to it on that issue.
    (i) The regional board of school trustees shall hear evidence as to the school needs and conditions of the territory in the area within and adjacent thereto and the effect detachment will have on those needs and conditions and as to the ability of the detaching or dissolving and annexing school districts to meet the standards of recognition as prescribed by the State Board of Education, shall take into consideration the division of funds and assets that will result from the change of boundaries, and shall determine whether it is in the best interests of the schools of the area and the direct educational welfare of the pupils that such change in boundaries be granted. If non-high school territory is contained in the petition, the normal high school attendance pattern of the pupils must be taken into consideration. However, upon resolution by the regional board of school trustees, the secretary thereof shall conduct the hearing upon any boundary petition and present a transcript of such hearing to the trustees, who shall base their decision upon the transcript, maps, and information and any presentation of counsel. In the instance of a change of boundaries through detachment:
        (1) When considering the effect the detachment will
    	
have on the direct educational welfare of the pupils, the regional board of school trustees shall consider a comparison of the school report cards for the schools of the detaching and annexing districts and the school district report cards for the detaching and annexing districts only if there is no more than a 3% difference in the minority, low-income, and English learner student populations of the relevant schools of the districts.
        (2) The community of interest of the petitioners and
    	
their children and the effect detachment will have on the whole child may be considered only if the regional board of school trustees first determines that there would be a significant direct educational benefit to the petitioners' children if the change in boundaries were allowed.
        (3) When petitioners cite an annexing district
    	
attendance center or centers in the petition or during testimony, the regional board of school trustees may consider the difference in the distances from the detaching area to the current attendance centers and the cited annexing district attendance centers only if the difference is no less than 10 miles shorter to one of the cited annexing district attendance centers than it is to the corresponding current attendance center.
        (4) The regional board of school trustees may not
    	
grant a petition if doing so will increase the percentage of minority or low-income students or English learners by more than 3% at the attendance center where students in the detaching territory currently attend, provided that if the percentage of any one of those groups also decreases at that attendance center, the regional board may grant the petition upon consideration of other factors under this Section and this Article.
        (5) The regional board of school trustees may not
    	
consider whether changing the boundaries will increase the property values of the petitioners' property.
    The factors in subdivisions (1) through (5) of this subsection (i) are applicable whether or not there are children residing in the petitioning area at the time the hearing is conducted.
    If the regional board of school trustees grants a petition to change school district boundaries, then the annexing school district shall determine the attendance center or centers that children from the petitioning area shall attend.
    (j) At the hearing, any resident in any detaching, dissolving, or annexing school district or any representative of a detaching, dissolving, or annexing school district may appear in person or by an attorney in support of the petition or to object to the granting of the petition and may present evidence in support of his or her position through either oral or written testimony.
    (k) At the conclusion of the hearing, the regional superintendent of schools as secretary to the regional board of school trustees shall, within 30 days, enter an order either granting or denying the petition. The regional superintendent of schools shall deliver a certified copy of the order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the petitioners or committee of petitioners, as applicable; the president of the school board of each detaching or dissolving and annexing district; any person providing testimony in support of or opposition to the petition at the hearing; and any attorney who appears for a person. The regional superintendent of schools shall also deliver a copy of the order to the regional superintendent of schools who has supervision and control, as defined in Section 3-14.2 of this Code, of the annexing district if different from the regional superintendent of schools with whom the petition was filed. The regional superintendent of schools is not required to send a copy of the regional board of school trustees' order to those attending the hearing but not participating. The final order shall be in writing and include findings of fact, conclusions of law, and the decision to grant or deny the petition.
    (l) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Section, if within 12 months after a petition is submitted under the provisions of Section 7-1 of this Code the petition is not approved or denied by the regional board of school trustees and the order approving or denying that petition entered and a copy thereof served as provided in this Section, petitioners may submit a copy of the petition directly to the State Superintendent of Education for approval or denial. The copy of the petition as so submitted shall be accompanied by a record of all proceedings had with respect to the petition up to the time the copy of the petition is submitted to the State Superintendent of Education (including a copy of any notice given or published, any certificate or other proof of publication, copies of any maps or written report of the financial and educational conditions of the school districts affected if furnished by the secretary of the regional board of school trustees, copies of any amendments to the petition and stipulations made, accepted or refused, a transcript of any hearing or part of a hearing held, continued or adjourned on the petition, and any orders entered with respect to the petition or any hearing held thereon). The petitioners submitting the petition and record of proceedings to the State Superintendent of Education shall give written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the regional board of school trustees and to the secretary of that board and to the detaching or dissolving and annexing school districts that the petition has been submitted to the State Superintendent of Education for approval or denial and shall furnish a copy of the notice so given to the State Superintendent of Education. The cost of assembling the record of proceedings for submission to the State Superintendent of Education shall be the responsibility of the petitioners that submit the petition and record of proceedings to the State Superintendent of Education. When a petition is submitted to the State Superintendent of Education in accordance with the provisions of this paragraph:
        (1) The regional board of school trustees loses all
    	
jurisdiction over the petition and shall have no further authority to hear, approve, deny or otherwise act with respect to the petition.
        (2) All jurisdiction over the petition and the right
    	
and duty to hear, approve, deny or otherwise act with respect to the petition is transferred to and shall be assumed and exercised by the State Superintendent of Education.
        (3) The State Superintendent of Education shall not
    	
be required to repeat any proceedings that were conducted in accordance with the provisions of this Section prior to the time jurisdiction over the petition is transferred to him, but the State Superintendent of Education shall be required to give and publish any notices and hold or complete any hearings that were not given, held or completed by the regional board of school trustees or its secretary as required by this Section prior to the time jurisdiction over the petition is transferred to the State Superintendent of Education.
        (4) If so directed by the State Superintendent of
    	
Education, the regional superintendent of schools shall submit to the State Superintendent of Education and to such school boards as the State Superintendent of Education shall prescribe accurate maps and a written report of the financial and educational conditions of the districts affected and the probable effect of the proposed boundary changes.
        (5) The State Superintendent is authorized to conduct
    	
further hearings, or appoint a hearing officer to conduct further hearings, on the petition even though a hearing thereon was held as provided in this Section prior to the time jurisdiction over the petition is transferred to the State Superintendent of Education.
        (6) The State Superintendent of Education or the
    	
hearing officer shall hear evidence and approve or deny the petition and shall enter an order to that effect and deliver and serve the same as required in other cases to be done by the regional board of school trustees and the regional superintendent of schools as secretary of that board.
    (m) (Blank).
    (n) Within 10 days after service of a copy of the order granting or denying the petition, any person so served may petition for a rehearing. The petition for rehearing shall specify the reason for the request. The regional board of school trustees shall first determine whether there is sufficient cause for a rehearing. If so determined, then the regional board of school trustees shall allow the petition to be heard anew in its entirety in accordance with all procedures in this Article. The party requesting a rehearing shall pay the expenses of publishing the notice and of any transcript taken at the hearing. The filing of a petition for rehearing shall operate as a stay of enforcement until the regional board of school trustees or State Superintendent of Education in cases determined under subsection (l) of this Section enters the final order on such petition for rehearing.
    (o) If a petition is required under the provisions of subsection (b-5) of this Section to request submission of a proposition at a regular scheduled election for the purpose of voting for or against the annexation of the territory described in the petition to the school district proposing to annex that territory, and if the petition is granted or approved by the regional board of school trustees or by the State Superintendent of Education, the proposition shall be placed on the ballot at the next regular scheduled election.
(Source: P.A. 99-475, eff. 1-1-16; 100-374, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-7) (from Ch. 122, par. 7-7)
    Sec. 7-7. Administrative Review Law. The decision of the regional board of school trustees or the decision of the State Superintendent of Education in cases determined pursuant to subsection (l) of Section 7-6 of this Code shall be deemed an "administrative decision" as defined in Section 3-101 of the Code of Civil Procedure; and any resident, petitioner, or board of education entitled to receive a certified copy of the regional board of school trustees' order may, within 35 days after a copy of the decision sought to be reviewed was served by certified mail, return receipt requested, upon the resident, petitioner, or board of education, thereby file a complaint for a judicial review of such decision in accordance with the Administrative Review Law and the rules adopted pursuant thereto. The commencement of any action for judicial review shall operate as a stay of enforcement, and no further proceedings shall be had until final disposition of such review. The circuit court of the county in which the dissolving district or detaching territory is located shall have sole jurisdiction to entertain a complaint for such review. In instances in which the dissolving district or detaching territory overlies more than one county, the circuit court of the county where a majority of the territory of the dissolving district or a majority of the territory of the detaching territory is located shall have sole jurisdiction to entertain a complaint for such review.
(Source: P.A. 100-374, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-7.5)
    Sec. 7-7.5. Holding of elections.
    (a) Elections provided by this Article shall be conducted in accordance with the general election law.
    (b) The notice shall be in substantially the following form:
NOTICE OF REFERENDUM FOR ANNEXATION
BY ..... (Name of Annexing District)
OF ALL TERRITORY OF ..... (Name Of
District Or Districts All Of
Whose Territory Is To Be Annexed)
        NOTICE is hereby given that on (insert date), a
    	
referendum will be held in part(s) of ...... County (Counties) for the purpose of voting for or against the proposition to annex all of the territory comprising ..... (name of each such school district) of ....... County, Illinois to ..... (name of annexing school district) of ...... County, Illinois.
        The territory which now comprises all of the
    	
territory of ..... (name of the school district or districts) of ...... County, Illinois, which territory is the same as the territory which is proposed to be annexed to ..... (name of annexing school district) of ....... County, Illinois, is described as follows: (Here describe such territory.)
        The territory which now comprises ..... (name of
    	
annexing school district) of ....... County, Illinois, which district it is proposed shall annex the territory above described in this Notice, is described as follows: (Here describe such territory.)
        The election is called and will be held pursuant to
    	
an order of the regional board of school trustees (or, State Superintendent of Education) dated on (insert date), which order states that the change of boundaries pursuant to the annexation granted or approved by the order shall be made if a majority of those voters in each of the affected school districts who vote on the proposition at the election vote in favor thereof.
        Dated (insert date).
        Regional Board of School Trustees (or State
        Superintendent of Education)
        By....................................
(Source: P.A. 90-459, eff. 8-17-97; 91-357, eff. 7-29-99.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-7.6)
    Sec. 7-7.6. Ballots. The ballot shall be in substantially the following form:
OFFICIAL BALLOT
--------------------------------------------------------------
    Shall the following described territory
comprising all of the territory
of ..... (name of school district or            YES
districts) of ...... County, Illinois
be annexed to and made a part of .....   ---------------------
(name of annexing school district)
of ....... County, Illinois?                    NO
(Here describe such territory.)
--------------------------------------------------------------
(Source: P.A. 90-459, eff. 8-17-97.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-7.7)
    Sec. 7-7.7. Passage requirements. The proposition for the annexation of all of the territory of one or more school districts to another school district shall be submitted to the voters of the annexing district and the voters of each district all of the territory of which is to be annexed to the annexing district, and if a majority of the voters in each such district who vote on the proposition vote in favor of the proposition, the proposition shall be deemed to have passed.
(Source: P.A. 90-459, eff. 8-17-97.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-8) (from Ch. 122, par. 7-8)
    Sec. 7-8. Limitation on successive petitions. No territory, nor any part thereof, which is involved in any proceeding to change the boundaries of a school district by detachment or dissolution from such school district of such territory, and which, after a hearing on the merits of the petition or referendum vote, is not so detached or dissolved, shall be again involved in proceedings to change the boundaries of such school district for at least 2 years after final determination of such first proceeding, unless during that 2-year period a petition filed is substantially different than any other previously filed petition during the previous 2 years or if a school district involved is identified as a priority district under Section 2-3.25d-5 of this Code, is placed on the financial watch list by the State Board of Education, or is certified as being in financial difficulty during that 2-year period or if such first proceeding involved a petition brought under Section 7-2b of this Article 7. The 2-year period is counted beginning from the date of a final administrative decision after all appeal timelines have run, upon final court order after all appeal timelines have run, or upon the certification of the election results in the event of a dissolution. The 2-year period is 2 calendar years.
(Source: P.A. 99-193, eff. 7-30-15; 100-374, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-9) (from Ch. 122, par. 7-9)
    Sec. 7-9. Effective date of change. In the event that the granting of a petition has become final, through failure to seek administrative review, by the final decision of a court on review if no further appeal is taken, or upon certification of election results in the event of a dissolution, the change in boundaries shall become effective the following July 1. The school boards of the districts as they existed prior to the change shall exercise the same power and authority over such territory until such date, unless accelerated or postponed by stipulation of the school boards of each detaching or dissolving and annexing school district and approval by the regional board of school trustees with which the original petition is required to be filed.
(Source: P.A. 100-374, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-10) (from Ch. 122, par. 7-10)
    Sec. 7-10. Map showing change; filed. Within 30 days after the boundaries of any school district have been changed, the regional superintendent of schools shall make and file with the county clerk or clerks a map of any detaching, dissolving, or annexing school districts, whereupon the county clerks shall extend taxes against the territory in accordance therewith; provided that if an action to review such decision under Section 7-7 of this Code is taken, the regional superintendent of schools shall not file the map with the county clerk until after he or she is served with a certified copy of the order of the final disposition of such review.
(Source: P.A. 100-374, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-10.5)
    Sec. 7-10.5. Teacher transfer. When dissolution and annexation become effective for purposes of administration and attendance as determined pursuant to Section 7-9 or 7-11 of this Code, as applicable, the positions of teachers in contractual continued service in the district being dissolved are transferred to an annexing district or to annexing districts pursuant to the provisions of subsection (h) of Section 24-11 of this Code relative to teachers having contractual continued service status whose positions are transferred from one school board to the control of a different school board, and those said provisions of subsection (h) of Section 24-11 of this Code shall apply to the transferred teachers. In the event that the territory is added to 2 or more districts, the decision on which positions are to be transferred to which annexing districts must be made giving consideration to the proportionate percentage of pupils transferred and the annexing districts' staffing needs, and the transfer of specific individuals into such positions must be based upon the request of those teachers in order of seniority in the dissolving district. The contractual continued service status of any teacher thereby transferred to an annexing district is not lost and the different school board is subject to this Code with respect to the transferred teacher in the same manner as if the teacher was that district's employee and had been its employee during the time the teacher was actually employed by the school board of the dissolving district from which the position was transferred.
(Source: P.A. 100-374, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-11) (from Ch. 122, par. 7-11)
    Sec. 7-11. Annexation of dissolved non-operating districts. If any school district has become dissolved as provided in Section 5-32 of this Code, or if a petition for dissolution is filed under Section 7-2a of this Code, the regional board of school trustees shall attach the territory of such dissolved district to one or more districts and, if the territory is added to 2 or more districts, shall divide the property of the dissolved district among the districts to which its territory is added, in the manner provided for the division of property in case of the organization of a new district from a part of another district. The regional board of school trustees of the region in which the regional superintendent has supervision and control, as defined in Section 3-14.2 of this Code, over the school district that is dissolved shall have all power necessary to annex the territory of the dissolved district as provided in this Section, including the power to attach the territory to a school district under the supervision and control of the regional superintendent of another educational service region and, in the case of Leepertown CCSD 175, the power to attach the territory to a non-contiguous school district if deemed in the best interests of the schools of the area and the educational welfare of the pupils involved. The annexation of the territory of a dissolved school district under this Section shall entitle the school districts involved in the annexation to payments from the State Board of Education in the same manner and to the same extent authorized in the case of other annexations under this Article. Other provisions of this Article 7 of this Code shall apply to and govern dissolutions and annexations under this Section and Section 7-2a of this Code, except that it is the intent of the General Assembly that in the case of conflict the provisions of this Section and Section 7-2a of this Code shall control over the other provisions of this Article.
    The regional board of school trustees shall give notice of a hearing, to be held not less than 50 days nor more than 70 days after a school district is dissolved under Section 5-32 of this Code or a petition is filed under Section 7-2a of this Code, on the disposition of the territory of such school district by publishing a notice thereof at least once each week for 2 successive weeks in at least one newspaper having a general circulation within the area of the territory involved. At such hearing, the regional board of school trustees shall hear evidence as to the school needs and conditions of the territory and of the area within and adjacent thereto, and shall take into consideration the educational welfare of the pupils of the territory and the normal high school attendance pattern of the children. In the case of an elementary school district, except for Leepertown CCSD 175, if all the eighth grade graduates of such district customarily attend high school in the same high school district, the regional board of school trustees shall, unless it be impossible because of the restrictions of a special charter district, annex the territory of the district to a contiguous elementary school district whose eighth grade graduates customarily attend that high school, and that has an elementary school building nearest to the center of the territory to be annexed, but if such eighth grade graduates customarily attend more than one high school the regional board of school trustees shall determine the attendance pattern of such graduates and divide the territory of the district among the contiguous elementary districts whose graduates attend the same respective high schools.
    At the conclusion of the hearing, the regional superintendent of schools, as secretary to the regional board of school trustees, shall, within 10 days, enter an order detailing the annexation of the dissolved district. The regional superintendent of schools shall deliver a certified copy of the order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the petitioners or committee of petitioners, as applicable; the president of the school board of each dissolving and annexing district; any person providing testimony in support of or opposition to the petition at the hearing; and any attorney who appears for any person. The regional superintendent of schools shall also deliver a copy of the order to the regional superintendent of schools who has supervision and control, as defined in Section 3-14.2 of this Code, of the annexing district, if different from the regional superintendent of schools with whom the petition was filed. The regional superintendent of schools is not required to send a copy of the regional board of school trustees' order to those attending the hearing but not participating. The final order shall be in writing and include findings of fact, conclusions of law, and the annexation decision. The decision of the regional board of school trustees shall be deemed an "administrative decision" as defined in Section 3-101 of the Code of Civil Procedure, and any resident, petitioner, or school board entitled to receive a certified copy of the regional board of school trustees' order may, within 10 days after a copy of the decision sought to be reviewed was served by certified mail, return receipt requested, upon the resident, petitioner, or school board, thereby file a complaint for the judicial review of such decision in accordance with the Administrative Review Law and the rules adopted pursuant thereto. The commencement of any action for review shall operate as a stay of enforcement, and no further proceedings shall be had until final disposition of such review. The final decision of the regional board of school trustees or of any court upon judicial review shall become effective under Section 7-9 of this Code in the case of a petition for dissolution filed under Section 7-2a of this Code, and a final decision shall become effective immediately following the date no further appeal is allowable in the case of a district dissolved under Section 5-32 of this Code.
    Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Section or any other provision of law to the contrary, the school board of the Mt. Morris School District is authorized to donate to the City of Mount Morris, Illinois the school building and other real property used as a school site by the Mt. Morris School District at the time of its dissolution, by appropriate resolution adopted by the school board of the district prior to the dissolution of the district; and upon the adoption of a resolution by the school board donating the school building and school site to the City of Mount Morris, Illinois as authorized by this Section, the regional board of school trustees or other school officials holding legal title to the school building and school site so donated shall immediately convey the same to the City of Mt. Morris, Illinois.
(Source: P.A. 100-374, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-12) (from Ch. 122, par. 7-12)
    Sec. 7-12. Termination of office. Upon the close of the then current school year during which any school district is annexed to another school district under any of the provisions of this Article, the terms of office of the school directors or board of education members of the annexed school district shall be terminated and the school board of the annexing district shall perform all the duties and have all the powers of the school board of the annexed district. The annexing district as it is constituted on and after the time of such annexation shall receive all the assets and assume all the obligations and liabilities including the bonded indebtedness of the original annexing district and of the district annexed. The tax rate for such assumed bonded indebtedness shall be determined in the manner provided in Article 19 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 100-374, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-13)
    Sec. 7-13. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 81-1490. Repealed by P.A. 100-374, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-14) (from Ch. 122, par. 7-14)
    Sec. 7-14. Bonded indebtedness-Tax rate.
    (a) Beginning on January 1, 2015, whenever the boundaries of any school district are changed by the attachment or detachment of territory, the territory that is detached shall remain liable for its proportionate share of the bonded indebtedness of the school district from which the territory is detached. The annexing district shall not, except pursuant to the approval of a resolution by the school board of the annexing district prior to the effective date of the change of boundaries, assume or be responsible for any of the bonded indebtedness of the district from which the territory is detached. If the annexing district does not assume the detaching territory's proportionate share of the bonded indebtedness of the district from which the territory is detaching, a tax rate for that bonded indebtedness shall be determined in the manner provided in Section 19-7 of this Code, and the county clerk or clerks shall annually extend taxes for each bond outstanding on the effective date of the change of boundaries against all of the taxable property situated within the territory that is detached and within the detaching district. After the effective date of the change of boundaries, all of the property situated within the annexing school district, including the detaching territory, shall be liable for the bonded indebtedness of that district as it exists on the effective date of the change of boundaries and any date thereafter.
    (b) Whenever a school district with bonded indebtedness has become dissolved under this Article and its territory annexed to another district, the annexing district or districts shall not, except by action pursuant to resolution of the school board of the annexing district prior to the effective date of the annexation, assume the bonded indebtedness of the dissolved district; nor, except by action pursuant to resolution of the school board of the dissolving district, shall the territory of the dissolved district assume the bonded indebtedness of the annexing district or districts. If the annexing district or districts do not assume the bonded indebtedness of the dissolved district, a tax rate for the bonded indebtedness shall be determined in the manner provided in Section 19-7, and the county clerk or clerks shall annually extend taxes for each outstanding bond issue against all the taxable property that was situated within the boundaries of the district as the boundaries existed at the time of the issuance of each bond issue regardless of whether the property is still contained in that same district at the time of the extension of the taxes by the county clerk or clerks.
    (c) Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 19-18 of this Code, upon resolution of the school board, the county clerk must extend taxes to pay the principal of and interest on any bonds issued exclusively to refund any bonded indebtedness of the annexing school district against all of the taxable property that was situated within the boundaries of the annexing district as the boundaries existed at the time of the issuance of the bonded indebtedness being refunded and not against any of the taxable property in the dissolved school district, provided that (i) the net interest rate on the refunding bonds may not exceed the net interest rate on the refunded bonds, (ii) the final maturity date of the refunding bonds may not extend beyond the final maturity date of the refunded bonds, and (iii) the tax levy to pay the refunding bonds in any levy year may not exceed the tax levy that would have been required to pay the refunded bonds for that levy year. The provisions of this subsection (c) are applicable to school districts that were dissolved and their territory annexed to another school district pursuant to a referendum held in April of 2003. The provisions of this subsection (c), other than this sentence, are inoperative 2 years after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 95th General Assembly.
(Source: P.A. 99-475, eff. 1-1-16.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-14A) (from Ch. 122, par. 7-14A)
    Sec. 7-14A. Annexation compensation. There shall be no accounting made after a mere change in boundaries when no new district is created, except that those districts whose enrollment increases by 90% or more as a result of annexing territory detached from another district pursuant to this Article are eligible for supplementary State aid payments in accordance with Section 11E-135 of this Code. Eligible annexing districts shall apply to the State Board of Education for supplementary State aid payments by submitting enrollment figures for the year immediately preceding and the year immediately following the effective date of the boundary change for both the district gaining territory and the district losing territory. Copies of any intergovernmental agreements between the district gaining territory and the district losing territory detailing any transfer of fund balances and staff must also be submitted. In all instances of changes in boundaries, the district losing territory shall not count the average daily attendance of pupils living in the territory during the year preceding the effective date of the boundary change in its claim for reimbursement under Section 18-8.05 or 18-8.15 of this Code for the school year following the effective date of the change in boundaries and the district receiving the territory shall count the average daily attendance of pupils living in the territory during the year preceding the effective date of the boundary change in its claim for reimbursement under Section 18-8.05 or 18-8.15 of this Code for the school year following the effective date of the change in boundaries. The changes to this Section made by this amendatory Act of the 95th General Assembly are intended to be retroactive and applicable to any annexation taking effect on or after July 1, 2004.
(Source: P.A. 99-657, eff. 7-28-16; 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-27)
    Sec. 7-27. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1967, p. 470. Repealed by P.A. 100-374, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-28)
    Sec. 7-28. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 88-155. Repealed by P.A. 100-374, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-29) (from Ch. 122, par. 7-29)
    Sec. 7-29. Limitation on contesting boundary change. No action contesting the annexation of any territory to a school district shall commence unless brought within 2 calendar years after (i) the order annexing the territory shall have become final in the event of a detachment or (ii) the election results shall have been certified in the event of a dissolution. Where a limitation of a shorter period is prescribed by statute, such shorter limitation shall apply. The limitation set forth in this Section shall not apply to jurisdictional challenges.
(Source: P.A. 100-374, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-30)
    Sec. 7-30. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31. Repealed by P.A. 100-374, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/7-31)
    Sec. 7-31. Applicability of amendatory Act. For any petition filed with the regional superintendent of schools under this Article prior to the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 100th General Assembly, including a petition for a rehearing pursuant to subsection (n) of Section 7-6 of this Code, the proposed action described in the petition, including all notices, hearings, administrative decisions, ballots, elections, and passage requirements relating thereto, shall proceed and be in accordance with the law in effect prior to the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 100th General Assembly.
(Source: P.A. 100-374, eff. 8-25-17.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 7A heading)
ARTICLE 7A. UNIT SCHOOL DISTRICT CONVERSION
IN DISTRICTS WITH NOT MORE THAN 250 STUDENTS
IN GRADES 9 THROUGH 12
(Repealed)
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 7C heading)
ARTICLE 7C - TRANSFER OF HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT TERRITORY
(Repealed)
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 8 heading)
ARTICLE 8. TREASURERS

    (105 ILCS 5/8-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 8-1)
    Sec. 8-1. Treasurers.
    (a) Except as otherwise provided in subsections (b) and (c), in Class II county school units the trustees of schools shall appoint a treasurer who shall be ex-officio clerk of the board. The term of the township treasurer shall be for a 2 year period beginning and ending on the first of July. The treasurer shall be a resident of the township, but not a trustee, or school board member. He shall attend all meetings and keep a record of the official proceedings of the trustees of schools. Such record shall be open to public inspection. All proceedings, when recorded, shall be signed by the president and the clerk. If the clerk is absent, or refuses to perform any of his duties, a clerk pro tempore may be appointed. For sufficient cause the treasurer may be removed from office by the trustees of schools. In case of a vacancy the trustees of schools shall elect a treasurer for the unexpired term.
    (b) In Class I county school units, and in each school district which forms a part of a Class II county school unit but which has withdrawn from the jurisdiction and authority of the trustees of schools of the township in which such school district is located and from the jurisdiction and authority of the township treasurer in such Class II county school unit as provided in subsection (b) of Section 5-1, each school board shall either elect one of its members to serve as treasurer without salary for a period of one year or appoint someone, not a member of the school board, as its treasurer, and, except as provided in this Section the board shall fix his compensation. An appointed treasurer shall serve at the pleasure of the board. An appointed treasurer shall be at least 21 years of age, of approved integrity, but not a member of the county board of school trustees. The records of the treasurer shall be open to public inspection. Two or more such districts may appoint the same treasurer. In case of a vacancy caused by the death, resignation or the removal from office of the school treasurer the school board shall appoint a treasurer. The school board may determine the temporary incapacity of its treasurer occasioned by illness, absence from the district or any other cause which prevents the prompt performance of his duties and appoint an acting treasurer to serve until the board determines such temporary incapacity no longer exists.
    (c) The school board of each elementary school, high school and unit school district that forms a part of a Class II county school unit and that was under the jurisdiction and authority of the township treasurer and trustees of schools of a township at the time those offices were abolished in that township as provided in subsection (c) of Section 5-1 shall appoint a person to serve as treasurer of the school board. The term of each school treasurer appointed under this subsection shall be for a 2 year period beginning and ending on the first day of July. A person appointed under this subsection to serve as treasurer of a school board shall not be the superintendent of schools of the school district. A person appointed and serving under this subsection as treasurer of a school board may concurrently serve as the treasurer of the regional board of school trustees, if selected to serve in that capacity by the regional board of school trustees, as provided in subsection (c) of Section 5-1. The school board shall fix the compensation of its school treasurer, and for sufficient cause may remove the school treasurer from office. However, if a member of the school board is also school treasurer, he or she shall perform his or her duties as school treasurer without compensation. In the case of a vacancy, the school board shall appoint a school treasurer for the unexpired term. The school board may determine the temporary incapacity of its treasurer due to illness, absence from the district, or other cause that prevents the prompt performance of his duties and may appoint an acting treasurer to serve until the school board determines that the temporary incapacity of its treasurer no longer exists.
    (d) After October 1, 1977, each treasurer in a Class I county school unit appointed under this Section for his first term shall have a financial background or related experience or 12 semester hours of credit of college level accounting.
    (e) After August 14, 1989, any treasurer appointed under this Section for his first term in Class II county school units, including any person appointed by a school board to serve as its treasurer as provided in subsection (c) of this Section, shall be a certified public accountant or a certified chief school business official as defined in part (3) of Section 21-7.3 of this Act. Experience as a township treasurer in a Class II county school unit prior to July 1, 1989 shall be deemed the equivalent of certification.
    (f) Concurrently with the election or appointment of its own school treasurer by the school board of a school district which forms a part of a Class II county school unit but which no longer is subject to the jurisdiction and authority of a township treasurer or trustees of schools of a township because the district has withdrawn from the jurisdiction and authority of the township treasurer and trustees of schools of the township or because those offices have been abolished as provided in subsection (b) or (c) of Section 5-1, all funds, accounts, moneys, notes, bonds, mortgages and effects then held by such township treasurer on behalf or for the use and benefit of, or then credited by such township treasurer to any fund or account of such school district shall thereupon be transferred and paid over by such township treasurer to the school treasurer elected or appointed by the school board of such school district. In addition the school treasurer of such school district shall have the right, at all reasonable times, to inspect all cash books, loan books, district account books and journals kept by such township treasurer as provided in Section 8-5 and to copy or otherwise reproduce such portions thereof as such school treasurer deems necessary for the performance of his duties.
    (g) Upon the abolition of the offices of the township treasurer and trustee of schools of a township as provided in subsection (c) of Section 5-1, and subject to the limitation of subsection (b) of Section 8-5 with respect to certain records to be surrendered to the regional board of school trustees, and except as otherwise provided in subsection (c) of Section 5-1 with respect to the common school lands and township loanable funds of that township and with respect to the records, books and accounts relating to those common school lands and township loanable funds, all school funds and accounts, moneys, notes, bonds, securities, district account books and other documents, records and effects then held by the former township treasurer on behalf or for the use and benefit of, or then credited by the former township treasurer to any fund or account of any school district that was under the jurisdiction and authority of the township treasurer at the time the office of that township treasurer was abolished shall thereupon be transferred and paid over by the former township treasurer to the appropriate school treasurer appointed by the school board of each such district under subsection (c) of this Section 8-1.
    (h) If the school district of a school treasurer elected or appointed under this Section is receiving emergency State financial assistance under Article 1B, that school treasurer is subject to the provisions of Article 1B.
(Source: P.A. 96-538, eff. 8-14-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/8-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 8-2)
    Sec. 8-2. Bond of treasurer. Before entering upon his duties, each school treasurer shall execute a bond with 2 or more persons having an interest in real estate who are not trustees, or a surety company authorized to do business in this State, as sureties, payable to the township trustees of schools in Class II county school units and to the school board of each district for which he or she is treasurer or its successors in office in Class I county school units and conditioned upon the faithful discharge of his or her duties, except that the bond required of the school treasurer of a school district which is located in a Class II county school unit but which no longer is subject to the jurisdiction and authority of a township treasurer or trustees of schools of a township because the district has withdrawn from the jurisdiction and authority of the township treasurer and trustees of schools of the township or because those offices have been abolished as provided in subsection (b) or (c) of Section 5-1 shall be payable to the school board of each district for which he or she is treasurer or its successor in office and conditioned upon the faithful discharge of his or her duties. The penalty of the bond shall be 25% of the amount of all bonds, notes, mortgages, moneys and effects of which he is to have the custody, whether individuals act as sureties or whether the surety given is by a surety company authorized to do business in this State, and shall be increased or decreased from time to time, as the increase or decrease of the amount of notes, bonds, mortgages, moneys and effects may require, and whenever in the judgment of the regional superintendent of schools, or whenever in the judgment of the township trustees or the school board of the district by which the school treasurer was appointed or elected, the penalty of the bond should be increased or decreased; provided that the penalty of the bond shall not be increased to more than 25% of the amount of all bonds, notes, mortgages, moneys and effects of which the treasurer has custody at any time. The bond of the township treasurer shall be approved by at least a majority of the township trustees in Class II county school units; provided that in those school districts that are located in a Class II county school unit but are no longer subject to the jurisdiction and authority of a township treasurer and trustees of schools of a township (because the districts have withdrawn from the jurisdiction and authority of the township treasurer and trustees of schools of the township or because those offices have been abolished as provided in subsection (b) or (c) of Section 5-1) and in Class I county school units, the bond shall be approved by at least a majority of the members of the school board; and in all cases the bond shall be filed with the regional superintendent of schools who shall file with the State Board of Education before September 1 in each year an affidavit showing which treasurers of school districts under his supervision and control are properly bonded. The bond shall be in the following form:
STATE OF ILLINOIS
.......... COUNTY
    We, AB, CD and EF, are obligated, jointly and severally, to the (School Board of District No. ...., or trustees of township .... range ....) in the above mentioned county or successors in office, in the penal sum of $...., for the payment of which we bind ourselves, our heirs, executors and administrators.
    Dated (insert date).
    The condition of this obligation is such that if AB, school treasurer in the above stated county, faithfully discharges the duties of his or her office, according to law, and delivers to his or her successor in office, after such successor has qualified by giving bond as provided by law, all moneys, books, papers, securities and control, which have come into his or her possession or control, as such school treasurer, from the date of his or her bond to the time that his or her successor has qualified as school treasurer, by giving such bond as required by law, then this obligation to be void; otherwise to remain in full force and effect.
    Approved and accepted by:
        A.... B.... (Signature)
        C.... D.... (Signature)
        E.... F.... (Signature)
        G.... H.... (Signature)
        I.... J.... (Signature)
        K.... L.... (Signature)
(Board of Education or Board of
Directors of District No. .....
By ....
President Secretary or Clerk
or ....
.... Township Trustees)
    No part of the State or other school fund shall be paid to any school treasurer or other persons authorized to receive it unless such treasurer has filed his or her bond, or if reelected, has renewed his or her bond and filed it as required by law.
(Source: P.A. 91-357, eff. 7-29-99.)

    (105 ILCS 5/8-3) (from Ch. 122, par. 8-3)
    Sec. 8-3. Compensation. Each school treasurer shall receive in full, for his services, a compensation to be fixed, prior to his appointment, and such compensation shall not be decreased during his term of office.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/8-4) (from Ch. 122, par. 8-4)
    Sec. 8-4. High school districts to pay share of compensation and expenses. Each elementary school district, community high school district and township high school district - excepting, however, any school district that no longer is subject to the jurisdiction and authority of a township treasurer or trustees of schools of a township because the district has withdrawn from the jurisdiction and authority of the township treasurer and trustees of schools of the township or because those offices have been abolished as provided in subsection (b) or (c) of Section 5-1 -- shall pay a proportionate share of the compensation of the township treasurer serving such district or districts and a proportionate share of the expenses of the township treasurer's office, which compensation and expenses shall be determined by dividing the total amount of all school funds handled by the township treasurer by such amount of the funds as belongs to each such elementary school district or high school district.
(Source: P.A. 86-1441; 87-473.)

    (105 ILCS 5/8-5) (from Ch. 122, par. 8-5)
    Sec. 8-5. Books and accounts.
    (a) The township treasurer shall be provided by the trustees of schools with a cash book, a loan book, a district account book, and a journal. In the cash book he shall enter in separate accounts all moneys received and paid out, with the amount, date, from whom, to whom and on what account received or paid out; or, if loaned, the date, to whom, and the amount. Moneys received shall be charged to debit account, and moneys paid out shall be credited as follows: First, to the principal of the township fund; second, to the interest of the township fund; third, to the common school fund and other funds; fourth, to the taxes received from the county or town collector, and for what districts received; fifth, donations; sixth, moneys coming from all other sources; in all cases entering the date when received, and when paid out.
    In the loan book he shall enter a record of all school funds loaned, with the amount to whom, date, time, when due, and the rate of interest, the interest paid, and a description of the securities.
    In the district account book he shall post from the cash book all receipts and expenditures on account of any district, with the amount, date, from or to whom, and from what sources and for what purposes.
    In the journal he shall record at length the acts and proceedings of the trustees of schools, their orders, by-laws and resolutions.
    The township treasurer shall keep his accounts in the manner directed by the State Board of Education, the regional superintendent of schools or the trustees of schools; and they shall be subject at all times to the inspection of the trustees, the directors or school board members or other persons authorized by this Act or of any committee appointed by the voters of the township at the election of trustees to examine them.
    (b) Concurrently with the abolition of the offices of township treasurer and trustee of schools of a township as provided in subsection (c) of Section 5-1, the former township treasurer whose office has been so abolished shall surrender to the school treasurer of each school district served by that township treasurer at the time that office is abolished the district account book theretofore maintained for that school district by the former township treasurer, and in addition shall surrender to the regional board of school trustees the cash books, loan books and journals referred to in subsection (a) of this Section 8-5; provided that the school board and school treasurer of each such school district, the State Board of Education, the regional superintendent and such other persons as may be authorized by law shall have the right, at all reasonable times, to inspect, and to copy or otherwise reproduce any portions of the cash books, loan books and journals surrendered by the former township treasurer to the regional board of school trustees as required by this subsection.
(Source: P.A. 87-473.)

    (105 ILCS 5/8-6) (from Ch. 122, par. 8-6)
    Sec. 8-6. Custody of school funds.
    The school treasurer shall have custody of the school funds and shall keep in a cash book separate cash balances. In the cash book he shall enter in separate accounts the balance, total of all moneys received in each fund, and the total of the orders countersigned or checks signed with respect to each fund and extend the balances and the aggregate cash balance for all funds balance at least monthly. The treasurer shall reconcile such balances with the accounting or bookkeeping department of the district in conformity with a template provided by the State Board of Education monthly. School districts on the financial watch or warning list that are required to submit deficit reduction plans in accordance with Section 17-1 of this Code or that are certified in financial difficulty in accordance with Section 1-A8 of this Code must transmit the cash balances as required pursuant to this Section 8-6 of this Code to the State Board of Education quarterly from the treasurer.
(Source: P.A. 97-429, eff. 8-16-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/8-7) (from Ch. 122, par. 8-7)
    Sec. 8-7. Only lawful custodian of funds - Depositaries. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (f) of Section 8-1, subsection (c) of Section 5-1, and subsection (b) of Section 8-5, the township treasurer in Class II county school units, the school treasurer in Class I county school units, and the school treasurer in any school district that forms a part of a Class II county school unit but which no longer is subject to the jurisdiction and authority of a township treasurer and trustees of schools of a township (because the district has withdrawn from the jurisdiction and authority of the township treasurer and trustees of school of the township or because those offices have been abolished as provided in subsection (b) or (c) of Section 5-1) shall be the only lawful custodian of all school funds and shall demand receipt for and safely keep, according to law, all bonds, mortgages, notes, moneys, effects, books and papers belonging to any school district or township, as the case may be, which he serves as treasurer. Trustees of schools in Class II county school units, school boards in Class I county school units, and those school boards in Class II county school units that have elected or appointed their own school treasurer pursuant to subsection (b) or (c) of Section 5-1 and subsection (b) or (c) of Section 8-1, shall designate one or more banks, savings and loan associations, situated in the State of Illinois, in which school funds and moneys in the custody of the township treasurer or of the school treasurer shall be kept. When a bank or savings and loan association has been designated as a depositary it shall continue as such until 10 days after a new depositary is designated and has qualified by furnishing statements of resources and liabilities as is required by this section. When a new depositary is designated, the trustees of schools in Class II county school units, school boards in Class I county school units, and those school boards in Class II county school units that have elected or appointed their own school treasurer pursuant to subsection (b) or (c) of Section 5-1 and subsection (b) or (c) of Section 8-1, shall notify the sureties of the township treasurer or of the school treasurer, as the case may be, of that fact, in writing at least 5 days before the transfer of funds. The township treasurer or the school treasurer shall be discharged from responsibility for such funds and moneys which he deposits in a depositary so designated while such funds and moneys are so deposited.
    No bank or savings and loan association shall receive public funds as permitted by this Section, unless it has complied with the requirements established pursuant to Section 6 of the Public Funds Investment Act.
    Township and school treasurers are authorized to enter into agreements of any definite or indefinite term regarding the deposit, redeposit, investment, reinvestment or withdrawal of school funds, including, without limitation, agreements with other township and school treasurers, agreements with community college districts authorized by Section 3-47 of the Public Community College Act and agreements with educational service regions authorized by Section 3-9.1.
    Each township and school treasurer is permitted to (i) combine moneys from more than one fund of a single school district for the purpose of investing such funds, and (ii) join with township and school treasurers, community college districts and educational service regions in investing school funds, community college funds and educational service region funds. Such joint investments shall be made only in investments authorized by law for the investment of school funds or, in the case of investments made jointly with community college districts and educational service regions, in investments authorized by law for the investment of school funds, community college funds and educational service region funds. When moneys of more than one fund of a single school district are combined for investment purposes or when moneys of a school district are combined with moneys of other school districts, community college districts or educational service regions, the moneys combined for such purposes shall be accounted for separately in all respects, and the earnings from such investment shall be separately and individually computed and recorded, and credited to the fund or school district, community college district or educational service region, as the case may be, for which the investment was acquired.
(Source: P.A. 86-1051; 86-1441; 87-435; 87-473; 87-968.)

    (105 ILCS 5/8-8) (from Ch. 122, par. 8-8)
    Sec. 8-8. Township fund - Loans - Investments.
    The township treasurer or township land commissioners, as the case may be, shall keep the principal of the township fund loaned at interest. The rate of interest, which shall not be less than four per cent per annum, payable annually, except in the case of investments in war bonds of the United States government, shall be determined by a majority of the trustees of schools at any regular or special meeting. No loan shall be made for less than one year nor more than 5 years but investments secured by mortgage, notes, or bonds, insured by the Federal Housing Administrator, or debentures issued by him, or in bonds or other obligations of National Mortgage Associations, may be for longer than 5 years. All loans shall be secured by mortgage on unencumbered realty situated in this State, worth at least 50% more than the amount loaned, with a condition that in case additional security shall be required at any time it shall be given to the satisfaction of the trustees of schools. In estimating the value of realty mortgaged to secure the payment of money loaned, the value of improvements liable to be destroyed may be included; but in such case the improvements shall be insured for their insurable value in a responsible insurance company or companies, and the policy or policies shall be transferred to the trustees of schools as additional security, and shall be kept so insured until the loan is paid. The township treasurer or township land commissioners, as the case may be, also may invest the principal of the township fund in:
    1. Bonds issued by the State, the Sanitary District of Chicago, counties, townships and cities in this State, and by school directors pursuant to Section 19-2;
    2. Bonds issued by any district in this State having authority to levy taxes upon all taxable property within the district;
    3. Mortgage notes or bonds issued by the Federal Housing Administrator, or debentures issued by him;
    4. Bonds or other obligations of National Mortgage Associations or the Home Owners' Loan Corporation;
    5. United States Government, State of Illinois and municipal securities the payment of which is protected by the power to levy taxes (not including special assessments) therefor.
    He or they may exchange mortgages in default for bonds of the Home Owners' Loan Corporation.
    He or they may invest moneys in the operations and maintenance fund of any school district in war bonds of the United States government that are redeemable at the owner's option, in cases where building projects cannot, by reason of material shortages or wartime priority restrictions, currently be undertaken or completed. School funds held by the treasurer of a district created by any special act shall be invested according to the provisions of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 86-970.)

    (105 ILCS 5/8-9) (from Ch. 122, par. 8-9)
    Sec. 8-9. Mortgages - Form. Mortgages to secure the payment of money loaned under the provisions of this Act may be in the following form:
    I, A B, of the county of ...., State of ...., do hereby grant, convey and transfer to the trustees of schools of township No. ...., Range No. ...., in the County of ...., and State of Illinois, for the use of the inhabitants of the township, the following described real estate: (here insert premises), which real estate I declare to be in mortgage for the payment of $...., loaned to me and for the payment of all interest that may accrue thereon, to be computed at the rate of .... per cent per year until paid. I agree to pay the above sum of money in .... years from the date hereof, and to pay the interest on the same annually, at the rate above stated. I further covenant that I have a good and valid title to the estate, and that the same is free from all incumbrance, and that I will pay all taxes and assessments which may be levied on the real estate, and that I will give any additional security that may at any time be required in writing by the board of trustees; and if the real estate is sold to pay the debt or any part thereof, or for any failure or refusal to comply with or perform the conditions or covenants herein contained, I will deliver immediate possession of the premises. It is further agreed by and between the parties that in the event a complaint is filed in any court to foreclose this mortgage for non-payment of either principal or interest, that the mortgagor will pay a reasonable attorney's fee, and the same shall be included in the judgment and be taxed as costs; and we, A B, and C, spouse of A B, hereby release all rights to the premises which we may have by virtue of any homestead laws of this State.
    Dated (insert date).
A .... B ....................
C .... D ....................

      The mortgage shall be acknowledged and recorded as is required by law for other conveyances of real estate, the mortgagor paying the expenses of acknowledgment and recording.
(Source: P.A. 91-357, eff. 7-29-99.)

    (105 ILCS 5/8-10) (from Ch. 122, par. 8-10)
    Sec. 8-10. Interest in default-Actions.
    If default is made in the interest due upon money loaned by any township treasurer, or in the payment of the principal, interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum shall be charged upon the principal and interest from the day of default, which interest shall be included in the assessment of damages, or in the judgment in the suit or action brought upon the obligation to enforce payment thereof, and interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum may be recovered in an action brought to recover interest only. The township treasurer may bring appropriate actions in the name of the trustees for the recovery of the interest when due and unpaid, without suing for the principal, in whatever form secured.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/8-11) (from Ch. 122, par. 8-11)
    Sec. 8-11. Suit when additional security not furnished.
    If the trustees of schools require additional security for the payment of money loaned, and such security is not given, the township treasurer shall cause suit to be instituted for the recovery of the principal and accrued interest to the date of judgment. Proof shall be made of such requisitions.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/8-12) (from Ch. 122, par. 8-12)
    Sec. 8-12. Name in which securities taken-Actions.
    Bonds, mortgages, notes and other securities taken for money or other property due, or to become due, to the trustees of schools for the township, shall be made payable to them in their corporate name; and in such name, suits, actions and complaints, and every description of legal proceedings may be had for the recovery of money, breach of contracts and for every legal liability which may at any time arise or exist, or upon which a right of action shall accrue to the use of such corporation.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/8-13) (from Ch. 122, par. 8-13)
    Sec. 8-13. Statement of condition of funds.
    On or before June 30, annually, the township treasurer shall deliver to the county superintendent of schools a statement verified by his affidavit, showing the exact condition of the township funds. Such statement shall contain a description of all bonds, mortgages, notes and other securities, held as principal of the township fund, giving names, dates, amounts, rates of interest, when due, and other data necessary to a full understanding of the condition of the funds.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/8-14) (from Ch. 122, par. 8-14)
    Sec. 8-14. Statements to trustees-Books, mortgages, etc., submitted for examination.
    On the first Mondays in April and October of each year the township treasurer shall submit to the trustees of schools a statement showing the amounts of interest, rents, issues and profits on township lands and funds that have accrued since their last regular meeting, and also the amount of distributive funds on hand. He shall submit also to the trustees for their examination all books, mortgages, bonds, notes and other evidences of indebtedness held by him as treasurer of the township, and shall make such other statements as the trustees may require.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/8-15) (from Ch. 122, par. 8-15)
    Sec. 8-15. Statement of district accounts. The school treasurer shall furnish to the school board of the district which he serves as treasurer a monthly reconciliation required by Section 8-6. The treasurer shall comply with any lawful demand the trustees or school board, as the case may be, may make as to the verification of any balance reported.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/8-16) (from Ch. 122, par. 8-16)
    Sec. 8-16. School orders; Teacher's wages. The school treasurer shall pay out funds of the school district only upon an order of the school board signed by the president and clerk or secretary or by a majority of the board, except payment of the obligations for Social Security taxes as required by the Social Security Enabling Act and payment of recurring bills, such as utility bills, may be made upon a certification by the clerk or secretary of the board of the amount of the obligation only. When an order issued for the wages of a teacher is presented to the treasurer and is not paid for want of funds, the treasurer shall endorse it over his signature, "not paid for want of funds" with the date of presentation, and shall make and keep a record of the endorsement. The order shall thereafter bear interest at the rate, not exceeding the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, established by the school board of the district, until the treasurer shall notify the clerk or secretary in writing that he has funds to pay the order. Whenever the treasurer obtains sufficient funds to pay any such order he shall set them aside for such purpose and shall not use them to pay any other order until the order previously presented and not paid is paid or otherwise discharged. The treasurer shall make and keep a record of the notices and hold the funds necessary to pay such order until it is presented. The order shall draw no interest after notice is given to the clerk or secretary.
    Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the establishment of a voucher system of expenditures as provided in Section 10-23.5 of this Act.
    With respect to instruments for the payment of money issued under this Section either before, on, or after June 6, 1989, it is and always has been the intention of the General Assembly (i) that the Omnibus Bond Acts are and always have been supplementary grants of power to issue instruments in accordance with the Omnibus Bond Acts, regardless of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts, (ii) that the provisions of this Section are not a limitation on the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts, and (iii) that instruments issued under this Section within the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts are not invalid because of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts.
(Source: P.A. 96-998, eff. 7-2-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/8-17) (from Ch. 122, par. 8-17)
    Sec. 8-17. Duties of treasurer.
    (a) It is also the duty of the township treasurer to:
        1. Return to the county clerk, on or before the
    	
first Tuesday in October in each year, the certificate of tax levy made by each school board in his township.
        2. Pay all lawful orders issued by the school board
    	
of any district in his township.
        3. Collect from the township and county collectors
    	
the full amount of taxes levied by the school boards in his township.
        4. Examine the official records of each district in
    	
the township on the first Mondays in April and October of each year.
        5. Keep a record account between districts when
    	
pupils are transferred from one district to another.
        6. Give notice of the election of trustees, and in
    	
case of the formation of a new school district, of the election of school directors or school board members.
        7. Give notice of any regular district election when
    	
the directors or school board members fail or refuse to do so.
        8. Publish in some English language newspaper of his
    	
county an annual statement of the finances of the township.
        9. Be responsible for receipts, disbursements and
    	
investments arising out of the operation of the school district under his supervision.
    (b) The duties of the township treasurer set forth in subsection (a) shall not be deemed or construed to extend or apply with respect to any school district in his township which has withdrawn from the jurisdiction and authority of the township trustees and from the jurisdiction and authority of the township treasurer as provided in subsection (b) of Section 5-1, nor to the school business, tax levies, tax revenues, payment orders, records, elections, annual statements, receipts, disbursements, investments or other financial or business activities or affairs of any such school district or of the school board of any such district, other than the duty to account in accordance with law for any balance of the income from the permanent township fund required to be apportioned and distributed to any such district pursuant to Section 5-17 after payment of all valid claims as provided in that Section, and except as otherwise provided with respect to the distribution and apportionment of funds pursuant to Sections 15-31 and 19-28.
(Source: P.A. 86-1441.)

    (105 ILCS 5/8-18) (from Ch. 122, par. 8-18)
    Sec. 8-18. District in two or more townships-Taxes-Treasurer.
    When a district is composed of parts of two or more townships, any treasurer not authorized to receive the taxes of the district shall notify the school board of the amount of funds held by him to the credit of the district, and the school board shall thereupon give the proper treasurer an order for the funds.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/8-19) (from Ch. 122, par. 8-19)
    Sec. 8-19. Delivery of money, books, mortgages, etc. to successor.
    At the expiration of his term of office, or upon his removal or resignation the school treasurer, or in case of his death, his representatives shall deliver to his successor, all moneys, books, mortgages, notes and securities, and all papers and documents in which the district has any lawful interest.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/8-20) (from Ch. 122, par. 8-20)
    Sec. 8-20. Failure or refusal to perform duties.
    The school treasurer who as such treasurer fails, neglects or refuses to perform the duties imposed upon him by this Act, within the time or in the manner prescribed, shall forfeit not less than ten dollars, nor more than twenty-five dollars, of his pay as treasurer, which forfeiture shall be enforced by the trustees or school board of the district as the case may be. For any failure or refusal to perform all the duties required of the treasurer by law, he shall be liable to the trustees of schools or school board or their successors in office as the case may be, upon his official bond, for all damages sustained, to be recovered by civil action by the trustees or school board or their successors in office as the case may be, for the use of the township or school district as the case may be, before any court having jurisdiction of the amount of damages claimed; but if the treasurer, in any failure or refusal, acted under and in conformity to a requisition or order of the trustees of schools or a school board as the case may be entered upon their minutes and subscribed by their president and secretary or clerk, then, and in that case, the trustees of schools or school board as the case may be or those voting for the requisition or order, and not the treasurer shall be liable, jointly and severally, to the inhabitants of the township or district as the case may be for such damages, to be recovered by a civil action in the official name of the county superintendent of schools, having supervision and control over the district for the use of the townships or districts as the case may be: provided that the school treasurer shall be liable for any part of the judgment obtained against the trustees of schools or school board or members thereof as the case may be which cannot be collected on account of their insolvency.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 9 heading)
ARTICLE 9. ELECTIONS

    (105 ILCS 5/9-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 9-1)
    Sec. 9-1. Scope of article. All school elections shall be governed by the general election law of the State.
(Source: P.A. 81-1490.)

    (105 ILCS 5/9-1.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 9-1.1)
    Sec. 9-1.1. Referenda. Whenever a proposition or public question is required to be submitted pursuant to this Act for approval or rejection by the electorate at an election, the time and manner of conducting such referendum shall be in accordance with the general election law of the State.
(Source: P.A. 81-1490.)

    (105 ILCS 5/9-1.5)
    Sec. 9-1.5. Advisory referenda. By a vote of the majority of the members of the school board, the board may authorize an advisory question of public policy to be placed on the ballot at the next regularly scheduled election in the school district. The school board shall certify the question to the proper election authority, which must submit the question at an election in accordance with the Election Code, provided, however, that no such question may be submitted at a consolidated primary election.
(Source: P.A. 97-81, eff. 7-5-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/9-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 9-2)
    Sec. 9-2. Election Definitions. As used in this Act in connection with elections of school officials and referenda:
    (a) "Voter" or "Legal voter" or "elector" means a person qualified to vote under the general election law.
    (b) "Certify" and "certification", when used in connection with elections of officers or referenda, refers to the certification in accordance with the general election law of offices, candidates or propositions to county clerks and boards of election commissioners for inclusion on the ballot at an election.
    (c) "Submit" and "submission" when used in connection with a referendum on a proposition or question refers to the submission to the voters in accordance with the general election law of the proposition or question by county clerks and boards of election commissioners.
    (d) "Local election official" means the secretary of a board of education, the secretary or clerk of a board of school directors, the treasurer of a township board of school trustees, the secretary of township land commissioners and the regional superintendent of schools with respect to the various school officer elections and school referenda for which the regional superintendent is assigned election duties pursuant to this Code.
(Source: P.A. 84-1338.)

    (105 ILCS 5/9-5) (from Ch. 122, par. 9-5)
    Sec. 9-5. Election dates and terms of offices. The dates upon which school officer elections shall be held are as established in the general election law. Members of boards of education shall unless otherwise provided serve terms of 4 years.
    If, at a regularly scheduled election, a proposition is submitted to the voters of a district, as provided by a resolution of the board, on the question of whether board members should serve for 6 year terms and the proposition receives the affirmative vote of those voting thereon, members of the board of education shall thereafter serve for terms of 6 years.
(Source: P.A. 82-1014.)

    (105 ILCS 5/9-10) (from Ch. 122, par. 9-10)
    Sec. 9-10. Candidates for office - nominating petitions. Candidates for the office of school director shall be nominated by petition signed by at least 25 voters or 5% of the voters, whichever is less, residing within the district and filed with the county clerk or the county board of election commissioners, as the case may be, of the county in which the principal office of the school district is located.
    Nominations for members of boards of education, including non-high school boards of education shall be made by a petition signed by at least 50 voters or 10% of the voters, whichever is less, residing within the district and shall be filed with the county clerk or the county board of election commissioners, as the case may be, of the county in which the principal office of the school district is located. In addition to the requirements of the general election law, the form of such petitions shall be substantially as follows:
NOMINATING PETITIONS
(LEAVE OUT THE INAPPLICABLE PART.)
    To the (County Clerk or County Board of Election Commissioners) .... of .... County:
    We the undersigned, being (.... or more) (or 10% or more) (or 5% or more) of the voters residing within said district, hereby petition that .... who resides at .... in the (city or village) of .... in Township .... (or who resides outside any city, village or incorporated town and in Township ....) in said district shall be a candidate for the office of .... of the board of education (or board of directors) (full term) (vacancy) to be voted for at the election to be held on (insert date).
    Name: .................. Address: ...................
 
    In the designation of the name of a candidate on a petition for nomination, the candidate's given name or names, initial or initials, a nickname by which the candidate is commonly known, or a combination thereof may be used in addition to the candidate's surname. If a candidate has changed his or her name, whether by a statutory or common law procedure in Illinois or any other jurisdiction, within 3 years before the last day for filing the petition, then (i) the candidate's name on the petition must be followed by "formerly known as (list all prior names during the 3-year period) until name changed on (list date of each such name change)" and (ii) the petition must be accompanied by the candidate's affidavit stating the candidate's previous names during the period specified in clause (i) and the date or dates each of those names was changed; failure to meet these requirements shall be grounds for denying certification of the candidate's name for the ballot, but these requirements do not apply to name changes resulting from adoption to assume an adoptive parent's or parents' surname, marriage to assume a spouse's surname, or dissolution of marriage or declaration of invalidity of marriage to assume a former surname. No other designation, such as a political slogan, as defined by Section 7-17 of the Election Code, title or degree, or nickname suggesting or implying possession of a title, degree or professional status, or similar information may be used in connection with the candidate's surname.
    Nomination papers filed under this Section are not valid unless the candidate named therein files with the county clerk or the county board of election commissioners, as the case may be, of the county in which the principal office of the school district is located a receipt from the county clerk showing that the candidate has filed a statement of economic interests as required by the Illinois Governmental Ethics Act. Such receipt shall be so filed either previously during the calendar year in which his nomination papers were filed or within the period for the filing of nomination papers in accordance with the general election law.
    All petitions for the nomination of members of a board of education shall be filed with the county clerk or the county board of election commissioners, as the case may be, of the county in which the principal office of the school district is located within the time provided for by the general election law. The county clerk or the county board of election commissioners may have petition forms available for issuance to potential candidates, and may give notice of the petition filing period by publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the school district not less than 10 days prior to the first day of filing. The county clerk or the county board of election commissioners shall make certification to the proper election authorities in accordance with the general election law.
    The county clerk or the county board of election commissioners, as the case may be, of the county in which the principal office of the school district is located shall notify the candidates for whom a petition for nomination is filed or the appropriate committee of the obligations under the Campaign Financing Act as provided in the general election law. Such notice shall be given on a form prescribed by the State Board of Elections and in accordance with the requirements of the general election law. The county clerk or county board of election commissioners shall within 7 days of filing or on the last day for filing, whichever is earlier, acknowledge to the petitioner in writing the office's acceptance of the petition.
    A candidate for membership on the board of education or for office as a school director, who has petitioned for nomination to fill a full term and to fill a vacant term to be voted upon at the same election, must withdraw his or her petition for nomination from either the full term or the vacant term by written declaration.
    In all newly organized districts the petition for the nomination of candidates for members of the board of education at the first election shall be addressed to and filed with the regional superintendent of schools in the manner herein specified for the petitions for members of a board of education. For such election the regional superintendent shall fulfill all duties otherwise assigned to the secretary of the board of education.
(Source: P.A. 98-115, eff. 7-29-13; 99-522, eff. 6-30-16.)

    (105 ILCS 5/9-11) (from Ch. 122, par. 9-11)
    Sec. 9-11. Tax rate increase - notice of election - ballot. In addition to the notice requirements of the general election law, whenever a proposition to increase a school tax rate is submitted to be voted upon by the voters of any district the notice of such election shall include an estimate of the approximate amount of taxes extendible under the maximum rate then in force and an estimate of the approximate amount of taxes extendible under the proposed increased rate, such amounts being computed upon the last known full, fair cash value; provided that any error, miscalculation or inaccuracy in computing such amounts shall not invalidate or affect the validity of any rate so increased. The board of directors shall make such estimate and the secretary shall certify such amount to the election authority as part of the certification of the proposition as required by the general election law. Such estimate shall appear on the ballot on which the proposition is printed, but shall not appear as a part of the proposition.
(Source: P.A. 83-448.)

    (105 ILCS 5/9-11.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 9-11.1)
    Sec. 9-11.1. The county clerk or the board of election commissioners, as the case may be, of the jurisdiction in which the principal office of the school district is located shall conduct a lottery to determine the ballot order of candidates for full terms in the event of any simultaneous petition filings. Such candidate lottery shall be conducted as follows:
    All petitions filed by persons waiting in line as of 8:00 a.m. on the first day for filing, or as of the normal opening hour of the office involved on such day, shall be deemed simultaneously filed as of 8:00 a.m. or the normal opening hour, as the case may be. Petitions filed by mail and received after midnight of the first day for filing and in the first mail delivery or pickup of that day shall be deemed simultaneously filed as of 8:00 a.m. of that day or as of the normal opening hour of such day, as the case may be. All petitions received thereafter shall be deemed filed in the order of actual receipt. However, 2 or more petitions filed within the last hour of the filing deadline shall be deemed filed simultaneously.
    Where 2 or more petitions are received simultaneously for the same office as of 8:00 a.m. on the first day for petition filing, or as of the normal opening hour of the office of the county clerk or the board of election commissioners, as the case may be, the county clerk or the board of election commissioners with whom such petitions are filed shall break ties and determine the order of filing by means of a lottery or other fair and impartial method of random selection. Such lottery shall be conducted within 9 days following the last day for petition filing and shall be open to the public. Seven days written notice of the time and place of conducting such random selection shall be given by the county clerk or the board of election commissioners to all candidates who filed their petitions simultaneously and to each organization of citizens within the election jurisdiction which was entitled, under the general election law, at the next preceding election, to have pollwatchers present on the day of election. The county clerk or the board of election commissioners shall post in a conspicuous, open and public place, at the entrance of his or her office, notice of the time and place of such lottery.
    All candidates shall be certified in the order in which their petitions have been filed and in the manner prescribed by Section 10-15 of the general election law. Where candidates have filed simultaneously, they shall be certified in the order prescribed by this Section and prior to candidates who filed for the same office at a later time.
    Where elections are conducted for unexpired terms, a second lottery to determine ballot order shall be conducted for candidates who simultaneously file petitions for such unexpired terms. Such lottery shall be conducted in the same manner as prescribed by this Section for full term candidates.
(Source: P.A. 98-691, eff. 7-1-14.)

    (105 ILCS 5/9-11.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 9-11.2)
    Sec. 9-11.2. For all school districts electing candidates to a board of education in a manner other than at large, candidates not elected at large who file nominating petitions for a full term shall be grouped together by area of residence as follows:
    (1) by congressional townships, or
    (2) according to incorporated or unincorporated areas.
    For all school districts electing candidates to a board of education in a manner other than at large, candidates not elected at large who file nominating petitions for an unexpired term shall be grouped together by area of residence as follows:
    (1) by congressional townships, or
    (2) according to incorporated or unincorporated areas.
    Candidate groupings by area of residence for unexpired terms shall precede the candidate groupings by area of residence for full terms on the ballot. In all instances, however, the ballot order of each candidate grouping shall be determined by the order of petition filing or lottery held pursuant to Section 9-11.1 in the following manner:
    The area of residence of the candidate determined to be first by order of petition filing or by lottery shall be listed first among the candidate groupings on the ballot. All other candidates from the same area of residence will follow according to order of petition filing or the lottery. The area of residence of the candidate determined to be second by the order of petition filing or the lottery shall be listed second among the candidate groupings on the ballot. All other candidates from the same area of residence will follow according to the order of petition filing or the lottery. The ballot order of additional candidate groupings by area of residence shall be established in a like manner.
    In any school district that elects its board members according to area of residence and that has one or more unexpired terms to be filled at an election, the winner or winners of the unexpired term or terms shall be determined first and independently of those running for full terms. The winners of the full terms shall then be determined taking into consideration the areas of residence of those elected to fill the unexpired term or terms.
    "Area of Residence" means congressional township and incorporated and unincorporated territories.
    "Affected school district" means either of the 2 entire elementary school districts that are formed into a combined school district.
(Source: P.A. 93-1079, eff. 1-21-05; 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/9-12) (from Ch. 122, par. 9-12)
    Sec. 9-12. Ballots for the election of school officers shall be in one of the following forms:
 
(FORMAT 1
    Ballot position for candidates shall be determined by the order of petition filing or lottery held pursuant to Section 9-11.1.
    This format is used by Boards of School Directors. School Directors are elected at large.)
OFFICIAL BALLOT
FOR MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF SCHOOL
DIRECTORS TO SERVE AN UNEXPIRED 2-YEAR TERM
VOTE FOR ....
( ) .......................................
( ) .......................................
( ) .......................................
FOR MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF SCHOOL
DIRECTORS TO SERVE A FULL 4-YEAR TERM
VOTE FOR ....
( ) ........................................
( ) ........................................
( ) ........................................

(FORMAT 2
    Ballot position for candidates shall be determined by the order of petition filing or lottery held pursuant to Section 9-11.1.
    This format is used when school board members are elected at large. Membership on the school board is not restricted by area of residence.
    Types of school districts generally using this format are:
    Common school districts;
    Community unit and community consolidated school districts formed on or after January 1, 1975;
    Community unit school districts formed prior to January 1, 1975 that elect board members at large and without restriction by area of residence within the district under subsection (c) of Section 11A-8 (now repealed);
    Community unit, community consolidated and combined school districts in which more than 90% of the population is in one congressional township;
    High school districts in which less than 15% of the taxable property is located in unincorporated territory; and unit districts (OLD TYPE);
    Combined school districts formed on or after July 1, 1983;
    Combined school districts formed before July 1, 1983 and community consolidated school districts that elect board members at large and without restriction by area of residence within the district under subsection (c) of Section 11B-7 (now repealed).)
OFFICIAL BALLOT
FOR MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF
EDUCATION TO SERVE AN UNEXPIRED 2-YEAR TERM
VOTE FOR ....
( ) .......................................
( ) .......................................
( ) .......................................
FOR MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF
EDUCATION TO SERVE A FULL 4-YEAR TERM
VOTE FOR ....
( ) .......................................
( ) .......................................
( ) .......................................

(FORMAT 3
    Ballot position for incorporated and unincorporated areas shall be determined by the order of petition filing or lottery held pursuant to Sections 9-11.1 and 9-11.2.
    This format is used by community unit, community consolidated and combined school districts when the territory is less than 2 congressional townships, or 72 square miles, but consists of more than one congressional township, or 36 square miles, outside of the corporate limits of any city, village or incorporated town within the school district. The School Code requires that not more than 5 board members shall be selected from any city, village or incorporated town in the school district. At least two board members must reside in the unincorporated area of the school district.
    Except for those community unit school districts formed before January 1, 1975 that elect board members at large and without restriction by area of residence within the district under subsection (c) of Section 11A-8 (now repealed) and except for combined school districts formed before July 1, 1983 and community consolidated school districts that elect board members at large and without restriction by area of residence within the district under subsection (c) of Section 11B-7 (now repealed), this format applies to community unit and community consolidated school districts formed prior to January 1, 1975 and combined school districts formed prior to July 1, 1983.)
OFFICIAL BALLOT
    Instructions to voter: The board of education shall be composed of members from both the incorporated and the unincorporated area; not more than 5 board members shall be selected from any city, village or incorporated town.
 
    ON THE BASIS OF EXISTING BOARD MEMBERSHIP, NOT MORE THAN .... MAY BE ELECTED FROM THE INCORPORATED AREAS.
FOR MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF EDUCATION
TO SERVE AN UNEXPIRED 2-YEAR TERM
THE AREA OF RESIDENCE OF THOSE ELECTED TO FILL UNEXPIRED TERMS IS TAKEN INTO CONSIDERATION IN DETERMINING THE WINNERS OF THE FULL TERMS.
VOTE FOR A TOTAL OF ....
................... Area
           ( )   ...........................
           ( )   ...........................
................... Area
           ( )   ...........................
           ( )   ...........................
FOR MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF EDUCATION
TO SERVE A FULL 4-YEAR TERM
VOTE FOR A TOTAL OF ....
................... Area
           ( )   ...........................
           ( )   ...........................
................... Area
           ( )   ...........................
           ( )   ...........................
 
(FORMAT 4
    Ballot position for township areas shall be determined by the order of petition filing or lottery held pursuant to Sections 9-11.1 and 9-11.2.
    Except for those community unit school districts formed prior to January 1, 1975 that elect board members at large and without restriction by area of residence within the district under subsection (c) of Section 11A-8 (now repealed) and except for those combined school districts formed before July 1, 1983 and community consolidated school districts that elect board members at large and without restriction by area of residence within the district under subsection (c) of Section 11B-7 (now repealed), this format applies to community unit and community consolidated school districts formed prior to January 1, 1975 and combined school districts formed prior to July 1, 1983 when the territory of the school district is greater than 2 congressional townships, or 72 square miles. This format applies only when less than 75% of the population is in one congressional township. Congressional townships of less than 100 inhabitants shall not be considered for the purpose of such mandatory board representation. In this case, not more than 3 board members may be selected from any one congressional township.)
OFFICIAL BALLOT
    Instructions to voter: Membership on the board of education is restricted to a maximum of 3 members from any congressional township.
 
    ON THE BASIS OF EXISTING BOARD MEMBERSHIP, MEMBERS MAY BE ELECTED IN THE FOLLOWING NUMBERS FROM EACH CONGRESSIONAL TOWNSHIP.
    NOT MORE THAN .... MAY BE ELECTED FROM TOWNSHIP .... RANGE ....
    NOT MORE THAN .... MAY BE ELECTED FROM TOWNSHIP .... RANGE ....
    NOT MORE THAN .... MAY BE ELECTED FROM TOWNSHIP .... RANGE ....
    (Include each remaining congressional township in district as needed)
FOR MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF EDUCATION TO SERVE
AN UNEXPIRED 2-YEAR TERM
THE AREA OF RESIDENCE OF THOSE ELECTED TO FILL UNEXPIRED TERMS IS TAKEN INTO CONSIDERATION IN DETERMINING THE WINNERS OF THE FULL TERMS.
VOTE FOR A TOTAL OF ....
     Township .............. Range ................
( ) ............................
( ) ............................
     Township .............. Range ................
( ) ............................
( ) ............................
FOR MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF
EDUCATION TO SERVE A FULL 4-YEAR TERM
VOTE FOR A TOTAL OF ....
     Township .............. Range ................
( ) ............................
( ) ............................
     Township .............. Range ................
( ) ............................
( ) ............................

(FORMAT 5
    Ballot position for township areas shall be determined by the order of petition filing or lottery held pursuant to Sections 9-11.1 and 9-11.2.
    Except for those community unit school districts formed before January 1, 1975 that elect board members at large and without restriction by area of residence within the district under subsection (c) of Section 11A-8 (now repealed) and except for those combined school districts formed before July 1, 1983 and community consolidated school districts that elect board members at large and without restriction by area of residence within the district under subsection (c) of Section 11B-7 (now repealed), this format is used by community unit and community consolidated school districts formed prior to January 1, 1975, and combined school districts formed prior to July 1, 1983, when the territory of the school district is greater than 2 congressional townships, or 72 square miles and when at least 75%, but not more than 90%, of the population resides in one congressional township. In this case, 4 school board members shall be selected from that one congressional township and the 3 remaining board members shall be selected from the rest of the district. If a school district from which school board members are to be selected is located in a county under township organization and if the surveyed boundaries of a congressional township from which one or more of those school board members is to be selected, as described by township number and range, are coterminous with the boundaries of the township as identified by the township name assigned to it as a political subdivision of the State, then that township may be referred to on the ballot by both its township name and by township number and range.)
OFFICIAL BALLOT
    Instructions to voter: Membership on the board of education is to consist of 4 members from the congressional township that has at least 75% but not more than 90% of the population, and 3 board members from the remaining congressional townships in the school district.
 
    ON THE BASIS OF EXISTING BOARD MEMBERSHIP, MEMBERS MAY BE ELECTED IN THE FOLLOWING NUMBERS FROM EACH CONGRESSIONAL TOWNSHIP.
FOR MEMBER OF THE BOARD OF EDUCATION
TO SERVE AN UNEXPIRED 2-YEAR TERM
FROM (name)........ TOWNSHIP ..... RANGE .....
VOTE FOR ONE
( )..........................
( )..........................
FOR MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF EDUCATION
TO SERVE A FULL 4-YEAR TERM
VOTE FOR ....
..... shall be elected from (name)...... Township ..... Range ......
(name)....... TOWNSHIP ..... RANGE .....
( ) ............................
( ) ............................
VOTE FOR ....
...... board members shall be elected from the remaining congressional townships.
The Remaining Congressional Townships
       
( ) ............................
( ) ............................

(FORMAT 6
    Ballot position for candidates shall be determined by the order of petition filing or lottery held pursuant to Section 9-11.1.
    This format is used by school districts in which voters have approved a referendum to elect school board members by school board district. The school district is then divided into 7 school board districts, each of which elects one member to the board of education.)
OFFICIAL BALLOT
DISTRICT ....... (1 through 7)
FOR MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF EDUCATION TO SERVE
AN UNEXPIRED 2-YEAR TERM
VOTE FOR ONE
( ) .....................................
( ) .....................................
( ) .....................................
(-OR-)
OFFICIAL BALLOT
DISTRICT ....... (1 through 7)
FOR MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF EDUCATION TO SERVE
A FULL 4-YEAR TERM
VOTE FOR ONE
( ) .....................................
( ) .....................................
( ) .....................................
REVERSE SIDE:
OFFICIAL BALLOT
DISTRICT ....... (1 through 7)
(Precinct name or number)
School District No. ......, ........... County, Illinois
Election Tuesday (insert date)
(facsimile signature of Election Authority)
(County)

(FORMAT 7
    Ballot position for incorporated and unincorporated areas shall be determined by the order of petition filing or lottery held pursuant to Sections 9-11.1 and 9-11.2.
    This format is used by high school districts if more than 15% but less than 30% of the taxable property is located in the unincorporated territory of the school district. In this case, at least one board member shall be a resident of the unincorporated territory.)
OFFICIAL BALLOT
    Instructions to voter: More than 15% but less than 30% of the taxable property of this high school district is located in the unincorporated territory of the district, therefore, at least one board member shall be a resident of the unincorporated areas.
 
    ON THE BASIS OF EXISTING BOARD MEMBERSHIP, AT LEAST ONE MEMBER SHALL BE ELECTED FROM THE UNINCORPORATED AREA.
FOR MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF EDUCATION TO SERVE
AN UNEXPIRED 2-YEAR TERM
THE AREA OF RESIDENCE OF THOSE ELECTED TO FILL UNEXPIRED TERMS IS TAKEN INTO CONSIDERATION IN DETERMINING THE WINNERS OF THE FULL TERMS.
VOTE FOR A TOTAL OF ....
................... Area
           ( )   ...........................
           ( )   ...........................
................... Area
           ( )   ...........................
           ( )   ...........................
FOR MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF EDUCATION TO SERVE
A FULL 4-YEAR TERM
VOTE FOR A TOTAL OF ....
................... Area
           ( )   ...........................
           ( )   ...........................
................... Area
           ( )   ...........................
           ( )   ...........................
 
(FORMAT 7a
    Ballot position for candidates shall be determined by the order of petition filing or lottery held pursuant to Sections 9-11.1 and 9-11.2.
    This format is used by high school districts if more than 15% but less than 30% of the taxable property is located in the unincorporated territory of the school district and on the basis of existing board membership no board member is required to be elected from the unincorporated area.)
OFFICIAL BALLOT
    Instruction to voter: More than 15% but less than 30% of the taxable property of this high school district is located in the unincorporated territory of the district, therefore, at least one board member shall be a resident of the unincorporated areas.
 
    ON THE BASIS OF EXISTING BOARD MEMBERSHIP, MEMBERS MAY BE ELECTED FROM ANY AREA OR AREAS.
FOR MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF EDUCATION TO SERVE
AN UNEXPIRED 2-YEAR TERM
VOTE FOR ....
( ) ........................................
( ) ........................................
( ) ........................................
FOR MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF EDUCATION TO SERVE
A FULL 4-YEAR TERM
VOTE FOR ....
( ) ........................................
( ) ........................................
( ) ........................................

(FORMAT 8
    Ballot position for incorporated and unincorporated areas shall be determined by the order of petition filing or lottery held pursuant to Sections 9-11.1 and 9-11.2.
    This format is used by high school districts if more than 30% of the taxable property is located in the unincorporated territory of the school district. In this case, at least two board members shall be residents of the unincorporated territory.)
OFFICIAL BALLOT
    Instructions to voters: Thirty percent (30%) or more of the taxable property of this high school district is located in the unincorporated territory of the district, therefore, at least two board members shall be residents of the unincorporated territory.
 
    ON THE BASIS OF EXISTING BOARD MEMBERSHIP, AT LEAST 2 MEMBERS SHALL BE ELECTED FROM THE UNINCORPORATED AREA.
FOR MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF EDUCATION TO SERVE
AN UNEXPIRED 2-YEAR TERM
THE AREA OF RESIDENCE OF THOSE ELECTED TO FILL UNEXPIRED TERMS IS TAKEN INTO CONSIDERATION IN DETERMINING THE WINNERS OF THE FULL TERMS.
VOTE FOR A TOTAL OF ....
................... Area
           ( )   ...........................
           ( )   ...........................
................... Area
           ( )   ...........................
           ( )   ...........................
FOR MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF EDUCATION TO SERVE
A FULL 4-YEAR TERM
VOTE FOR A TOTAL OF ....
................... Area
           ( )   ...........................
           ( )   ...........................
................... Area
           ( )   ...........................
           ( )   ...........................
 
(FORMAT 8a
    Ballot position for incorporated and unincorporated areas shall be determined by the order of petition filing or lottery held pursuant to Sections 9-11.1 and 9-11.2.
    This format is used by high school districts if more than 30% of the taxable property is located in the unincorporated territory of the school district. In this case, at least two board members shall be residents of the unincorporated territory.)
OFFICIAL BALLOT
    Instructions to voters: Thirty percent (30%) or more of the taxable property of this high school district is located in the unincorporated territory of the district, therefore, at least two board members shall be residents of the unincorporated territory.
 
    ON THE BASIS OF EXISTING BOARD MEMBERSHIP, AT LEAST ONE MEMBER SHALL BE ELECTED FROM THE UNINCORPORATED AREA.
FOR MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF EDUCATION TO SERVE
AN UNEXPIRED 2-YEAR TERM
THE AREA OF RESIDENCE OF THOSE ELECTED TO FILL UNEXPIRED TERMS IS TAKEN INTO CONSIDERATION IN DETERMINING THE WINNERS OF THE FULL TERMS.
VOTE FOR A TOTAL OF ....
................... Area
           ( )   ...........................
           ( )   ...........................
................... Area
           ( )   ...........................
           ( )   ...........................
FOR MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF EDUCATION TO SERVE
A FULL 4-YEAR TERM
VOTE FOR A TOTAL OF ....
................... Area
           ( )   ...........................
           ( )   ...........................
................... Area
           ( )   ...........................
           ( )   ...........................
 
(FORMAT 8b
    Ballot position for incorporated and unincorporated areas shall be determined by the order of petition filing or lottery held pursuant to Sections 9-11.1 and 9-11.2.
    This format is used by high school districts if more than 30% of the taxable property is located in the unincorporated territory of the school district. In this case, at least two board members shall be residents of the unincorporated territory.)
OFFICIAL BALLOT
    Instructions to voters: Thirty percent (30%) or more of the taxable property of this high school district is located in the unincorporated territory of the district, therefore, at least two board members shall be residents of the unincorporated territory.
 
    ON THE BASIS OF EXISTING BOARD MEMBERSHIP, MEMBERS MAY BE ELECTED FROM ANY AREA OR AREAS.
FOR MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF EDUCATION TO SERVE
AN UNEXPIRED 2-YEAR TERM
VOTE FOR ....
           ( )   ...........................
           ( )   ...........................
           ( )   ...........................
           ( )   ...........................
FOR MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF EDUCATION TO SERVE
A FULL 4-YEAR TERM
VOTE FOR ....
           ( )   ...........................
           ( )   ...........................
           ( )   ...........................
           ( )   ...........................
(Source: P.A. 93-706, eff. 7-9-04; 93-1079, eff. 1-21-05; 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/9-12.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 9-12.1)
    Sec. 9-12.1. (a) On the reverse side of each ballot contained in Section 9-12, except the ballot under Format 6, shall be printed the following:
OFFICIAL BALLOT
..... County, Illinois
School District No. ...., ...... County, Illinois
Election Tuesday, (insert date)
(facsimile signature of the election authority)
    (b) If 6-year terms have been adopted under Section 9-5, or if a ballot is to be used to elect a member or members of a board of school directors or board of education at the consolidated election held in April of 1999 or April of 2001 to a full term that is less than a 4-year term, appropriate adjustments should be made to each ballot in Section 9-12. In the case of any unexpired term each ballot format must indicate whether it is a 4-year or a 2-year unexpired term.
(Source: P.A. 90-637, eff. 7-24-98; 91-357, eff. 7-29-99.)

    (105 ILCS 5/9-13) (from Ch. 122, par. 9-13)
    Sec. 9-13. Public measure - Ballot. More than one public measure may be submitted upon the same ballot. The proposition of purchasing one or more schoolhouse sites, building one or more new schoolhouses, and issuing bonds for the purpose of borrowing money to purchase one or more schoolhouse sites and to build one or more new schoolhouses or make additions and improvements to existing school buildings, may be combined into one or more propositions on the ballot. No proposition under this Section which is substantially the same shall be submitted more than once every 2 months, except where the proposition is submitted as a consequence of a disaster, calamity or other Act of God.
(Source: P.A. 81-1489.)

    (105 ILCS 5/9-18)
    Sec. 9-18. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 93-1079, eff. 1-21-05. Repealed by P.A. 95-141, eff. 8-13-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/9-22) (from Ch. 122, par. 9-22)
    Sec. 9-22. School board districts; changing manner of election. A school board may by resolution or shall, upon the petition of the lesser of 2,500 or 5% of the district's registered voters, order submitted to the district's voters at a regular school election or at the general election, the proposition for the election of board members by school board district, and the proposition shall thereupon be certified by the board's secretary for submission. If the proposition is approved by a majority of those voting on the proposition, the board shall divide the school district into 7 school board districts, each of which must be compact and contiguous and substantially equal in population to each other district. The terms of office of the board members incumbent at the time the proposition is adopted expire on the day of the next regular school election, at which time one member shall be elected from each school board district. In districts which have 4 year terms, those members first elected after adoption of such a proposition shall, by lot, determine 3 to serve for 2 years and 4 for 4 years; their successors shall serve for a 4 year term. In districts which have 6 year terms, those members first elected after adoption of such a proposition shall, by lot, determine 3 to serve for 2 years, 2 for 4 years and 2 for 6 years; their successors shall serve for a 6 year term. Vacancies shall be filled as provided in Section 10-10.
    In the year following each decennial census, the school board shall reapportion the board districts to reflect the results of such census; provided, that no decennial reapportionment shall be required in any school district which elects its board members by school board district rather than at large if: (i) on the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1990, such school district last elected its board members by school board district at the nonpartisan election in 1989; (ii) the terms of the board members so elected were determined by lot after that election and prior to January 1, 1990; and (iii) the population of each existing school board district in that school district at the time of the decennial census is within 5% of what would be the population in the corresponding school board district that would result were the school board districts in that school district to be reapportioned following that decennial census as otherwise required by this paragraph. If reapportionment is required by this paragraph, the school board districts shall be compact, contiguous and substantially equal in population, and such reapportionment plan shall be completed and formally approved by a majority of the members of the board not less than 90 days before the last date established by law for the submission of nominating petitions for the next school board election. At the same board meeting, the board shall, publicly by lot, divide the board districts as equally as possible into 2 groups. In school districts which have 4 year terms, board members or their successors from one group shall be elected for successive terms of 2 years, 4 years and 4 years; and members or their successors from the second group shall be elected for successive terms of 4 years, 4 years and 2 years. In school districts which have 6 year terms, board members or their successors from one group shall be elected for successive terms of 4 years and 6 years; and members or their successors from the second group shall be elected for successive terms of 6 years and 4 years.
    In any school district in which the members of the school board are elected by school board district rather than at large, the school board may by resolution or shall, upon the petition of the lesser of 2,500 or 5% of the school district's registered voters, order submitted to the school district's voters at a regular school election or at the general election, the proposition for the election of board members at large rather than by school board district; and the proposition shall thereupon be certified by the board's secretary for submission. If a majority of those voting at the election in each school board district vote in favor of the proposition: (i) the proposition to elect board members at large shall be deemed to have passed, (ii) new members of the board shall be elected at large at the next regular school election, and (iii) the terms of office of the board members incumbent at the time the proposition is adopted shall expire when the new board members that are elected at large have organized in accordance with Section 10-16. In school districts that formerly elected their members by school board district to successive terms not exceeding 4 years, the members elected at large shall be elected for a term of 4 years, and in school districts that formerly elected their members by school board district to successive terms not exceeding 6 years, the members elected at large shall be elected for a term of 6 years; provided, that in each case the terms of the board members initially elected at large as provided in this paragraph shall be staggered and determined in accordance with the provisions of Sections 10-10 and 10-16.
(Source: P.A. 87-1139; 87-1210; 88-45.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 10 heading)
ARTICLE 10. SCHOOL BOARDS

    (105 ILCS 5/10-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-1)
    Sec. 10-1. Board of school directors.
    (a) School districts having a population of fewer than 1000 inhabitants and not governed by any special act shall be governed by a board of school directors to consist of 3 members who shall be elected in the manner provided in Article 9 of this Act. In consolidated districts and in districts in which the membership of the board of school directors is increased as provided in subsection (b), 7 members shall be so elected.
    (b) Upon presentment to the board of school directors of a school district having a population of fewer than 1,000 inhabitants of a petition signed by the lesser of 5% or 25 of the registered voters of the district to increase the membership of the district's board of school directors to 7 directors and to elect a new 7-member board of school directors to replace the district's existing board of 3 school directors, the clerk or secretary of the board of school directors shall certify the proposition to the proper election authorities for submission to the electors of the district at a regular scheduled election in accordance with the general election law. If the proposition is approved by a majority of those voting on the proposition, the members of the board of school directors of that district thereafter shall be elected in the manner provided by subsection (c) of Section 10-4.
    (c) A board of school directors may appoint a student to the board to serve in an advisory capacity. The student member shall serve for a term as determined by the board. The board may not grant the student member any voting privileges, but shall consider the student member as an advisor. The student member may not participate in or attend any executive session of the board.
(Source: P.A. 94-231, eff. 7-14-05.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-2)
    Sec. 10-2. Corporate powers.
    The directors of each district shall be a body politic and corporate, by the name of "school directors of district No. ...., county of .... and State of Illinois," and by that name may sue and be sued in all courts and places where judicial proceedings are had.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-3) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-3)
    Sec. 10-3. Eligibility of directors. Any person who, on the date of his or her election, is a citizen of the United States, of the age of 18 years or over, is a resident of the State and of the territory of the district for at least one year immediately preceding his or her election, is a registered voter as provided in the general election law, is not a school trustee or a school treasurer, and is not a child sex offender as defined in Section 11-9.3 of the Criminal Code of 2012 shall be eligible to the office of school director.
(Source: P.A. 97-1150, eff. 1-25-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-4) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-4)
    Sec. 10-4. Election of directors.
    (a) In all districts, directors shall be elected in each odd-numbered year, each for a term of 4 years.
    (b) In consolidated districts where 5 directors are elected in 1981 pursuant to the extension of terms provided by law for transition to the consolidated election schedule under the general election law, those directors elected shall, by lot, determine 2 of their number to serve 2 years and 3 to serve 4 years; their successors shall serve for a 4 year term.
    (c) If a proposition to increase the membership of a school district's board of school directors to 7 directors and to elect a new 7-member board of school directors to replace the district's existing board of 3 school directors is approved by the electors of the district at a regular scheduled election as provided in subsection (b) of Section 10-1, 7 members shall be elected at the next regular school election, in the manner provided by Article 9, to serve as the board of school directors of that district. The terms of office of the 3 members of the board of school directors serving at the time of the election of the initial 7-member board of school directors shall expire when the 7 newly elected members of the initial 7-member board of school directors assume office and are organized as provided in Section 10-5. At their organizational meeting, the initial members of the 7-member board of school directors shall by lot determine 4 of their number to serve 4 year terms and 3 of their number to serve 2 year terms. Their successors shall serve for a 4 year term.
    (d) In all other districts, one school director shall be elected in each district every other odd-numbered year, and two school directors shall be elected in the intervening odd-numbered years.
    (e) When a vacancy occurs in the membership of any board of school directors the remaining members shall, within 30 days, fill the vacancy by appointment until the next regular school election, or, upon their failure so to do, the regional superintendent shall make such appointment within the next 30 days to fill the vacancy as herein provided. Upon the regional superintendent's failure to fill the vacancy, the vacancy shall be filled at the next regularly scheduled election.
(Source: P.A. 90-757, eff. 8-14-98.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-5) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-5)
    Sec. 10-5. Organization of board - Report to treasurer and regional superintendent of schools. Within 28 days after the regular election of directors, the directors shall meet and organize by appointing one of their number president and another as clerk, except that when directors are elected at the consolidated elections in April of 1999 and April of 2001, the directors shall meet and organize, in the manner provided by this Section, within 7 days after the first Tuesday after the first Monday of November in each of those 2 years. The clerk shall at once report to the treasurer and regional superintendent of schools the names of the president and clerk so appointed. Upon organizing itself as provided in this Section, the board of school directors shall enter upon the discharge of its duties. Terms of members are subject to Section 2A-54 of the Election Code, except as otherwise limited by subsection (c) of Section 10-4.
(Source: P.A. 93-847, eff. 7-30-04.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-6) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-6)
    Sec. 10-6. Regular and special meetings. The directors shall hold regular meetings at such times as they may designate, and special meetings at the call of the president or of any 2 members. Public notice of meetings must be given as prescribed in Sections 2.02 and 2.03 of the Open Meetings Act. No official business shall be transacted by the directors except at a regular or a special meeting. In consolidated districts and in districts electing a 7-member board of school directors under subsection (c) of Section 10-4, 4 directors shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. In all other districts 2 directors shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. If the president or clerk is absent from any meeting or refuses to perform his duties, a president or clerk pro tempore shall be appointed. At each regular and special meeting which is open to the public, members of the public and employees of the district shall be afforded time, subject to reasonable constraints, to comment to or ask questions of the board. When the president or district superintendent of schools receives a written correspondence from a resident within the school district's territory, requesting the consideration of a matter before the board, the author of the correspondence shall receive a formal written statement from an appointed official of the board stating the board's position on their request, no later than 60 days from the receipt of the correspondence by the president or district superintendent of schools. The formal written response from the board shall establish a meeting before the board or list the reasons for denying the request.
(Source: P.A. 90-757, eff. 8-14-98.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-7) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-7)
    Sec. 10-7. Secretary or clerk to record official acts - yeas and nays on expenditures. The secretary or clerk shall keep in a punctual, orderly and reliable manner a record of the official acts of the board which shall be signed by the president and the secretary or clerk, and submitted to the treasurer having custody of the funds of the district for his inspection and approval at such times as the treasurer may require. On all questions involving the expenditure of money, the yeas and nays shall be taken and entered on the records of the proceedings of the board. The secretary or clerk shall keep the minutes and, if the district is not required to employ a superintendent, keep or cause to be kept the financial records of the school district.
(Source: P.A. 96-998, eff. 7-2-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-8) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-8)
    Sec. 10-8. Report by secretary or clerk to treasurer.
    On or before July 7 annually, the secretary or clerk shall report to the treasurer having the custody of the funds of his district, such statistics and other information in relation to the schools of his district as the treasurer is required to include in his report to the regional superintendent of schools.
(Source: P.A. 80-279.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-9) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-9)
    Sec. 10-9. Interest of board member in contracts.
    (a) No school board member shall be interested, directly or indirectly, in his own name or in the name of any other person, association, trust or corporation, in any contract, work or business of the district or in the sale of any article, whenever the expense, price or consideration of the contract, work, business or sale is paid either from the treasury or by any assessment levied by any statute or ordinance. A school board member shall not be deemed interested if the board member is an employee of a business that is involved in the transaction of business with the school district, provided that the board member has no financial interests other than as an employee. No school board member shall be interested, directly or indirectly, in the purchase of any property which (1) belongs to the district, or (2) is sold for taxes or assessments, or (3) is sold by virtue of legal process at the suit of the district.
    (b) However, any board member may provide materials, merchandise, property, services or labor, if:
        A. the contract is with a person, firm, partnership,
    	
association, corporation or cooperative association in which the board member has less than a 7 1/2% share in the ownership; and
        B. such interested board member publicly discloses
    	
the nature and extent of his interest prior to or during deliberations concerning the proposed award of the contract; and
        C. such interested board member abstains from voting
    	
on the award of the contract, though he shall be considered present for the purposes of establishing a quorum; and
        D. such contract is approved by a majority vote of
    	
those board members presently holding office; and
        E. the contract is awarded after sealed bids to the
    	
lowest responsible bidder if the amount of the contract exceeds $1500, or awarded without bidding if the amount of the contract is less than $1500; and
        F. the award of the contract would not cause the
    	
aggregate amount of all such contracts so awarded to the same person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or cooperative association in the same fiscal year to exceed $25,000.
    (c) In addition to the above exemption, any board member may provide materials, merchandise, property, services or labor if:
        A. the award of the contract is approved by a
    	
majority vote of the board provided that any such interested member shall abstain from voting; and
        B. the amount of the contract does not exceed $1,000;
    	
and
        C. the award of the contract would not cause the
    	
aggregate amount of all such contracts so awarded to the same person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or cooperative association in the same fiscal year to exceed $2,000, except with respect to a board member of a school district in which the materials, merchandise, property, services, or labor to be provided under the contract are not available from any other person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or cooperative association in the district, in which event the award of the contract shall not cause the aggregate amount of all contracts so awarded to that same person, firm, association, partnership, or cooperative association in the same fiscal year to exceed $5,000; and
        D. such interested member publicly discloses the
    	
nature and extent of his interest prior to or during deliberations concerning the proposed award of the contract; and
        E. such interested member abstains from voting on the
    	
award of the contract, though he shall be considered present for the purposes of establishing a quorum.
    (d) In addition to exemptions otherwise authorized by this Section, any board member may purchase for use as the board member's primary place of residence a house constructed by the district's vocational education students on the same basis that any other person would be entitled to purchase the property. The sale of the house by the district must comply with the requirements set forth in Section 5-22 of The School Code.
    (e) A contract for the procurement of public utility services by a district with a public utility company is not barred by this Section by one or more members of the board being an officer or employee of the public utility company or holding an ownership interest of no more than 7 1/2% in the public utility company, or holding an ownership interest of any size if the school district has a population of less than 7,500 and the public utility's rates are approved by the Illinois Commerce Commission. An elected or appointed member of the board having such an interest shall be deemed not to have a prohibited interest under this Section.
    (f) Nothing contained in this Section, including the restrictions set forth in subsections (b), (c), (d) and (e), shall preclude a contract of deposit of monies, loans or other financial services by a school district with a local bank or local savings and loan association, regardless of whether a member or members of the governing body of the school district are interested in such bank or savings and loan association as an officer or employee or as a holder of less than 7 1/2% of the total ownership interest. A member or members holding such an interest in such a contract shall not be deemed to be holding a prohibited interest for purposes of this Act. Such interested member or members of the governing body must publicly state the nature and extent of their interest during deliberations concerning the proposed award of such a contract, but shall not participate in any further deliberations concerning the proposed award. Such interested member or members shall not vote on such a proposed award. Any member or members abstaining from participation in deliberations and voting under this Section may be considered present for purposes of establishing a quorum. Award of such a contract shall require approval by a majority vote of those members presently holding office. Consideration and award of any such contract in which a member or members are interested may only be made at a regularly scheduled public meeting of the governing body of the school district.
    (g) Any school board member who violates this Section is guilty of a Class 4 felony and in addition thereto any office held by such person so convicted shall become vacant and shall be so declared as part of the judgment of the court.
(Source: P.A. 96-998, eff. 7-2-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-10) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-10)
    Sec. 10-10. Board of education; term; vacancy. All school districts having a population of not fewer than 1,000 and not more than 500,000 inhabitants, as ascertained by any special or general census, and not governed by special Acts, shall be governed by a board of education consisting of 7 members, serving without compensation except as herein provided. Each member shall be elected for a term of 4 years for the initial members of the board of education of a combined school district to which that subsection applies. If 5 members are elected in 1983 pursuant to the extension of terms provided by law for transition to the consolidated election schedule under the general election law, 2 of those members shall be elected to serve terms of 2 years and 3 shall be elected to serve terms of 4 years; their successors shall serve for a 4 year term. When the voters of a district have voted to elect members of the board of education for 6 year terms, as provided in Section 9-5, the terms of office of members of the board of education of that district expire when their successors assume office but not later than 7 days after such election. If at the regular school election held in the first odd-numbered year after the determination to elect members for 6 year terms 2 members are elected, they shall serve for a 6 year term; and of the members elected at the next regular school election 3 shall serve for a term of 6 years and 2 shall serve a term of 2 years. Thereafter members elected in such districts shall be elected to a 6 year term. If at the regular school election held in the first odd-numbered year after the determination to elect members for 6 year terms 3 members are elected, they shall serve for a 6 year term; and of the members elected at the next regular school election 2 shall serve for a term of 2 years and 2 shall serve for a term of 6 years. Thereafter members elected in such districts shall be elected to a 6 year term. If at the regular school election held in the first odd-numbered year after the determination to elect members for 6 year terms 4 members are elected, 3 shall serve for a term of 6 years and one shall serve for a term of 2 years; and of the members elected at the next regular school election 2 shall serve for terms of 6 years and 2 shall serve for terms of 2 years. Thereafter members elected in such districts shall be elected to a 6 year term. If at the regular school election held in the first odd-numbered year after the determination to elect members for a 6 year term 5 members are elected, 3 shall serve for a term of 6 years and 2 shall serve for a term of 2 years; and of the members elected at the next regular school election 2 shall serve for terms of 6 years and 2 shall serve for terms of 2 years. Thereafter members elected in such districts shall be elected to a 6 year term. An election for board members shall not be held in school districts which by consolidation, annexation or otherwise shall cease to exist as a school district within 6 months after the election date, and the term of all board members which would otherwise terminate shall be continued until such district shall cease to exist. Each member, on the date of his or her election, shall be a citizen of the United States of the age of 18 years or over, shall be a resident of the State and the territory of the district for at least one year immediately preceding his or her election, shall be a registered voter as provided in the general election law, shall not be a school trustee, must not have been removed from a school board pursuant to Section 2-3.25f-5 of this Code (unless subsequently appointed as a member of an Independent Authority or if it has been 10 years since the abolition of the Independent Authority in the district), and shall not be a child sex offender as defined in Section 11-9.3 of the Criminal Code of 2012. When the board of education is the successor of the school directors, all rights of property, and all rights regarding causes of action existing or vested in such directors, shall vest in it as fully as they were vested in the school directors. Terms of members are subject to Section 2A-54 of the Election Code.
    Nomination papers filed under this Section are not valid unless the candidate named therein files with the county clerk or the county board of election commissioners, as the case may be, of the county in which the principal office of the school district is located a receipt from the county clerk showing that the candidate has filed a statement of economic interests as required by the Illinois Governmental Ethics Act. Such receipt shall be so filed either previously during the calendar year in which his nomination papers were filed or within the period for the filing of nomination papers in accordance with the general election law.
    Whenever a vacancy occurs, the remaining members shall notify the regional superintendent of that vacancy within 5 days after its occurrence and shall proceed to fill the vacancy until the next regular school election, at which election a successor shall be elected to serve the remainder of the unexpired term. However, if the vacancy occurs with less than 868 days remaining in the term, or if the vacancy occurs less than 88 days before the next regularly scheduled election for this office then the person so appointed shall serve the remainder of the unexpired term, and no election to fill the vacancy shall be held. Should they fail so to act, within 60 days after the vacancy occurs, the regional superintendent of schools under whose supervision and control the district is operating, as defined in Section 3-14.2 of this Act, shall within 30 days after the remaining members have failed to fill the vacancy, fill the vacancy as provided for herein. Upon the regional superintendent's failure to fill the vacancy, the vacancy shall be filled at the next regularly scheduled election. Whether elected or appointed by the remaining members or regional superintendent, the successor shall be an inhabitant of the particular area from which his or her predecessor was elected if the residential requirements contained in Section 10-10.5 or 12-2 of this Code apply.
    A board of education may appoint a student to the board to serve in an advisory capacity. The student member shall serve for a term as determined by the board. The board may not grant the student member any voting privileges, but shall consider the student member as an advisor. The student member may not participate in or attend any executive session of the board.
(Source: P.A. 101-67, eff. 1-1-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-10.5)
    Sec. 10-10.5. Community unit school district or combined school district formation; school board election.
    (a) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) or (c) of this Section, for community unit school districts formed before January 1, 1975 and for combined school districts formed before July 1, 1983, the following provisions apply:
        (1) if the territory of the district is greater than
    	
2 congressional townships or 72 square miles, then not more than 3 board members may be selected from any one congressional township, except that congressional townships of less than 100 inhabitants shall not be considered for the purpose of this mandatory board representation;
        (2) if in the community unit school district or
    	
combined school district at least 75% but not more than 90% of the population is in one congressional township, then 4 board members shall be selected from the congressional township and 3 board members shall be selected from the rest of the district, except that if in the community unit school district or combined school district more than 90% of the population is in one congressional township, then all board members may be selected from one or more congressional townships; and
        (3) if the territory of any community unit school
    	
district or combined school district consists of not more than 2 congressional townships or 72 square miles, but consists of more than one congressional township or 36 square miles, outside of the corporate limits of any city, village, or incorporated town within the school district, then not more than 5 board members may be selected from any city, village, or incorporated town in the school district.
    (b)(1) The provisions of subsection (a) of this Section for mandatory board representation shall no longer apply to a community unit school district formed before January 1, 1975, to a combined school district formed before July 1, 1983, or to community consolidated school districts, and the members of the board of education shall be elected at large from within the school district and without restriction by area of residence within the district if both of the following conditions are met with respect to that district:
        (A) A proposition for the election of board members
    	
at large and without restriction by area of residence within the school district rather than in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a) of this Section for mandatory board representation is submitted to the school district's voters at a regular school election or at the general election as provided in this subsection (b).
        (B) A majority of those voting at the election in
    	
each congressional township comprising the territory of the school district, including any congressional township of less than 100 inhabitants, vote in favor of the proposition or two-thirds of all voters voting on the proposition vote in favor of the proposition.
        (2) The school board may, by resolution, order
    	
submitted or, upon the petition of the lesser of 2,500 or 5% of the school district's registered voters, shall order submitted to the school district's voters, at a regular school election or at the general election, the proposition for the election of board members at large and without restriction by area of residence within the district rather than in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a) of this Section for mandatory board representation; and the proposition shall thereupon be certified by the board's secretary for submission.
        (3) If a majority of those voting at the election in
    	
each congressional township comprising the territory of the school district, including any congressional township of less than 100 inhabitants, vote in favor of the proposition or if two-thirds of all voters voting on the proposition vote in favor of the proposition:
            (A) the proposition to elect board members at
        	
large and without restriction by area of residence within the district shall be deemed to have passed,
            (B) new members of the board shall be elected at
        	
large and without restriction by area of residence within the district at the next regular school election, and
            (C) the terms of office of the board members
        	
incumbent at the time the proposition is adopted shall expire when the new board members that are elected at large and without restriction by area of residence within the district have organized in accordance with Section 10-16.
        (4) In a community unit school district, a combined
    	
school district, or a community consolidated school district that formerly elected its members under subsection (a) of this Section to successive terms not exceeding 4 years, the members elected at large and without restriction by area of residence within the district shall be elected for a term of 4 years, and in a community unit school district or combined school district that formerly elected its members under subsection (a) of this Section to successive terms not exceeding 6 years, the members elected at large and without restriction by area of residence within the district shall be elected for a term of 6 years; provided that in each case the terms of the board members initially elected at large and without restriction by area of residence within the district as provided in this subsection (b) shall be staggered and determined in accordance with the provisions of Sections 10-10 and 10-16 of this Code.
    (c) If a school board fills a vacancy under Section 10-10 of this Code due to a lack of candidates for election in a congressional township in the most recent election, then the school board shall, by resolution, order submitted to the school district's voters at the next general election a proposition for the election of a board member at large without restriction by area of residence within the district and the proposition shall be certified by the school board's secretary for submission.
(Source: P.A. 99-91, eff. 1-1-16; 100-800, eff. 1-1-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-11) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-11)
    Sec. 10-11. Vacancies. Elective offices become vacant within the meaning of the Act, unless the context indicates otherwise, on the happening of any of the following events, before the expiration of the term of such office:
        1. The death of the incumbent.
        2. His or her resignation in writing filed with the
    	
Secretary or Clerk of the Board.
        3. His or her becoming a person under legal
    	
disability.
        4. His or her ceasing to be an inhabitant of the
    	
district for which he or she was elected.
        5. His or her conviction of an infamous crime, of any
    	
offense involving a violation of official oath, or of a violent crime against a child.
        6. His or her removal from office.
        7. The decision of a competent tribunal declaring his
    	
or her election void.
        8. His ceasing to be an inhabitant of a particular
    	
area from which he was elected, if the residential requirements contained in Section 10-10.5, 11E-35, or 12-2 of this Code are violated.
    No elective office except as herein otherwise provided becomes vacant until the successor of the incumbent of such office has been appointed or elected, as the case may be, and qualified. The successor shall have the same type of residential qualifications as his or her predecessor and, if the residential requirements contained in Section 10-10.5, 11E-35, or 12-2 of this Code apply, the successor, whether elected or appointed by the remaining members or a regional superintendent, shall be an inhabitant of the particular area from which his or her predecessor was elected.
(Source: P.A. 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-12) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-12)
    Sec. 10-12. Quorum.
    A majority of the full membership of the board of education shall constitute a quorum. Unless otherwise provided, when a vote is taken upon any measure before the board, a quorum being present, a majority of the votes of the members voting on the measure shall determine the outcome thereof.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-13) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-13)
    Sec. 10-13. President of board of education. The president of the board of education shall be elected by the members thereof from among their number and serve for 2 years, except that the board by resolution may establish a policy for the term of office to be one year.
    He shall preside at all meetings and shall perform such duties as are imposed upon him by law or by action of the board of education. If he is absent from any meeting or refuses to perform his duties, a president pro tempore shall be appointed. The vice-president of the board, if the board elects such officer, shall be appointed the president pro tempore.
(Source: P.A. 84-497.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-13.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-13.1)
    Sec. 10-13.1. Vice-President of the board of education. A vice-president of the board of education shall be elected by the members thereof from among their number and serve for 2 years, except that the board by resolution may establish a policy for the term of office to be one year.
    The vice-president shall perform the duties of the president if there is a vacancy in the office of president or in case of the president's absence or inability to act, and other duties imposed upon him by the rules of the board.
(Source: P.A. 85-839.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-14) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-14)
    Sec. 10-14. Secretary of board of education. The secretary of the board of education shall be elected by the board of education and may be a member thereof, who shall serve for 2 years, except that the board by resolution may establish a policy for the term of office to be one year. The secretary, if not a member of the board, may receive such compensation as shall be fixed by the board of education prior to the election of the secretary. If the secretary is a member of the board, he or she may receive such compensation not to exceed $500 per year as shall be fixed by the board and may vote on all questions coming before the board.
    He shall perform the duties usually pertaining to his office, or to the clerk of a board of directors, and such as are imposed on him by law, or by action of the board of education. If he is absent from any meeting or refuses to perform his duties, a secretary pro tempore who may but need not be a member of the board shall be appointed.
(Source: P.A. 86-682.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-16) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-16)
    Sec. 10-16. Organization of Board. Within 28 days after the consolidated election, other than the consolidated elections in 1999 and 2001, the board shall organize by electing its officers and fixing a time and place for the regular meetings. However, when school board members are elected at the consolidated elections held in April of 1999 and April of 2001, the board shall organize within 7 days after the first Tuesday after the first Monday of November in each such year by electing officers and setting the time and place of the regular meetings. Upon organizing itself as provided in this paragraph, the board shall enter upon the discharge of its duties.
    The regional superintendent of schools having supervision and control, as provided in Section 3-14.2, of a new school district that is governed by the School Code and formed on or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1998 shall convene the newly elected board within 7 days after the election of the board of education of that district, whereupon the board shall proceed to organize by electing one of their number as president and electing a secretary, who may or may not be a member. At such meeting the length of term of each of the members shall be determined by lot so that 4 shall serve for 4 years, and 3 for 2 years from the commencement of their terms; provided, however, if such members were not elected at the consolidated election in an odd-numbered year, such initial terms shall be extended to the consolidated election for school board members immediately following the expiration of the initial 4 or 2 year terms. The provisions of this paragraph that relate to the determination of terms by lot shall not apply to the initial members of the board of education of a combined school district who are to be elected to unstaggered terms.
    The terms of the officers of a board of education shall be for 2 years, except that the terms of the officers elected at the organization meeting in November, 2001 shall expire at the organization meeting in April, 2003; provided that the board by resolution may establish a policy for the terms of office to be one year, and provide for the election of officers.
    Special meetings of the board of education may be called by the president or by any 3 members of the board by giving notice thereof in writing, stating the time, place and purpose of the meeting. Such notice may be served by mail 48 hours before such meeting or by personal service 24 hours before such meeting. Public notice of meetings must also be given as prescribed in Sections 2.02 and 2.03 of the Open Meetings Act, as now or hereafter amended.
    At each regular and special meeting which is open to the public, members of the public and employees of the district shall be afforded time, subject to reasonable constraints, to comment to or ask questions of the board.
    The president or district superintendent shall, at each regular board meeting, report any requests made of the district under provisions of the Freedom of Information Act and shall report the status of the district's response.
(Source: P.A. 93-847, eff. 7-30-04; 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-16a)
    Sec. 10-16a. School board member's leadership training.
    (a) This Section applies to all school board members serving pursuant to Section 10-10 of this Code who have been elected after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 97th General Assembly or appointed to fill a vacancy of at least one year's duration after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 97th General Assembly.
    (b) Every voting member of a school board of a school district elected or appointed for a term beginning after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 97th General Assembly, within a year after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 97th General Assembly or the first year of his or her first term, shall complete a minimum of 4 hours of professional development leadership training covering topics in education and labor law, financial oversight and accountability, and fiduciary responsibilities of a school board member. The school district shall maintain on its Internet website, if any, the names of all voting members of the school board who have successfully completed the training.
    (c) The training on financial oversight, accountability, and fiduciary responsibilities may be provided by an association established under this Code for the purpose of training school board members or by other qualified providers approved by the State Board of Education, in consultation with an association so established.
(Source: P.A. 97-8, eff. 6-13-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-16.5)
    Sec. 10-16.5. Oath of office. Each school board member, before taking his or her seat on the board, shall take an oath of office, administered as determined by the board, in substantially the following form:
        I, (name of member or successful candidate), do
    	
solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of member of the Board of Education (or Board of School Directors, as the case may be) of (name of school district), in accordance with the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the laws of the State of Illinois, to the best of my ability.
        I further swear (or affirm) that:
        I shall respect taxpayer interests by serving as a
    	
faithful protector of the school district's assets;
        I shall encourage and respect the free expression of
    	
opinion by my fellow board members and others who seek a hearing before the board, while respecting the privacy of students and employees;
        I shall recognize that a board member has no legal
    	
authority as an individual and that decisions can be made only by a majority vote at a public board meeting;
        I shall abide by majority decisions of the board,
    	
while retaining the right to seek changes in such decisions through ethical and constructive channels;
        As part of the Board of Education (or Board of School
    	
Directors, as the case may be), I shall accept the responsibility for my role in the equitable and quality education of every student in the school district;
        I shall foster with the board extensive participation
    	
of the community, formulate goals, define outcomes, and set the course for (name of school district);
        I shall assist in establishing a structure and an
    	
environment designed to ensure all students have the opportunity to attain their maximum potential through a sound organizational framework;
        I shall strive to ensure a continuous assessment of
    	
student achievement and all conditions affecting the education of our children, in compliance with State law;
        I shall serve as education's key advocate on behalf
    	
of students and our community's school (or schools) to advance the vision for (name of school district); and
        I shall strive to work together with the district
    	
superintendent to lead the school district toward fulfilling the vision the board has created, fostering excellence for every student in the areas of academic skills, knowledge, citizenship, and personal development.
(Source: P.A. 100-1055, eff. 1-1-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-16.7)
    Sec. 10-16.7. School board duties with respect to superintendent. In addition to all other powers and duties enumerated in this Article, the school board shall make all employment decisions pertaining to the superintendent. The school board shall direct, through policy, the superintendent in his or her charge of the administration of the school district, including without limitation considering the recommendations of the superintendent concerning the budget, building plans, the locations of sites, the selection, retention, and dismissal of employees, and the selection of textbooks, instructional material, and courses of study. The school board shall evaluate the superintendent in his or her administration of school board policies and his or her stewardship of the assets of the district.
(Source: P.A. 94-881, eff. 6-20-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-16.9)
    Sec. 10-16.9. Bank reconciliation reports. School districts on the financial watch or warning list that are required to submit deficit reduction plans pursuant to Section 17-1 of this Code or that are certified in financial difficulty must transmit the bank reconciliation reports from the school treasurer as required pursuant to Section 8-6 of this Code to the State Board of Education quarterly. The State Board of Education shall establish the dates by which the reconciliation reports must be submitted and provide a template for those districts to utilize.
(Source: P.A. 97-429, eff. 8-16-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-16.11)
    Sec. 10-16.11. Payment of outstanding obligations of a Financial Oversight Panel. The school board of a district subject to a Financial Oversight Panel pursuant to Article 1H of this Code that, except for the existence of outstanding financial obligations of the Financial Oversight Panel, would be able to seek abolition of the Panel pursuant to Section 1H-115 of this Code may: (1) spend surplus district funds in an amount sufficient to liquidate the outstanding obligations of the Financial Oversight Panel or (2) issue funding bonds for such purpose as authorized by Sections 19-8 and 19-9 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 97-429, eff. 8-16-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-17) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-17)
    Sec. 10-17. Statement of affairs.
    (a) In Class I or Class II county school units the school board may use either a cash basis or accrual system of accounting; however, any board so electing to use the accrual system may not change to a cash basis without the permission of the State Board of Education.
    School Boards using either a cash basis or accrual system of accounting shall maintain records showing the assets, liabilities and fund balances in such minimum forms as may be prescribed by the State Board of Education. Such boards shall make available to the public a statement of the affairs of the district prior to December 1 annually by submitting the statement of affairs in such form as may be prescribed by the State Board of Education for posting on the State Board of Education's Internet website, by having copies of the statement of affairs available in the main administrative office of the district, and by publishing in a newspaper of general circulation published in the school district an annual statement of affairs summary containing at a minimum all of the following information:
        (1) A summary statement of operations for all funds
    	
of the district, as excerpted from the statement of affairs filed with the State Board of Education. The summary statement must include a listing of all moneys received by the district, indicating the total amounts, in the aggregate, each fund of the district received, with a general statement concerning the source of receipts.
        (2) Except as provided in subdivision (3) of this
    	
subsection (a), a listing of all moneys paid out by the district where the total amount paid during the fiscal year exceeds $2,500 in the aggregate per person, giving the name of each person to whom moneys were paid and the total paid to each person.
        (3) A listing of all personnel, by name, with an
    	
annual fiscal year gross payment in the categories set forth in subdivisions 1 and 2 of subsection (c) of this Section.
In this Section, "newspaper of general circulation" means a newspaper of general circulation published in the school district, or, if no newspaper is published in the school district, a newspaper published in the county where the school district is located or, if no newspaper is published in the county, a newspaper published in the educational service region where the regional superintendent of schools has supervision and control of the school district. The submission to the State Board of Education shall include an assurance that the statement of affairs has been made available in the main administrative office of the school district and that the required notice has been published in accordance with this Section.
    After December 15 annually, upon 10 days prior written notice to the school district, the State Board of Education may discontinue the processing of payments to the State Comptroller's office on behalf of any school district that is not in compliance with the requirements imposed by this Section. The State Board of Education shall resume the processing of payments to the State Comptroller's Office on behalf of the school district once the district is in compliance with the requirements imposed by this Section.
    The State Board of Education must post, on or before January 15, all statements of affairs timely received from school districts.
    (b) When any school district is the administrative district for several school districts operating under a joint agreement as authorized by this Code, no receipts or disbursements accruing, received or paid out by that school district as such an administrative district shall be included in the statement of affairs of the district required by this Section. However, that district shall have prepared and made available to the public, in accordance with subsection (a) of this Section, in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as are provided in this Section for the statement of affairs of that district, a statement showing the cash receipts and disbursements by funds (or the revenue, expenses and financial position, if the accrual system of accounting is used) of the district as such administrative district, in the form prescribed by the State Board of Education. The costs of publishing the notice and summary of this separate statement prepared by such an administrative district shall be apportioned among and paid by the participating districts in the same manner as other costs and expenses accruing to those districts jointly.
    School districts on a cash basis shall have prepared and made available to the public, in accordance with subsection (a) of this Section, a statement showing the cash receipts and disbursements by funds in the form prescribed by the State Board of Education.
    School districts using the accrual system of accounting shall have prepared and made available to the public, in accordance with subsection (a) of this Section, a statement of revenue and expenses and a statement of financial position in the form prescribed by the State Board of Education.
    In Class II county school units such statement shall be prepared and made available to the public, in accordance with subsection (a) of this Section, by the township treasurer of the unit within which such districts are located, except with respect to the school board of any school district that no longer is subject to the jurisdiction and authority of a township treasurer or trustees of schools of a township because the district has withdrawn from the jurisdiction and authority of the township treasurer and trustees of schools of the township or because those offices have been abolished as provided in subsection (b) or (c) of Section 5-1, and as to each such school district the statement required by this Section shall be prepared and made available to the public, in accordance with subsection (a) of this Section, by the school board of such district in the same manner as required for school boards of school districts situated in Class I county school units.
    (c) The statement of affairs required pursuant to this Section shall contain such information as may be required by the State Board of Education, including:
        1. Annual fiscal year gross payment for certificated
    	
personnel to be shown by name, listing each employee in one of the following categories:
            (a) Under $25,000
            (b) $25,000 to $39,999
            (c) $40,000 to $59,999
            (d) $60,000 to $89,999
            (e) $90,000 and over
        2. Annual fiscal year payment for non-certificated
    	
personnel to be shown by name, listing each employee in one of the following categories:
            (a) Under $25,000
            (b) $25,000 to $39,999
            (c) $40,000 to $59,999
            (d) $60,000 and over
        3. In addition to wages and salaries all other moneys
    	
in the aggregate paid to recipients of $1,000 or more, giving the name of the person, firm or corporation and the total amount received by each.
        4. Approximate size of school district in square
    	
miles.
        5. Number of school attendance centers.
        6. Numbers of employees as follows:
            (a) Full-time certificated employees;
            (b) Part-time certificated employees;
            (c) Full-time non-certificated employees;
            (d) Part-time non-certificated employees.
        7. Numbers of pupils as follows:
            (a) Enrolled by grades;
            (b) Total enrolled;
            (c) Average daily attendance.
        8. Assessed valuation as follows:
            (a) Total of the district;
            (b) Per pupil in average daily attendance.
        9. Tax rate for each district fund.
        10. District financial obligation at the close of the
    	
fiscal year as follows:
            (a) Teachers' orders outstanding;
            (b) Anticipation warrants outstanding for each
        	
fund.
        11. Total bonded debt at the close of the fiscal
    	
year.
        12. Percent of bonding power obligated currently.
        13. Value of capital assets of the district
    	
including:
            (a) Land;
            (b) Buildings;
            (c) Equipment.
        14. Total amount of investments each fund.
        15. Change in net cash position from the previous
    	
report period for each district fund.
    In addition to the above report, a report of expenditures in the aggregate paid on behalf of recipients of $500 or more, giving the name of the person, firm or corporation and the total amount received by each shall be available in the school district office for public inspection. This listing shall include all wages, salaries and expenditures over $500 expended from any revolving fund maintained by the district. Any resident of the school district may receive a copy of this report, upon request, by paying a reasonable charge to defray the costs of preparing such copy.
    This Section does not apply to cities having a population exceeding 500,000.
(Source: P.A. 94-875, eff. 7-1-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-17a) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-17a)
    Sec. 10-17a. State, school district, and school report cards.
    (1) By October 31, 2013 and October 31 of each subsequent school year, the State Board of Education, through the State Superintendent of Education, shall prepare a State report card, school district report cards, and school report cards, and shall by the most economic means provide to each school district in this State, including special charter districts and districts subject to the provisions of Article 34, the report cards for the school district and each of its schools.
    (2) In addition to any information required by federal law, the State Superintendent shall determine the indicators and presentation of the school report card, which must include, at a minimum, the most current data collected and maintained by the State Board of Education related to the following:
        (A) school characteristics and student demographics,
    	
including average class size, average teaching experience, student racial/ethnic breakdown, and the percentage of students classified as low-income; the percentage of students classified as English learners; the percentage of students who have individualized education plans or 504 plans that provide for special education services; the number and percentage of all students who have been assessed for placement in a gifted education or advanced academic program and, of those students: (i) the racial and ethnic breakdown, (ii) the percentage who are classified as low-income, and (iii) the number and percentage of students who received direct instruction from a teacher who holds a gifted education endorsement and, of those students, the percentage who are classified as low-income; the percentage of students scoring at the "exceeds expectations" level on the assessments required under Section 2-3.64a-5 of this Code; the percentage of students who annually transferred in or out of the school district; average daily attendance; the per-pupil operating expenditure of the school district; and the per-pupil State average operating expenditure for the district type (elementary, high school, or unit);
        (B) curriculum information, including, where
    	
applicable, Advanced Placement, International Baccalaureate or equivalent courses, dual enrollment courses, foreign language classes, computer science courses, school personnel resources (including Career Technical Education teachers), before and after school programs, extracurricular activities, subjects in which elective classes are offered, health and wellness initiatives (including the average number of days of Physical Education per week per student), approved programs of study, awards received, community partnerships, and special programs such as programming for the gifted and talented, students with disabilities, and work-study students;
        (C) student outcomes, including, where applicable,
    	
the percentage of students deemed proficient on assessments of State standards, the percentage of students in the eighth grade who pass Algebra, the percentage of students who participated in workplace learning experiences, the percentage of students enrolled in post-secondary institutions (including colleges, universities, community colleges, trade/vocational schools, and training programs leading to career certification within 2 semesters of high school graduation), the percentage of students graduating from high school who are college and career ready, and the percentage of graduates enrolled in community colleges, colleges, and universities who are in one or more courses that the community college, college, or university identifies as a developmental course;
        (D) student progress, including, where applicable,
    	
the percentage of students in the ninth grade who have earned 5 credits or more without failing more than one core class, a measure of students entering kindergarten ready to learn, a measure of growth, and the percentage of students who enter high school on track for college and career readiness;
        (E) the school environment, including, where
    	
applicable, the percentage of students with less than 10 absences in a school year, the percentage of teachers with less than 10 absences in a school year for reasons other than professional development, leaves taken pursuant to the federal Family Medical Leave Act of 1993, long-term disability, or parental leaves, the 3-year average of the percentage of teachers returning to the school from the previous year, the number of different principals at the school in the last 6 years, the number of teachers who hold a gifted education endorsement, the process and criteria used by the district to determine whether a student is eligible for participation in a gifted education program or advanced academic program and the manner in which parents and guardians are made aware of the process and criteria, 2 or more indicators from any school climate survey selected or approved by the State and administered pursuant to Section 2-3.153 of this Code, with the same or similar indicators included on school report cards for all surveys selected or approved by the State pursuant to Section 2-3.153 of this Code, and the combined percentage of teachers rated as proficient or excellent in their most recent evaluation;
        (F) a school district's and its individual schools'
    	
balanced accountability measure, in accordance with Section 2-3.25a of this Code;
        (G) the total and per pupil normal cost amount the
    	
State contributed to the Teachers' Retirement System of the State of Illinois in the prior fiscal year for the school's employees, which shall be reported to the State Board of Education by the Teachers' Retirement System of the State of Illinois;
        (H) for a school district organized under Article 34
    	
of this Code only, State contributions to the Public School Teachers' Pension and Retirement Fund of Chicago and State contributions for health care for employees of that school district;
        (I) a school district's Final Percent of Adequacy, as
    	
defined in paragraph (4) of subsection (f) of Section 18-8.15 of this Code;
        (J) a school district's Local Capacity Target, as
    	
defined in paragraph (2) of subsection (c) of Section 18-8.15 of this Code, displayed as a percentage amount;
        (K) a school district's Real Receipts, as defined in
    	
paragraph (1) of subsection (d) of Section 18-8.15 of this Code, divided by a school district's Adequacy Target, as defined in paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of Section 18-8.15 of this Code, displayed as a percentage amount;
        (L) a school district's administrative costs;
        (M) whether or not the school has participated in the
    	
Illinois Youth Survey. In this paragraph (M), "Illinois Youth Survey" means a self-report survey, administered in school settings every 2 years, designed to gather information about health and social indicators, including substance abuse patterns and the attitudes of students in grades 8, 10, and 12; and
        (N) whether the school offered its students career
    	
and technical education opportunities.
    The school report card shall also provide information that allows for comparing the current outcome, progress, and environment data to the State average, to the school data from the past 5 years, and to the outcomes, progress, and environment of similar schools based on the type of school and enrollment of low-income students, special education students, and English learners.
    As used in this subsection (2):
    "Administrative costs" means costs associated with executive, administrative, or managerial functions within the school district that involve planning, organizing, managing, or directing the school district.
    "Advanced academic program" means a course of study to which students are assigned based on advanced cognitive ability or advanced academic achievement compared to local age peers and in which the curriculum is substantially differentiated from the general curriculum to provide appropriate challenge and pace.
    "Computer science" means the study of computers and algorithms, including their principles, their hardware and software designs, their implementation, and their impact on society. "Computer science" does not include the study of everyday uses of computers and computer applications, such as keyboarding or accessing the Internet.
    "Gifted education" means educational services, including differentiated curricula and instructional methods, designed to meet the needs of gifted children as defined in Article 14A of this Code.
    For the purposes of paragraph (A) of this subsection (2), "average daily attendance" means the average of the actual number of attendance days during the previous school year for any enrolled student who is subject to compulsory attendance by Section 26-1 of this Code at each school and charter school.
    (3) At the discretion of the State Superintendent, the school district report card shall include a subset of the information identified in paragraphs (A) through (E) of subsection (2) of this Section, as well as information relating to the operating expense per pupil and other finances of the school district, and the State report card shall include a subset of the information identified in paragraphs (A) through (E) and paragraph (N) of subsection (2) of this Section. The school district report card shall include the average daily attendance, as that term is defined in subsection (2) of this Section, of students who have individualized education programs and students who have 504 plans that provide for special education services within the school district.
    (4) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Section, in consultation with key education stakeholders, the State Superintendent shall at any time have the discretion to amend or update any and all metrics on the school, district, or State report card.
    (5) Annually, no more than 30 calendar days after receipt of the school district and school report cards from the State Superintendent of Education, each school district, including special charter districts and districts subject to the provisions of Article 34, shall present such report cards at a regular school board meeting subject to applicable notice requirements, post the report cards on the school district's Internet web site, if the district maintains an Internet web site, make the report cards available to a newspaper of general circulation serving the district, and, upon request, send the report cards home to a parent (unless the district does not maintain an Internet web site, in which case the report card shall be sent home to parents without request). If the district posts the report card on its Internet web site, the district shall send a written notice home to parents stating (i) that the report card is available on the web site, (ii) the address of the web site, (iii) that a printed copy of the report card will be sent to parents upon request, and (iv) the telephone number that parents may call to request a printed copy of the report card.
    (6) Nothing contained in Public Act 98-648 repeals, supersedes, invalidates, or nullifies final decisions in lawsuits pending on July 1, 2014 (the effective date of Public Act 98-648) in Illinois courts involving the interpretation of Public Act 97-8.
(Source: P.A. 100-227, eff. 8-18-17; 100-364, eff. 1-1-18; 100-448, eff. 7-1-19; 100-465, eff. 8-31-17; 100-807, eff. 8-10-18; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18; 100-1121, eff. 1-1-19; 101-68, eff. 1-1-20; 101-81, eff. 7-12-19; 101-654, eff. 3-8-21.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-18) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-18)
    Sec. 10-18. Orders. Every order issued by the school board shall state for what purposes or on what account it is issued, and shall be in the following form:
$.... State of Illinois, (insert date)
THE TREASURER
(Insert name)
Of School District No. .... in .... County,
Pay to the order of .... the sum of .... Dollars, for.........
..............................................................
..............................................................
By order of the School Board of
    District No. ...., in said County.
Order No. ....
...................President
........Clerk (or Secretary)
    An order paid in full and properly endorsed shall be a sufficient receipt for the purposes of this Act. The school board shall issue no order, except for teachers' wages, unless at the time there are sufficient funds in the hands of the treasurer to pay it.
(Source: P.A. 91-357, eff. 7-29-99.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-19) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-19)
    Sec. 10-19. Length of school term - experimental programs. Each school board shall annually prepare a calendar for the school term, specifying the opening and closing dates and providing a minimum term of at least 185 days to insure 176 days of actual pupil attendance, computable under Section 10-19.05, except that for the 1980-1981 school year only 175 days of actual pupil attendance shall be required because of the closing of schools pursuant to Section 24-2 on January 29, 1981 upon the appointment by the President of that day as a day of thanksgiving for the freedom of the Americans who had been held hostage in Iran. Any days allowed by law for teachers' institutes but not used as such or used as parental institutes as provided in Section 10-22.18d shall increase the minimum term by the school days not so used. Except as provided in Section 10-19.1, the board may not extend the school term beyond such closing date unless that extension of term is necessary to provide the minimum number of computable days. In case of such necessary extension school employees shall be paid for such additional time on the basis of their regular contracts. A school board may specify a closing date earlier than that set on the annual calendar when the schools of the district have provided the minimum number of computable days under this Section. Nothing in this Section prevents the board from employing superintendents of schools, principals and other nonteaching personnel for a period of 12 months, or in the case of superintendents for a period in accordance with Section 10-23.8, or prevents the board from employing other personnel before or after the regular school term with payment of salary proportionate to that received for comparable work during the school term. Remote learning days, blended remote learning days, and up to 5 remote and blended remote learning planning days established under Section 10-30 or 34-18.66 shall be deemed pupil attendance days for calculation of the length of a school term under this Section.
    A school board may make such changes in its calendar for the school term as may be required by any changes in the legal school holidays prescribed in Section 24-2. A school board may make changes in its calendar for the school term as may be necessary to reflect the utilization of teachers' institute days as parental institute days as provided in Section 10-22.18d.
    The calendar for the school term and any changes must be submitted to and approved by the regional superintendent of schools before the calendar or changes may take effect.
    With the prior approval of the State Board of Education and subject to review by the State Board of Education every 3 years, any school board may, by resolution of its board and in agreement with affected exclusive collective bargaining agents, establish experimental educational programs, including but not limited to programs for e-learning days as authorized under Section 10-20.56 of this Code, self-directed learning, or outside of formal class periods, which programs when so approved shall be considered to comply with the requirements of this Section as respects numbers of days of actual pupil attendance and with the other requirements of this Act as respects courses of instruction.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17; 101-12, eff. 7-1-19; 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-19.05)
    Sec. 10-19.05. Daily pupil attendance calculation.
    (a) Except as otherwise provided in this Section, for a pupil of legal school age and in kindergarten or any of grades 1 through 12, a day of attendance shall be counted only for sessions of not less than 5 clock hours of school work per day under direct supervision of (i) teachers or (ii) non-teaching personnel or volunteer personnel when engaging in non-teaching duties and supervising in those instances specified in subsection (a) of Section 10-22.34 and paragraph 10 of Section 34-18. Days of attendance by pupils through verified participation in an e-learning program adopted by a school board and verified by the regional office of education or intermediate service center for the school district under Section 10-20.56 of this Code shall be considered as full days of attendance under this Section.
    (b) A pupil regularly enrolled in a public school for only a part of the school day may be counted on the basis of one-sixth of a school day for every class hour of instruction of 40 minutes or more attended pursuant to such enrollment, unless a pupil is enrolled in a block-schedule format of 80 minutes or more of instruction, in which case the pupil may be counted on the basis of the proportion of minutes of school work completed each day to the minimum number of minutes that school work is required to be held that day.
    (c) A session of 4 or more clock hours may be counted as a day of attendance upon certification by the regional superintendent of schools and approval by the State Superintendent of Education to the extent that the district has been forced to use daily multiple sessions.
    (d) A session of 3 or more clock hours may be counted as a day of attendance (1) when the remainder of the school day or at least 2 hours in the evening of that day is utilized for an in-service training program for teachers, up to a maximum of 10 days per school year, provided that a district conducts an in-service training program for teachers in accordance with Section 10-22.39 of this Code, or, in lieu of 4 such days, 2 full days may be used, in which event each such day may be counted as a day required for a legal school calendar pursuant to Section 10-19 of this Code; (2) when, of the 5 days allowed under item (1), a maximum of 4 days are used for parent-teacher conferences, or, in lieu of 4 such days, 2 full days are used, in which case each such day may be counted as a calendar day required under Section 10-19 of this Code, provided that the full-day, parent-teacher conference consists of (i) a minimum of 5 clock hours of parent-teacher conferences, (ii) both a minimum of 2 clock hours of parent-teacher conferences held in the evening following a full day of student attendance and a minimum of 3 clock hours of parent-teacher conferences held on the day immediately following evening parent-teacher conferences, or (iii) multiple parent-teacher conferences held in the evenings following full days of student attendance in which the time used for the parent-teacher conferences is equivalent to a minimum of 5 clock hours; and (3) when days in addition to those provided in items (1) and (2) are scheduled by a school pursuant to its school improvement plan adopted under Article 34 or its revised or amended school improvement plan adopted under Article 2, provided that (i) such sessions of 3 or more clock hours are scheduled to occur at regular intervals, (ii) the remainder of the school days in which such sessions occur are utilized for in-service training programs or other staff development activities for teachers, and (iii) a sufficient number of minutes of school work under the direct supervision of teachers are added to the school days between such regularly scheduled sessions to accumulate not less than the number of minutes by which such sessions of 3 or more clock hours fall short of 5 clock hours. Days scheduled for in-service training programs, staff development activities, or parent-teacher conferences may be scheduled separately for different grade levels and different attendance centers of the district.
    (e) A session of not less than one clock hour of teaching hospitalized or homebound pupils on-site or by telephone to the classroom may be counted as a half day of attendance; however, these pupils must receive 4 or more clock hours of instruction to be counted for a full day of attendance.
    (f) A session of at least 4 clock hours may be counted as a day of attendance for first grade pupils and pupils in full-day kindergartens, and a session of 2 or more hours may be counted as a half day of attendance by pupils in kindergartens that provide only half days of attendance.
    (g) For children with disabilities who are below the age of 6 years and who cannot attend 2 or more clock hours because of their disability or immaturity, a session of not less than one clock hour may be counted as a half day of attendance; however, for such children whose educational needs require a session of 4 or more clock hours, a session of at least 4 clock hours may be counted as a full day of attendance.
    (h) A recognized kindergarten that provides for only a half day of attendance by each pupil shall not have more than one half day of attendance counted in any one day. However, kindergartens may count 2 and a half days of attendance in any 5 consecutive school days. When a pupil attends such a kindergarten for 2 half days on any one school day, the pupil shall have the following day as a day absent from school, unless the school district obtains permission in writing from the State Superintendent of Education. Attendance at kindergartens that provide for a full day of attendance by each pupil shall be counted the same as attendance by first grade pupils. Only the first year of attendance in one kindergarten shall be counted, except in the case of children who entered the kindergarten in their fifth year whose educational development requires a second year of kindergarten as determined under rules of the State Board of Education.
    (i) On the days when the State's final accountability assessment is administered under subsection (c) of Section 2-3.64a-5 of this Code, the day of attendance for a pupil whose school day must be shortened to accommodate required testing procedures may be less than 5 clock hours and shall be counted toward the 176 days of actual pupil attendance required under Section 10-19 of this Code, provided that a sufficient number of minutes of school work in excess of 5 clock hours are first completed on other school days to compensate for the loss of school work on the examination days.
    (j) Pupils enrolled in a remote educational program established under Section 10-29 of this Code may be counted on the basis of a one-fifth day of attendance for every clock hour of instruction attended in the remote educational program, provided that, in any month, the school district may not claim for a student enrolled in a remote educational program more days of attendance than the maximum number of days of attendance the district can claim (i) for students enrolled in a building holding year-round classes if the student is classified as participating in the remote educational program on a year-round schedule or (ii) for students enrolled in a building not holding year-round classes if the student is not classified as participating in the remote educational program on a year-round schedule.
    (j-5) The clock hour requirements of subsections (a) through (j) of this Section do not apply if the Governor has declared a disaster due to a public health emergency pursuant to Section 7 of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act. The State Superintendent of Education may establish minimum clock hour requirements under Sections 10-30 and 34-18.66 if the Governor has declared a disaster due to a public health emergency pursuant to Section 7 of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act.
    (k) Pupil participation in any of the following activities shall be counted toward the calculation of clock hours of school work per day:
        (1) Instruction in a college course in which a
    	
student is dually enrolled for both high school credit and college credit.
        (2) Participation in a Supervised Career
    	
Development Experience, as defined in Section 10 of the Postsecondary and Workforce Readiness Act, in which student participation and learning outcomes are supervised by an educator licensed under Article 21B.
        (3) Participation in a youth apprenticeship, as
    	
jointly defined in rules of the State Board of Education and Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity, in which student participation and outcomes are supervised by an educator licensed under Article 21B.
        (4) Participation in a blended learning program
    	
approved by the school district in which course content, student evaluation, and instructional methods are supervised by an educator licensed under Article 21B.
(Source: P.A. 101-12, eff. 7-1-19; 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-19.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-19.1)
    Sec. 10-19.1. Full year school plan.
    (a) Any school district may, by resolution of its board, operate one or more schools within the district on a full year school plan approved by the State Board of Education. Any board which operates under this subsection (a) shall devise a plan so that a student's required attendance in school shall be for a minimum term of 180 days of actual attendance, including not more than 4 institute days, during a 12 month period, but shall not exceed 185 days. Under such plan, no teacher shall be required to teach more than 185 days. A calendar of 180 days may be established with the approval of the State Board of Education.
    (b) Any school board that operates one or more schools within the school district on a pilot full-year school plan under subsection (a-5) of Section 2-3.25f of this Code shall devise a plan so that a student's required attendance in school shall be for a minimum term of 215 days of actual attendance, including not more than 4 institute days, during a 12-month period. A calendar of 215 days may be established with the approval of the State Board of Education.
(Source: P.A. 97-370, eff. 1-1-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-19.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-19.2)
    Sec. 10-19.2. Full year feasibility study - grant - transitional expenditure reimbursement. Any school district, including special charter districts, may, by resolution of its board, file an application with the State Board of Education and, if approved, receive funds for the purpose of conducting a study of the feasibility of operating one or more schools within the district on a full year school plan pursuant to Section 10-19.1. Such feasibility study shall include, but need not be limited to, the educational program, building and space needs, administrative and personnel costs, pupil distribution in the district, community attitudes and transportation costs. The Board of Education of any district which conducts a feasibility study pursuant to this Section shall submit a final report to the State Board of Education upon completion of the study or within one year after receipt of funds, whichever occurs first.
    School districts seeking State financial support to conduct feasibility studies shall file applications with the State Board of Education on forms provided by the State Board. The State Board of Education may grant or deny applications, in whole or in part, and provide the funds necessary to implement approved applications, provided that the total amount of funds necessary to implement approved applications does not exceed the annual appropriation for that purpose.
    If, based upon the results of a full year feasibility study, a school district determines that it will operate one or more schools within the district in accordance with Section 10-19.1, the State Board of Education may, pursuant to guidelines established by the State Board, reimburse such district for expenditures resulting from making such transition, provided that no expenditure shall be reimbursed which would have been incurred by a school district in the absence of a changeover to a full year school program.
    In the event any funds appropriated for transition reimbursement during any fiscal year are insufficient for that purpose, payment shall be made in the proportion that the total amount of such expenditures bears to the total amount of money available for payment.
(Source: P.A. 81-1508.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-19.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-19.3)
    Sec. 10-19.3. Advertisements for employees during strikes. No school board shall advertise seeking to hire employees to replace employees on strike without stating in such advertisement that a strike is in progress.
(Source: P.A. 84-468.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20)
    Sec. 10-20. Powers of school board. The school board has the powers enumerated in the Sections of this Article following this Section. This enumeration of powers is not exclusive, but the board may exercise all other powers not inconsistent with this Act that may be requisite or proper for the maintenance, operation, and development of any school or schools under the jurisdiction of the board. This grant of powers does not release a school board from any duty imposed upon it by this Act or any other law.
(Source: P.A. 88-670, eff. 12-2-94; 89-159, eff. 1-1-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20.1)
    Sec. 10-20.1. Records to be retained. To maintain records to substantiate all district claims for State aid in accordance with regulations prescribed by the State Board of Education and to retain such records for a period of three years.
(Source: P.A. 81-1508.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20.2)
    Sec. 10-20.2. Report of teachers employed.
    To report to the county superintendent within ten days after their employment the names of all teachers employed, with the dates of the beginning and end of their contracts.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.2b)
    Sec. 10-20.2b. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 85-611. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20.3)
    Sec. 10-20.3. Revenue to be provided.
    To provide for the revenue necessary to maintain schools in their districts.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.4) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20.4)
    Sec. 10-20.4. District in two or more townships - Treasurer to receive taxes.
    To determine, in case of a district which is situated in a Class II county school unit and which is subject to the jurisdiction and authority of the trustees of schools of a township but composed of parts of two or more townships, which treasurer is to receive the taxes of the district, and to notify the collectors in writing accordingly.
(Source: P.A. 86-1441.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.5) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20.5)
    Sec. 10-20.5. Rules. To adopt and enforce all necessary rules for the management and government of the public schools of their district. Rules adopted by the school board shall be filed for public inspection in the administrative office of the district.
(Source: P.A. 81-1003.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.5a) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20.5a)
    Sec. 10-20.5a. Access to high school campus.
    (a) For school districts maintaining grades 10 through 12, to provide, on an equal basis, access to a high school campus and student directory information to the official recruiting representatives of the armed forces of Illinois and the United States for the purpose of informing students of the educational and career opportunities available in the military if the board has provided such access to persons or groups whose purpose is to acquaint students with educational or occupational opportunities available to them. The board is not required to give greater notice regarding the right of access to recruiting representatives than is given to other persons and groups. In this Section, "directory information" means a high school student's name, address, and telephone number.
    (b) If a student or his or her parent or guardian submits a signed, written request to the high school before the end of the student's sophomore year (or if the student is a transfer student, by another time set by the high school) that indicates that the student or his or her parent or guardian does not want the student's directory information to be provided to official recruiting representatives under subsection (a) of this Section, the high school may not provide access to the student's directory information to these recruiting representatives. The high school shall notify its students and their parents or guardians of the provisions of this subsection (b).
    (c) A high school may require official recruiting representatives of the armed forces of Illinois and the United States to pay a fee for copying and mailing a student's directory information in an amount that is not more than the actual costs incurred by the high school.
    (d) Information received by an official recruiting representative under this Section may be used only to provide information to students concerning educational and career opportunities available in the military and may not be released to a person who is not involved in recruiting students for the armed forces of Illinois or the United States.
(Source: P.A. 92-527, eff. 6-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.5b) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20.5b)
    Sec. 10-20.5b. Tobacco prohibition. Each school board shall prohibit the use of tobacco on school property by any school personnel, student, or other person when such property is being used for any school purposes. The school board may not authorize or permit any exception to or exemption from the prohibition at any place or at any time, including without limitation outside of school buildings or before or after the regular school day or on days when school is not in session. "School purposes" include but are not limited to all events or activities or other use of school property that the school board or school officials authorize or permit on school property, including without limitation all interscholastic or extracurricular athletic, academic, or other events sponsored by the school board or in which pupils of the district participate. For purposes of this Section "tobacco" shall mean cigarette, cigar, or tobacco in any other form, including smokeless tobacco which is any loose, cut, shredded, ground, powdered, compressed or leaf tobacco that is intended to be placed in the mouth without being smoked.
(Source: P.A. 89-181, eff. 7-19-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.6) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20.6)
    Sec. 10-20.6. Maintain schools. To maintain the public schools under their jurisdiction as the good of the schools may require and in conformance with the code authorized in Section 2-3.12.
(Source: P.A. 96-998, eff. 7-2-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.7) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20.7)
    Sec. 10-20.7. Appoint teachers and fix salaries. To appoint all teachers and fix the amount of their salaries, subject to limitations set forth in this Act. In fixing salaries of certificated employees, school boards shall make no discrimination on account of sex and there shall be no loss in salary because of jury duty or because such employee, pursuant to subpoena issued by the clerk of a court and served on such employee, attends as a witness upon trial or to have his or her deposition taken in any school related matter pending in court, except that the board may make a deduction equal to the amount received for such jury duty or for per diem fees which the employee is entitled to receive for complying with such subpoena. Certified employees may be paid full salary by the board when in the active service of this State, under orders of the Commander-in-Chief, as members of the Illinois National Guard or Illinois Naval Militia, provided that the board may deduct from such salary any amounts received for such State service. A school board may at any time after January 1 employ teachers for the school year beginning on the following July 1.
(Source: P.A. 86-1366.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.7a) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20.7a)
    Sec. 10-20.7a. Minority recruitment policy. To develop and implement, by 1991, a policy of recruitment and hiring of minority teachers, other certificated employees and non-certificated employees, including custodians, lunch room staff and teacher aides.
(Source: P.A. 86-227.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.7b) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20.7b)
    Sec. 10-20.7b. Active military service. Any certificated or non-certificated employee of a school board who is a member of any reserve component of the United States Armed Services, including the Illinois National Guard, and who is mobilized to active military duty on or after August 1, 1990, shall for each pay period beginning on or after August 1, 1990 continue to receive the same regular compensation that he receives or was receiving as an employee of the school board at the time he is or was so mobilized to active military duty, plus any health insurance and other benefits he is or was receiving or accruing at that time, minus the amount of his base pay for military service, for the duration of his active military service. Such active military duty shall not result in the loss or diminishment of any employment benefit, service credit, or status accrued at the time the duty commenced if the duty commenced on or after September 1, 2001.
    In the event any provision of a collective bargaining agreement or any school board or district policy covering any employee so ordered to active duty is more generous than the provisions contained in this Section, the collective bargaining agreement or school board or district policy shall be controlling.
(Source: P.A. 92-660, eff. 7-16-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.8) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20.8)
    Sec. 10-20.8. Branches of study, textbooks and apparatus.
    To direct what branches of study shall be taught and what apparatus shall be used. Subject to Article 28 of this Act, to direct what textbooks shall be used and to enforce uniformity of textbooks in the public schools; but not to maintain grades above the eighth unless such grades were maintained during the school year ended June 30, 1959. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section or the School Code, no school board may purchase any textbook for use in the public schools from any textbook publisher that fails to furnish any computer diskettes as required under Section 28-21.
(Source: P.A. 87-1071.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.9)
    Sec. 10-20.9. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.9a) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20.9a)
    Sec. 10-20.9a. Final grade; promotion.
    (a) Teachers shall administer the approved marking system or other approved means of evaluating pupil progress. The teacher shall maintain the responsibility and right to determine grades and other evaluations of students within the grading policies of the district based upon his or her professional judgment of available criteria pertinent to any given subject area or activity for which he or she is responsible. District policy shall provide the procedure and reasons by and for which a grade may be changed; provided that no grade or evaluation shall be changed without notification to the teacher concerning the nature and reasons for such change. If such a change is made, the person making the change shall assume such responsibility for determining the grade or evaluation, and shall initial such change.
    (b) School districts shall not promote students to the next higher grade level based upon age or any other social reasons not related to the academic performance of the students. On or before September 1, 1998, school boards shall adopt and enforce a policy on promotion as they deem necessary to ensure that students meet local goals and objectives and can perform at the expected grade level prior to promotion. Decisions to promote or retain students in any classes shall be based on successful completion of the curriculum, attendance, performance based on the assessments required under Section 2-3.64a-5 of this Code, the Iowa Test of Basic Skills, or other testing or any other criteria established by the school board. Students determined by the local district to not qualify for promotion to the next higher grade shall be provided remedial assistance, which may include, but shall not be limited to, a summer bridge program of no less than 90 hours, tutorial sessions, increased or concentrated instructional time, modifications to instructional materials, and retention in grade.
(Source: P.A. 98-972, eff. 8-15-14.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.12) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20.12)
    Sec. 10-20.12. School year - School age. To establish and keep in operation in each year during a school term of at least the minimum length required by Section 10-19, a sufficient number of free schools for the accommodation of all persons in the district who are 5 years of age or older but under 21 years of age, and to secure for all such persons the right and opportunity to an equal education in such schools; provided that (i) children who will attain the age of 5 years on or before September 1 of the year of the 1990-1991 school term and each school term thereafter may attend school upon the commencement of such term and (ii) based upon an assessment of the child's readiness, children who have attended a non-public preschool and continued their education at that school through kindergarten, were taught in kindergarten by an appropriately certified teacher, and will attain the age of 6 years on or before December 31 of the year of the 2009-2010 school term and each school term thereafter may attend first grade upon commencement of such term. However, Section 33 of the Educational Opportunity for Military Children Act shall apply to children of active duty military personnel. Based upon an assessment of a child's readiness to attend school, a school district may permit a child to attend school prior to the dates contained in this Section. In any school district operating on a full year school basis children who will attain age 5 within 30 days after the commencement of a term may attend school upon the commencement of such term and, based upon an assessment of the child's readiness, children who have attended a non-public preschool and continued their education at that school through kindergarten, were taught in kindergarten by an appropriately certified teacher, and will attain age 6 within 4 months after the commencement of a term may attend first grade upon the commencement of such term. The school district may, by resolution of its board, allow for a full year school plan.
(Source: P.A. 98-673, eff. 6-30-14.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.12a) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20.12a)
    Sec. 10-20.12a. Tuition for non-resident pupils.
    (a) To charge non-resident pupils who attend the schools of the district tuition in an amount not exceeding 110% of the per capita cost of maintaining the schools of the district for the preceding school year.
    Such per capita cost shall be computed by dividing the total cost of conducting and maintaining the schools of the district by the average daily attendance, including tuition pupils. Depreciation on the buildings and equipment of the schools of the district, and the amount of annual depreciation on such buildings and equipment shall be dependent upon the useful life of such property.
    The tuition charged shall in no case exceed 110% of the per capita cost of conducting and maintaining the schools of the district attended, as determined with reference to the most recent audit prepared under Section 3-7 which is available at the commencement of the current school year. Non-resident pupils attending the schools of the district for less than the school term shall have their tuition apportioned, however pupils who become non-resident during a school term shall not be charged tuition for the remainder of the school term in which they became non-resident pupils.
    (b) Unless otherwise agreed to by the parties involved and where the educational services are not otherwise provided for, educational services for an Illinois student under the age of 21 (and not eligible for services pursuant to Article 14 of this Code) in any residential program shall be provided by the district in which the facility is located and financed as follows. The cost of educational services shall be paid by the district in which the student resides in an amount equal to the cost of providing educational services in the residential facility. Payments shall be made by the district of the student's residence and shall be made to the district wherein the facility is located no less than once per month unless otherwise agreed to by the parties.
    The funding provision of this subsection (b) applies to all Illinois students under the age of 21 (and not eligible for services pursuant to Article 14 of this Code) receiving educational services in residential facilities, irrespective of whether the student was placed therein pursuant to this Code or the Juvenile Court Act of 1987 or by an Illinois public agency or a court. The changes to this subsection (b) made by this amendatory Act of the 95th General Assembly apply to all placements in effect on July 1, 2007 and all placements thereafter. For purposes of this subsection (b), a student's district of residence shall be determined in accordance with subsection (a) of Section 10-20.12b of this Code. The placement of a student in a residential facility shall not affect the residency of the student. When a dispute arises over the determination of the district of residence under this subsection (b), any person or entity, including without limitation a school district or residential facility, may make a written request for a residency decision to the State Superintendent of Education, who, upon review of materials submitted and any other items or information he or she may request for submission, shall issue his or her decision in writing. The decision of the State Superintendent of Education is final.
(Source: P.A. 95-844, eff. 8-15-08; 95-938, eff. 8-29-08.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.12b)
    Sec. 10-20.12b. Residency; payment of tuition; hearing; criminal penalty.
    (a) For purposes of this Section:
        (1) The residence of a person who has legal custody
    	
of a pupil is deemed to be the residence of the pupil.
        (2) "Legal custody" means one of the following:
            (i) Custody exercised by a natural or adoptive
        	
parent with whom the pupil resides.
            (ii) Custody granted by order of a court of
        	
competent jurisdiction to a person with whom the pupil resides for reasons other than to have access to the educational programs of the district.
            (iii) Custody exercised under a statutory
        	
short-term guardianship, provided that within 60 days of the pupil's enrollment a court order is entered that establishes a permanent guardianship and grants custody to a person with whom the pupil resides for reasons other than to have access to the educational programs of the district.
            (iv) Custody exercised by an adult caretaker
        	
relative who is receiving aid under the Illinois Public Aid Code for the pupil who resides with that adult caretaker relative for purposes other than to have access to the educational programs of the district.
            (v) Custody exercised by an adult who
        	
demonstrates that, in fact, he or she has assumed and exercises legal responsibility for the pupil and provides the pupil with a regular fixed night-time abode for purposes other than to have access to the educational programs of the district.
    (a-5) If a pupil's change of residence is due to the military service obligation of a person who has legal custody of the pupil, then, upon the written request of the person having legal custody of the pupil, the residence of the pupil is deemed for all purposes relating to enrollment (including tuition, fees, and costs), for the duration of the custodian's military service obligation, to be the same as the residence of the pupil immediately before the change of residence caused by the military service obligation. A school district is not responsible for providing transportation to or from school for a pupil whose residence is determined under this subsection (a-5). School districts shall facilitate re-enrollment when necessary to comply with this subsection (a-5).
    (b) Except as otherwise provided under Section 10-22.5a, only resident pupils of a school district may attend the schools of the district without payment of the tuition required to be charged under Section 10-20.12a. However, children for whom the Guardianship Administrator of the Department of Children and Family Services has been appointed temporary custodian or guardian of the person of a child shall not be charged tuition as a nonresident pupil if the child was placed by the Department of Children and Family Services with a foster parent or placed in another type of child care facility and the foster parent or child care facility is located in a school district other than the child's former school district and it is determined by the Department of Children and Family Services to be in the child's best interest to maintain attendance at his or her former school district.
    (c) The provisions of this subsection do not apply in school districts having a population of 500,000 or more. If a school board in a school district with a population of less than 500,000 determines that a pupil who is attending school in the district on a tuition free basis is a nonresident of the district for whom tuition is required to be charged under Section 10-20.12a, the board shall notify the person who enrolled the pupil of the amount of the tuition charged under Section 10-20.12a that is due to the district for a nonresident pupil's attendance in the district's schools. The notice shall detail the specific reasons why the board believes that the pupil is a nonresident of the district and shall be given by certified mail, return receipt requested. Within 10 calendar days after receipt of the notice, the person who enrolled the pupil may request a hearing to review the determination of the school board. The request shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the district superintendent. Within 10 calendar days after receipt of the request, the board shall notify, by certified mail, return receipt requested, the person requesting the hearing of the time and place of the hearing, which shall be held not less than 10 nor more than 20 calendar days after the notice of hearing is given. At least 3 calendar days prior to the hearing, each party shall disclose to the other party all written evidence and testimony that it may submit during the hearing and a list of witnesses that it may call to testify during the hearing. The hearing notice shall notify the person requesting the hearing that any written evidence and testimony or witnesses not disclosed to the other party at least 3 calendar days prior to the hearing are barred at the hearing without the consent of the other party. The board or a hearing officer designated by the board shall conduct the hearing. The board and the person who enrolled the pupil may be represented at the hearing by representatives of their choice. At the hearing, the person who enrolled the pupil shall have the burden of going forward with the evidence concerning the pupil's residency. If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer, the hearing officer, within 5 calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing, shall send a written report of his or her findings by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the school board and to the person who enrolled the pupil. The person who enrolled the pupil may, within 5 calendar days after receiving the findings, file written objections to the findings with the school board by sending the objections by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the district superintendent. Whether the hearing is conducted by the school board or a hearing officer, the school board shall, within 30 calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing, decide whether or not the pupil is a resident of the district and the amount of any tuition required to be charged under Section 10-20.12a as a result of the pupil's attendance in the schools of the district. The school board shall send a copy of its decision within 5 calendar days of its decision to the person who enrolled the pupil by certified mail, return receipt requested. This decision must inform the person who enrolled the pupil that he or she may, within 5 calendar days after receipt of the decision of the board, petition the regional superintendent of schools to review the decision. The decision must also include notification that, at the request of the person who enrolled the pupil, the pupil may continue attending the schools of the district pending the regional superintendent of schools' review of the board's decision but that tuition shall continue to be assessed under Section 10-20.12a of this Code during the review period and become due upon a final determination of the regional superintendent of schools that the student is a nonresident.
    Within 5 calendar days after receipt of the decision of the board pursuant to this subsection (c) of this Section, the person who enrolled the pupil may petition the regional superintendent of schools who exercises supervision and control of the board to review the board's decision. The petition must include the basis for the request and be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to both the regional superintendent of schools and the district superintendent.
    Within 5 calendar days after receipt of the petition, the board must deliver to the regional superintendent of schools the written decision of the board, any written evidence and testimony that was submitted by the parties during the hearing, a list of all witnesses that testified during the hearing, and any existing written minutes or transcript of the hearing or verbatim record of the hearing in the form of an audio or video recording documenting the hearing. The board may also provide the regional superintendent of schools and the petitioner with a written response to the petition. The regional superintendent of schools' review of the board's decision is limited to the documentation submitted to the regional superintendent of schools pursuant to this Section.
    Within 10 calendar days after receipt of the documentation provided by the school district pursuant to this Section, the regional superintendent of schools shall issue a written decision as to whether or not there is clear and convincing evidence that the pupil is a resident of the district pursuant to this Section and eligible to attend the district's schools on a tuition-free basis. The decision shall be transmitted to the board and the person who enrolled the pupil and shall, with specificity, detail the rationale behind the decision.
    (c-5) The provisions of this subsection apply only in school districts having a population of 500,000 or more. If the board of education of a school district with a population of 500,000 or more determines that a pupil who is attending school in the district on a tuition free basis is a nonresident of the district for whom tuition is required to be charged under Section 10-20.12a, the board shall notify the person who enrolled the pupil of the amount of the tuition charged under Section 10-20.12a that is due to the district for the nonresident pupil's attendance in the district's schools. The notice shall be given by certified mail, return receipt requested. Within 10 calendar days after receipt of the notice, the person who enrolled the pupil may request a hearing to review the determination of the school board. The request shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the district superintendent. Within 30 calendar days after receipt of the request, the board shall notify, by certified mail, return receipt requested, the person requesting the hearing of the time and place of the hearing, which shall be held not less than 10 calendar nor more than 30 calendar days after the notice of hearing is given. The board or a hearing officer designated by the board shall conduct the hearing. The board and the person who enrolled the pupil may each be represented at the hearing by a representative of their choice. At the hearing, the person who enrolled the pupil shall have the burden of going forward with the evidence concerning the pupil's residency. If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer, the hearing officer, within 20 calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing, shall serve a written report of his or her findings by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the school board and to the person who enrolled the pupil. The person who enrolled the pupil may, within 10 calendar days after receiving the findings, file written objections to the findings with the board of education by sending the objections by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the general superintendent of schools. If the hearing is conducted by the board of education, the board shall, within 45 calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing, decide whether or not the pupil is a resident of the district and the amount of any tuition required to be charged under Section 10-20.12a as a result of the pupil's attendance in the schools of the district. If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer, the board of education shall, within 45 days after the receipt of the hearing officer's findings, decide whether or not the pupil is a resident of the district and the amount of any tuition required to be charged under Section 10-20.12a as a result of the pupil's attendance in the schools of the district. The board of education shall send, by certified mail, return receipt requested, a copy of its decision to the person who enrolled the pupil, and the decision of the board shall be final.
    (d) If a hearing is requested under subsection (c) of this Section to review the determination of the school board or board of education that a nonresident pupil is attending the schools of the district without payment of the tuition required to be charged under Section 10-20.12a, the pupil may, at the request of the person who enrolled the pupil, continue attendance at the schools of the district pending the decision of the board or regional superintendent of schools, as applicable, and the school district's payments under Section 18-8.05 of this Code shall not be adjusted due to tuition collection under this Section. However, attendance of that pupil in the schools of the district as authorized by this subsection (d) shall not relieve any person who enrolled the pupil of the obligation to pay the tuition charged for that attendance under Section 10-20.12a if the final decision of the board or regional superintendent of schools is that the pupil is a nonresident of the district. If a pupil is determined to be a nonresident of the district for whom tuition is required to be charged pursuant to this Section, the board shall refuse to permit the pupil to continue attending the schools of the district unless the required tuition is paid for the pupil.
    (d-5) If a hearing is requested under subsection (c-5) of this Section to review the determination of the board of education that a nonresident pupil is attending the schools of the district without payment of the tuition required to be charged under Section 10-20.12a of this Code, the pupil may, at the request of the person who enrolled the pupil, continue attendance at the schools of the district pending a final decision of the board following the hearing. However, attendance of that pupil in the schools of the district as authorized by this subsection (d-5) shall not relieve any person who enrolled the pupil of the obligation to pay the tuition charged for that attendance under Section 10-20.12a of this Code if the final decision of the board is that the pupil is a nonresident of the district. If a pupil is determined to be a nonresident of the district for whom tuition is required to be charged pursuant to this Section, the board shall refuse to permit the pupil to continue attending the schools of the district unless the required tuition is paid for the pupil.
    (e) Except for a pupil referred to in subsection (b) of Section 10-22.5a, a pupil referred to in Section 10-20.12a, or a pupil referred to in subsection (b) of this Section, a person who knowingly enrolls or attempts to enroll in the schools of a school district on a tuition free basis a pupil known by that person to be a nonresident of the district shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor.
    (f) A person who knowingly or wilfully presents to any school district any false information regarding the residency of a pupil for the purpose of enabling that pupil to attend any school in that district without the payment of a nonresident tuition charge shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor.
    (g) The provisions of this Section are subject to the provisions of the Education for Homeless Children Act. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to apply to or require the payment of tuition by a parent or guardian of a "homeless child" (as that term is defined in Section 1-5 of the Education for Homeless Children Act) in connection with or as a result of the homeless child's continued education or enrollment in a school that is chosen in accordance with any of the options provided in Section 1-10 of that Act.
(Source: P.A. 99-670, eff. 1-1-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.13) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20.13)
    Sec. 10-20.13. Textbooks for children of parents unable to buy them and other fees.
    (a) To purchase, at the expense of the district, a sufficient number of textbooks for children whose parents are unable to buy them, including but not limited to children living in households that meet the free lunch or breakfast eligibility guidelines established by the federal government pursuant to Section 1758 of the federal Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1758; 7 C.F.R. 245 et seq.), subject to verification as set forth in subsection (c) of this Section. Such textbooks shall be loaned only, and the directors shall require the teacher to see that they are properly cared for and returned at the end of each term of school.
    (b) To waive all fees assessed by the district on children whose parents are unable to afford them, including but not limited to children living in households that meet the free lunch or breakfast eligibility guidelines established by the federal government pursuant to Section 1758 of the federal Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1758; 7 C.F.R. 245 et seq.), subject to verification as set forth in subsection (c) of this Section. The school board shall adopt written policies and procedures for such waiver of fees in accordance with regulations promulgated by the State Board of Education.
    (c) Any school board that participates in a federally funded, school-based child nutrition program and uses a student's application for, eligibility for, or participation in the federally funded, school-based child nutrition program (42 U.S.C. 1758; 7 C.F.R. 245 et seq.) as the basis for waiving fees assessed by the school district must follow the verification requirements of the federally funded, school-based child nutrition program (42 U.S.C. 1758; 7 C.F.R. 245.6a).
    A school board that establishes a process for the determination of eligibility for waiver of fees assessed by the school district that is completely independent of a student's application for, eligibility for, or participation in a federally funded, school-based child nutrition program may provide for fee waiver verification no more often than every 60 calendar days. Information obtained during the independent, fee waiver verification process indicating that the student does not meet free lunch or breakfast eligibility guidelines may be used to deny the waiver of the student's fees, provided that any information obtained through this independent process for determining or verifying eligibility for fee waivers shall not be used to determine or verify eligibility for any federally funded, school-based child nutrition program.
(Source: P.A. 96-360, eff. 9-1-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.14) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20.14)
    Sec. 10-20.14. Student discipline policies; parent-teacher advisory committee.
    (a) To establish and maintain a parent-teacher advisory committee to develop with the school board or governing body of a charter school policy guidelines on pupil discipline, including school searches and bullying prevention as set forth in Section 27-23.7 of this Code. School authorities shall furnish a copy of the policy to the parents or guardian of each pupil within 15 days after the beginning of the school year, or within 15 days after starting classes for a pupil who transfers into the district during the school year, and the school board or governing body of a charter school shall require that a school inform its pupils of the contents of the policy. School boards and the governing bodies of charter schools, along with the parent-teacher advisory committee, must annually review their pupil discipline policies, the implementation of those policies, and any other factors related to the safety of their schools, pupils, and staff.
    (a-5) On or before September 15, 2016, each elementary and secondary school and charter school shall, at a minimum, adopt pupil discipline policies that fulfill the requirements set forth in this Section, subsections (a) and (b) of Section 10-22.6 of this Code, Section 34-19 of this Code if applicable, and federal and State laws that provide special requirements for the discipline of students with disabilities.
    (b) The parent-teacher advisory committee in cooperation with local law enforcement agencies shall develop, with the school board, policy guideline procedures to establish and maintain a reciprocal reporting system between the school district and local law enforcement agencies regarding criminal offenses committed by students. School districts are encouraged to create memoranda of understanding with local law enforcement agencies that clearly define law enforcement's role in schools, in accordance with Section 10-22.6 of this Code.
    (c) The parent-teacher advisory committee, in cooperation with school bus personnel, shall develop, with the school board, policy guideline procedures to establish and maintain school bus safety procedures. These procedures shall be incorporated into the district's pupil discipline policy.
    (d) The school board, in consultation with the parent-teacher advisory committee and other community-based organizations, must include provisions in the student discipline policy to address students who have demonstrated behaviors that put them at risk for aggressive behavior, including without limitation bullying, as defined in the policy. These provisions must include procedures for notifying parents or legal guardians and early intervention procedures based upon available community-based and district resources.
(Source: P.A. 99-456, eff. 9-15-16.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.14a) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20.14a)
    Sec. 10-20.14a. Meal breaks for noncertificated employees. To provide each noncertificated employee who works 7 1/2 continuous hours or longer with at least 30 minutes duty free for a meal break beginning no later than 5 hours after the start of the work period.
(Source: P.A. 84-1294.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.14b) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20.14b)
    Sec. 10-20.14b. Medications policy. To develop a policy for administration of medications in schools, to furnish a copy of the policy to the parents or guardians of each pupil within 15 days after the beginning of each school year, or within 15 days after starting classes for a pupil who transfers into the district, and to require that each school informs its pupils of the contents of its policy.
(Source: P.A. 90-789, eff. 8-14-98.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.15) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20.15)
    Sec. 10-20.15. Payment of teachers.
    To pay no public money to any teacher unless the teacher at the time of his employment held a certificate of qualification obtained under the provisions of this Act, has kept and furnished schedules as required by this Act, and has satisfactorily accounted for books, apparatus and other property of the district that he may have taken in charge.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.15a) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20.15a)
    Sec. 10-20.15a. Federal Social Security or Medicare withholdings. To the extent that federal law allows such coverage, school districts shall make Social Security or Medicare withholdings, or both, for employees subject to Articles 16 and 17 of the "Illinois Pension Code" only upon the approval of a referendum under Section 21-105 of that Act applicable to such employees.
(Source: P.A. 84-1334.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.16)
    Sec. 10-20.16. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.17) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20.17)
    Sec. 10-20.17. Water supply.
    To provide for the schools in their districts an adequate, clear, palatable, and safe supply of water for drinking purposes and for general school use in accordance with Sections 2 and 8.1 of the Department of Public Health Act.
(Source: P.A. 87-984.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.17a) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20.17a)
    Sec. 10-20.17a. Hazardous materials training. To enhance the safety of pupils and staff by providing in-service training programs on the safe handling and use of hazardous or toxic materials for personnel in the district who work with such materials on a regular basis. Such programs shall be approved by the State Board of Education in consultation with the Illinois Department of Public Health.
(Source: P.A. 84-1294.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.18) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20.18)
    Sec. 10-20.18. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31. Repealed by P.A. 89-159, eff. 1-1-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.19) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20.19)
    Sec. 10-20.19. Payment of orders. Subject to the provisions of Article 1B in the case of a school district receiving emergency State financial assistance, the school board shall pay all orders in accordance with Section 10-18 of this Act, except as herein provided:
        (1) It shall be lawful for the school board to submit
    	
to the treasurer a certified copy of those portions of the board minutes, properly signed by the secretary and president, or a majority of the board, showing all bills approved for payment by the board and clearly showing to whom, and for what purpose each payment is to be made by the treasurer, and to what budgetary item each payment shall be debited, and such certified copy shall serve as full authority to the treasurer to make the payments as thus approved; this shall not preclude the use of a voucher system, or any other system of sound accounting and business procedure, provided that such system reflects the facts, and that the same is in accordance with the regulations prescribed by or approved by the Superintendent of Public Instruction.
        (2) It shall be lawful for the school board by
    	
resolution to establish revolving funds for school cafeterias, lunch rooms, athletics, petty cash or similar purposes, provided such funds are in the custody of an employee who shall be bonded as provided in Article 8 of this Act for bonding school treasurers and who shall be responsible to the board and to the treasurer, subject to regular annual audit by licensed public accountants and other such examinations as the school board shall deem advisable and kept in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Superintendent of Public Instruction. A monthly report and an annual summary of all receipts and expenditures of the fund shall be submitted to the school board and the treasurer. All funds advanced by the treasurer to operate such revolving funds shall be carried on the treasurer's books as cash obligations due to the district and all receipts of such revolving funds shall be deposited daily in a bank or savings and loan association to be approved by the treasurer, unless there is no bank or savings and loan association in the community, in which event receipts shall be deposited intact not less than once each week in the bank or savings and loan association approved by the treasurer. All reimbursements to any such revolving funds from the district funds shall be completely itemized as to whom paid, for what purpose, and against what budgetary item the expenditure is chargeable.
        No bank or savings and loan association shall receive
    	
public funds as permitted by this Section, unless it has complied with the requirements established pursuant to Section 6 of "An Act relating to certain investments of public funds by public agencies", approved July 23, 1943, as now or hereafter amended.
        (3) The school board shall establish rules and
    	
regulations governing conditions under which school classes, clubs, and associations may collect or acquire funds in the name of any school; and, under such regulations as the Superintendent of Public Instruction may prescribe, provide for the safeguarding of such funds for the educational, recreational, or cultural purposes they are designed to serve.
        (4) It shall be lawful for the clerk or secretary of
    	
the board to certify to the school treasurer the amount of the obligation for Social Security taxes as required by the Social Security Enabling Act and the amount of recurring bills, such as utility bills, showing the amount and to whom payment is to be made and what budgetary item or items the payment shall be debited from, and such certification shall serve as full authority to the treasurer to make such payment.
(Source: P.A. 96-998, eff. 7-2-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.19a) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20.19a)
    Sec. 10-20.19a. Kindergartens. After July 1, 1970, to establish and maintain kindergartens for the instruction of children in accordance with rules and regulations prescribed by the State Board of Education. Such kindergartens may provide for either a 1/2 day or a full day of attendance for pupils enrolled therein.
(Source: P.A. 84-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.19b) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20.19b)
    Sec. 10-20.19b. Purchases made pursuant to this Act shall be made in compliance with the "Local Government Prompt Payment Act", approved by the Eighty-fourth General Assembly.
(Source: P.A. 84-731.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.19c) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20.19c)
    Sec. 10-20.19c. Recycled paper and paper products and solid waste management.
    (a) Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated, unless the context otherwise requires:
    "Deinked stock" means paper that has been processed to remove inks, clays, coatings, binders and other contaminants.
    "High grade printing and writing papers" includes offset printing paper, duplicator paper, writing paper (stationery), tablet paper, office paper, note pads, xerographic paper, envelopes, form bond including computer paper and carbonless forms, book papers, bond papers, ledger paper, book stock and cotton fiber papers.
    "Paper and paper products" means high grade printing and writing papers, tissue products, newsprint, unbleached packaging and recycled paperboard.
    "Postconsumer material" means only those products generated by a business or consumer which have served their intended end uses, and which have been separated or diverted from solid waste; wastes generated during the production of an end product are excluded.
    "Recovered paper material" means paper waste generated after the completion of the papermaking process, such as postconsumer materials, envelope cuttings, bindery trimmings, printing waste, cutting and other converting waste, butt rolls, and mill wrappers, obsolete inventories, and rejected unused stock. "Recovered paper material", however, does not include fibrous waste generated during the manufacturing process such as fibers recovered from waste water or trimmings of paper machine rolls (mill broke), or fibrous byproducts of harvesting, extraction or woodcutting processes, or forest residues such as bark.
    "Recycled paperboard" includes paperboard products, folding cartons and pad backings.
    "Tissue products" includes toilet tissue, paper towels, paper napkins, facial tissue, paper doilies, industrial wipers, paper bags and brown papers. These products shall also be unscented and shall not be colored.
    "Unbleached packaging" includes corrugated and fiber storage boxes.
    (a-5) Each school district shall periodically review its procurement procedures and specifications related to the purchase of products and supplies. Those procedures and specifications must be modified as necessary to require the school district to seek out products and supplies that contain recycled materials and to ensure that purchased products and supplies are reusable, durable, or made from recycled materials, if economically and practically feasible. In selecting products and supplies that contain recycled material, preference must be given to products and supplies that contain the highest amount of recycled material and that are consistent with the effective use of the product or supply, if economically and practically feasible.
    (b) Wherever economically and practically feasible, as determined by the school board, the school board, all public schools and attendance centers within a school district, and their school supply stores shall procure recycled paper and paper products as follows:
        (1) Beginning July 1, 2008, at least 10% of the total
    	
dollar value of paper and paper products purchased by school boards, public schools and attendance centers, and their school supply stores shall be recycled paper and paper products.
        (2) Beginning July 1, 2011, at least 25% of the total
    	
dollar value of paper and paper products purchased by school boards, public schools and attendance centers, and their school supply stores shall be recycled paper and paper products.
        (3) Beginning July 1, 2014, at least 50% of the total
    	
dollar value of paper and paper products purchased by school boards, public schools and attendance centers, and their school supply stores shall be recycled paper and paper products.
        (4) Beginning July 1, 2020, at least 75% of the total
    	
dollar value of paper and paper products purchased by school boards, public schools and attendance centers, and their school supply stores shall be recycled paper and paper products.
        (5) Beginning upon the effective date of this
    	
amendatory Act of 1992, all paper purchased by the board of education, public schools and attendance centers for publication of student newspapers shall be recycled newsprint. The amount purchased shall not be included in calculating the amounts specified in paragraphs (1) through (4).
    (c) Paper and paper products purchased from private sector vendors pursuant to printing contracts are not considered paper and paper products for the purposes of subsection (b), unless purchased under contract for the printing of student newspapers.
    (d)(1) Wherever economically and practically feasible, the recycled paper and paper products referred to in subsection (b) shall contain postconsumer or recovered paper materials as specified by paper category in this subsection:
         (i) Recycled high grade printing and writing paper
    	
shall contain at least 50% recovered paper material. Such recovered paper material, until July 1, 2008, shall consist of at least 20% deinked stock or postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 2008, shall consist of at least 25% deinked stock or postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 2010, shall consist of at least 30% deinked stock or postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 2012, shall consist of at least 40% deinked stock or postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 2014, shall consist of at least 50% deinked stock or postconsumer material.
         (ii) Recycled tissue products, until July 1, 1994,
    	
shall contain at least 25% postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 1994, shall contain at least 30% postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 1996, shall contain at least 35% postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 1998, shall contain at least 40% postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 2000, shall contain at least 45% postconsumer material.
         (iii) Recycled newsprint, until July 1, 1994, shall
    	
contain at least 40% postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 1994, shall contain at least 50% postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 1996, shall contain at least 60% postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 1998, shall contain at least 70% postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 2000, shall contain at least 80% postconsumer material.
         (iv) Recycled unbleached packaging, until July 1,
    	
1994, shall contain at least 35% postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 1994, shall contain at least 40% postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 1996, shall contain at least 45% postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 1998, shall contain at least 50% postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 2000, shall contain at least 55% postconsumer material.
         (v) Recycled paperboard, until July 1, 1994, shall
    	
contain at least 80% postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 1994, shall contain at least 85% postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 1996, shall contain at least 90% postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 1998, shall contain at least 95% postconsumer material.
        (2) For the purposes of this Section, "postconsumer
    	
material" includes:
            (i) paper, paperboard, and fibrous waste from
        	
retail stores, office buildings, homes and so forth, after the waste has passed through its end usage as a consumer item, including used corrugated boxes, old newspapers, mixed waste paper, tabulating cards, and used cordage; and
            (ii) all paper, paperboard, and fibrous wastes
        	
that are diverted or separated from the municipal waste stream.
        (3) For the purposes of this Section, "recovered
    	
paper material" includes:
            (i) postconsumer material;
            (ii) dry paper and paperboard waste generated
        	
after completion of the papermaking process (that is, those manufacturing operations up to and including the cutting and trimming of the paper machine reel into smaller rolls or rough sheets), including envelope cuttings, bindery trimmings, and other paper and paperboard waste resulting from printing, cutting, forming and other converting operations, or from bag, box and carton manufacturing, and butt rolls, mill wrappers, and rejected unused stock; and
            (iii) finished paper and paperboard from obsolete
        	
inventories of paper and paperboard manufacturers, merchants, wholesalers, dealers, printers, converters or others.
    (e) Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to apply to art materials, nor to any newspapers, magazines, text books, library books or other copyrighted publications which are purchased or used by any school board or any public school or attendance center within a school district, or which are sold in any school supply store operated by or within any such school or attendance center, other than newspapers written, edited or produced by students enrolled in the school district, public school or attendance center.
    (e-5) Each school district shall periodically review its procedures on solid waste reduction regarding the management of solid waste generated by academic, administrative, and other institutional functions. Those waste reduction procedures must be designed to, when economically and practically feasible, recycle the school district's waste stream, including without limitation landscape waste, computer paper, and white office paper. School districts are encouraged to have procedures that provide for the investigation of potential markets for other recyclable materials that are present in the school district's waste stream. The waste reduction procedures must be designed to achieve, before July 1, 2020, at least a 50% reduction in the amount of solid waste that is generated by the school district.
    (f) The State Board of Education, in coordination with the Departments of Central Management Services and Commerce and Economic Opportunity, may adopt such rules and regulations as it deems necessary to assist districts in carrying out the provisions of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 94-793, eff. 5-19-06; 95-741, eff. 7-18-08.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.20) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20.20)
    Sec. 10-20.20. Protection from suit. To indemnify and protect school districts, members of school boards, employees, volunteer personnel authorized in Sections 10-22.34, 10-22.34a and 10-22.34b of this Code, mentors of certified staff as authorized in Article 21A and Sections 2-3.53a, 2-3.53b, and 34-18.33 of this Code, and student teachers against civil rights damage claims and suits, constitutional rights damage claims and suits and death and bodily injury and property damage claims and suits, including defense thereof, when damages are sought for negligent or wrongful acts alleged to have been committed in the scope of employment or under the direction of the board or related to any mentoring services provided to certified staff of the school district. Such indemnification and protection shall extend to persons who were members of school boards, employees of school boards, authorized volunteer personnel, mentors of certified staff, or student teachers at the time of the incident from which a claim arises. No agent may be afforded indemnification or protection unless he was a member of a school board, an employee of a board, an authorized volunteer, a mentor of certified staff, or a student teacher at the time of the incident from which the claim arises.
(Source: P.A. 96-62, eff. 7-23-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.21)
    Sec. 10-20.21. Contracts.
    (a) To award all contracts for purchase of supplies and materials or work involving an expenditure in excess of $25,000 or a lower amount as required by board policy to the lowest responsible bidder, considering conformity with specifications, terms of delivery, quality and serviceability, after due advertisement, except the following: (i) contracts for the services of individuals possessing a high degree of professional skill where the ability or fitness of the individual plays an important part; (ii) contracts for the printing of finance committee reports and departmental reports; (iii) contracts for the printing or engraving of bonds, tax warrants and other evidences of indebtedness; (iv) contracts for the purchase of perishable foods and perishable beverages; (v) contracts for materials and work which have been awarded to the lowest responsible bidder after due advertisement, but due to unforeseen revisions, not the fault of the contractor for materials and work, must be revised causing expenditures not in excess of 10% of the contract price; (vi) contracts for the maintenance or servicing of, or provision of repair parts for, equipment which are made with the manufacturer or authorized service agent of that equipment where the provision of parts, maintenance, or servicing can best be performed by the manufacturer or authorized service agent; (vii) purchases and contracts for the use, purchase, delivery, movement, or installation of data processing equipment, software, or services and telecommunications and interconnect equipment, software, and services; (viii) contracts for duplicating machines and supplies; (ix) contracts for the purchase of fuel, including diesel, gasoline, oil, aviation, natural gas, or propane, lubricants, or other petroleum products; (x) purchases of equipment previously owned by some entity other than the district itself; (xi) contracts for repair, maintenance, remodeling, renovation, or construction, or a single project involving an expenditure not to exceed $50,000 and not involving a change or increase in the size, type, or extent of an existing facility; (xii) contracts for goods or services procured from another governmental agency; (xiii) contracts for goods or services which are economically procurable from only one source, such as for the purchase of magazines, books, periodicals, pamphlets and reports, and for utility services such as water, light, heat, telephone or telegraph; (xiv) where funds are expended in an emergency and such emergency expenditure is approved by 3/4 of the members of the board; (xv) State master contracts authorized under Article 28A of this Code; and (xvi) contracts providing for the transportation of pupils, which contracts must be advertised in the same manner as competitive bids and awarded by first considering the bidder or bidders most able to provide safety and comfort for the pupils, stability of service, and any other factors set forth in the request for proposal regarding quality of service, and then price. However, at no time shall a cause of action lie against a school board for awarding a pupil transportation contract per the standards set forth in this subsection (a) unless the cause of action is based on fraudulent conduct.
    All competitive bids for contracts involving an expenditure in excess of $25,000 or a lower amount as required by board policy must be sealed by the bidder and must be opened by a member or employee of the school board at a public bid opening at which the contents of the bids must be announced. Each bidder must receive at least 3 days' notice of the time and place of the bid opening. For purposes of this Section due advertisement includes, but is not limited to, at least one public notice at least 10 days before the bid date in a newspaper published in the district, or if no newspaper is published in the district, in a newspaper of general circulation in the area of the district. State master contracts and certified education purchasing contracts, as defined in Article 28A of this Code, are not subject to the requirements of this paragraph.
    Under this Section, the acceptance of bids sealed by a bidder and the opening of these bids at a public bid opening may be permitted by an electronic process for communicating, accepting, and opening competitive bids. An electronic bidding process must provide for, but is not limited to, the following safeguards:
        (1) On the date and time certain of a bid opening,
    	
the primary person conducting the competitive, sealed, electronic bid process shall log onto a specified database using a unique username and password previously assigned to the bidder to allow access to the bidder's specific bid project number.
        (2) The specified electronic database must be on a
    	
network that (i) is in a secure environment behind a firewall; (ii) has specific encryption tools; (iii) maintains specific intrusion detection systems; (iv) has redundant systems architecture with data storage back-up, whether by compact disc or tape; and (v) maintains a disaster recovery plan.
It is the legislative intent of Public Act 96-841 to maintain the integrity of the sealed bidding process provided for in this Section, to further limit any possibility of bid-rigging, to reduce administrative costs to school districts, and to effect efficiencies in communications with bidders.
    (b) To require, as a condition of any contract for goods and services, that persons bidding for and awarded a contract and all affiliates of the person collect and remit Illinois Use Tax on all sales of tangible personal property into the State of Illinois in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois Use Tax Act regardless of whether the person or affiliate is a "retailer maintaining a place of business within this State" as defined in Section 2 of the Use Tax Act. For purposes of this Section, the term "affiliate" means any entity that (1) directly, indirectly, or constructively controls another entity, (2) is directly, indirectly, or constructively controlled by another entity, or (3) is subject to the control of a common entity. For purposes of this subsection (b), an entity controls another entity if it owns, directly or individually, more than 10% of the voting securities of that entity. As used in this subsection (b), the term "voting security" means a security that (1) confers upon the holder the right to vote for the election of members of the board of directors or similar governing body of the business or (2) is convertible into, or entitles the holder to receive upon its exercise, a security that confers such a right to vote. A general partnership interest is a voting security.
    To require that bids and contracts include a certification by the bidder or contractor that the bidder or contractor is not barred from bidding for or entering into a contract under this Section and that the bidder or contractor acknowledges that the school board may declare the contract void if the certification completed pursuant to this subsection (b) is false.
    (b-5) To require all contracts and agreements that pertain to goods and services and that are intended to generate additional revenue and other remunerations for the school district in excess of $1,000, including without limitation vending machine contracts, sports and other attire, class rings, and photographic services, to be approved by the school board. The school board shall file as an attachment to its annual budget a report, in a form as determined by the State Board of Education, indicating for the prior year the name of the vendor, the product or service provided, and the actual net revenue and non-monetary remuneration from each of the contracts or agreements. In addition, the report shall indicate for what purpose the revenue was used and how and to whom the non-monetary remuneration was distributed.
    (b-10) To prohibit any contract to purchase food with a bidder or offeror if the bidder's or offeror's contract terms prohibit the school from donating food to food banks, including, but not limited to, homeless shelters, food pantries, and soup kitchens.
    (c) If the State education purchasing entity creates a master contract as defined in Article 28A of this Code, then the State education purchasing entity shall notify school districts of the existence of the master contract.
    (d) In purchasing supplies, materials, equipment, or services that are not subject to subsection (c) of this Section, before a school district solicits bids or awards a contract, the district may review and consider as a bid under subsection (a) of this Section certified education purchasing contracts that are already available through the State education purchasing entity.
(Source: P.A. 101-570, eff. 8-23-19; 101-632, eff. 6-5-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.21a)
    Sec. 10-20.21a. Contracts for charter bus services. To award contracts for providing charter bus services for the sole purpose of transporting students regularly enrolled in grade 12 or below to or from interscholastic athletic or interscholastic or school sponsored activities.
    All contracts for providing charter bus services for the sole purpose of transporting students regularly enrolled in grade 12 or below to or from interscholastic athletic or interscholastic or school sponsored activities must contain clause (A) as set forth below, except that a contract with an out-of-state company may contain clause (B), as set forth below, or clause (A). The clause must be set forth in the body of the contract in typeface of at least 12 points and all upper case letters:
    (A) "ALL OF THE CHARTER BUS DRIVERS WHO WILL BE PROVIDING SERVICES UNDER THIS CONTRACT HAVE, OR WILL HAVE BEFORE ANY SERVICES ARE PROVIDED:
        (1) SUBMITTED THEIR FINGERPRINTS TO THE DEPARTMENT OF
    	
STATE POLICE IN THE FORM AND MANNER PRESCRIBED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE POLICE. THESE FINGERPRINTS SHALL BE CHECKED AGAINST THE FINGERPRINT RECORDS NOW AND HEREAFTER FILED IN THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE POLICE AND FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS DATABASES. THE FINGERPRINT CHECK HAS RESULTED IN A DETERMINATION THAT THEY HAVE NOT BEEN CONVICTED OF COMMITTING ANY OF THE OFFENSES SET FORTH IN SUBDIVISION (C-1)(4) OF SECTION 6-508 OF THE ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE; AND
        (2) DEMONSTRATED PHYSICAL FITNESS TO OPERATE SCHOOL
    	
BUSES BY SUBMITTING THE RESULTS OF A MEDICAL EXAMINATION, INCLUDING TESTS FOR DRUG USE, TO A STATE REGULATORY AGENCY."
    (B) "NOT ALL OF THE CHARTER BUS DRIVERS WHO WILL BE PROVIDING SERVICES UNDER THIS CONTRACT HAVE, OR WILL HAVE BEFORE ANY SERVICES ARE PROVIDED:
        (1) SUBMITTED THEIR FINGERPRINTS TO THE DEPARTMENT OF
    	
STATE POLICE IN THE FORM AND MANNER PRESCRIBED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE POLICE. THESE FINGERPRINTS SHALL BE CHECKED AGAINST THE FINGERPRINT RECORDS NOW AND HEREAFTER FILED IN THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE POLICE AND FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS DATABASES. THE FINGERPRINT CHECK HAS RESULTED IN A DETERMINATION THAT THEY HAVE NOT BEEN CONVICTED OF COMMITTING ANY OF THE OFFENSES SET FORTH IN SUBDIVISION (C-1)(4) OF SECTION 6-508 OF THE ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE; AND
        (2) DEMONSTRATED PHYSICAL FITNESS TO OPERATE SCHOOL
    	
BUSES BY SUBMITTING THE RESULTS OF A MEDICAL EXAMINATION, INCLUDING TESTS FOR DRUG USE, TO A STATE REGULATORY AGENCY."
(Source: P.A. 95-331, eff. 8-21-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.22)
    Sec. 10-20.22. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 77-530. Repealed by P.A. 94-600, eff. 8-16-05.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.23)
    Sec. 10-20.23. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 77-533. Repealed by P.A. 94-600, eff. 8-16-05.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.24) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20.24)
    Sec. 10-20.24. Part-time Attendance. To accept in part-time attendance in the regular education program of the district pupils enrolled in nonpublic schools if there is sufficient space in the public school desired to be attended. Request for attendance in the following school year must be submitted by the nonpublic school principal to the public school before May 1. Request may be made only to those public schools located in the district where the child attending the nonpublic school resides.
    To accept, pursuant to the provisions of Section 14-6.01, in part-time attendance resident pupils of the types described in Sections 14-1.02 through 14-1.07 who are enrolled in nonpublic schools.
(Source: P.A. 80-1509.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.25)
    Sec. 10-20.25. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 81-1508. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.25a) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20.25a)
    Sec. 10-20.25a. Report of student statistics. To report to the State Board of Education the annual student dropout rate and number of students who graduate from, transfer from or otherwise leave bilingual programs.
(Source: P.A. 84-662.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.26) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20.26)
    Sec. 10-20.26. Report of teacher dismissals. To send an annual report, on or before October 15, to the State Board of Education which discloses the number of probationary teachers and the number of teachers in contractual continued service who have been dismissed or removed as a result of the board's decision to decrease the number of teachers employed or to discontinue any type of teaching service. The report will also list the number in each teacher category which were subsequently reemployed by the board.
(Source: P.A. 96-734, eff. 8-25-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.27) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20.27)
    Sec. 10-20.27. To file with the regional superintendent a list of all unfilled teaching positions in the district by August 1 of each year, and to report to the regional superintendent no less frequently than by the first day of every month other than August, all teaching positions which, subsequent to the filing of such list, become vacant or are filled.
(Source: P.A. 83-503.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.28) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-20.28)
    Sec. 10-20.28. Cellular radio telecommunication devices.
    (a) The General Assembly finds and declares that the educational development of all persons to the limits of their capacities is a fundamental goal of the people of this State and that to achieve such goal it is essential to provide a safe and secure learning environment within the public schools. While recognizing that cellular radio telecommunication devices may be used for inappropriate activities during school hours and on school property and may, on occasion, cause disruption to the classroom environment, the General Assembly also recognizes that the use of cellular radio telecommunication devices can decrease the response time of officials to emergency situations. In addition, cellular radio telecommunication devices allow parents an additional and timely method of contacting their children should an emergency situation arise. Therefore, it is the purpose and intention of the General Assembly in enacting this legislation to (i) reduce the occurrence of inappropriate and disruptive activities during school hours and on school property occurring through the use of cellular radio telecommunication devices and (ii) increase the safety of students and school personnel during school hours and on school property.
    (b) The school board may establish appropriate rules and disciplinary procedures governing the use or possession of cellular radio telecommunication devices by a student while in a school or on school property, during regular school hours, or at any other time.
(Source: P.A. 92-793, eff. 8-9-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.29)
    Sec. 10-20.29. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 88-71. Repealed by P.A. 96-734, eff. 8-25-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.30)
    Sec. 10-20.30. No pass-no play policy. Beginning with the 1998-99 school year, the school board of each school district that maintains any of grades 9 through 12 shall establish, implement, and enforce a uniform and consistent policy under which a student in any of those grades who fails to maintain a specified minimum grade point average or a specified minimum grade in each course in which the student is enrolled or both is suspended from further participation in any school-sponsored or school-supported athletic or extracurricular activities for a specified period or until a specified minimum grade point average or minimum grade or both are earned by the student. Each school board shall adopt a policy as required by this Section not later than one year after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1997 and shall concurrently file a copy of that policy with the State Board of Education. After the policy has been in effect for one year, the school board shall file a report with the State Board of Education setting forth the number and length of suspensions imposed under the policy during the period covered by the report. If the school board already has a policy that is consistent with the requirements of this Section in effect on the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1997, it shall file a copy of that policy with the State Board of Education within 90 days after the effective date of this amendatory Act and shall file the annual report required under this Section 12 months thereafter.
(Source: P.A. 90-548, eff. 1-1-98.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.31)
    Sec. 10-20.31. Occupational standards. A school board shall not require a student to meet occupational standards for grade level promotion or graduation unless that student is voluntarily enrolled in a job training program.
(Source: P.A. 91-175, eff. 1-1-00; 92-16, eff. 6-28-01.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.32)
    Sec. 10-20.32. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 92-16, eff. 6-28-01. Repealed by P.A. 94-600, eff. 8-16-05.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.33)
    Sec. 10-20.33. Time out and physical restraint. Until rules are adopted under Section 2-3.130 of this Code, the use of any of the following rooms or enclosures for time out purposes is prohibited:
        (1) a locked room other than one with a locking
    	
mechanism that engages only when a key or handle is being held by a person;
        (2) a confining space such as a closet or box;
        (3) a room where the student cannot be continually
    	
observed; or
        (4) any other room or enclosure or time out procedure
    	
that is contrary to current guidelines of the State Board of Education.
    The use of physical restraints is prohibited except when (i) the student poses a physical risk to himself, herself, or others, (ii) there is no medical contraindication to its use, and (iii) the staff applying the restraint have been trained in its safe application. For the purposes of this Section, "restraint" does not include momentary periods of physical restriction by direct person-to-person contact, without the aid of material or mechanical devices, accomplished with limited force and that are designed (i) to prevent a student from completing an act that would result in potential physical harm to himself, herself, or another or damage to property or (ii) to remove a disruptive student who is unwilling to voluntarily leave the area. The use of physical restraints that meet the requirements of this Section may be included in a student's individualized education plan where deemed appropriate by the student's individualized education plan team. Whenever physical restraints are used, school personnel shall fully document the incident, including the events leading up to the incident, the type of restraint used, the length of time the student is restrained, and the staff involved. The parents or guardian of a student shall be informed whenever physical restraints are used.
(Source: P.A. 91-600, eff. 8-14-99; 92-16, eff. 6-28-01.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.34)
    Sec. 10-20.34. Medicaid-eligible children; health care resources. As authorized by federal law, a school district may access federally funded health care resources if the school district provides early periodic screening and diagnostic testing services, including screening and diagnostic services, health care and treatment, preventive health care, or any other measure, to correct or improve health impairments of Medicaid-eligible children.
(Source: P.A. 91-842, eff. 6-22-00.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.35)
    Sec. 10-20.35. Medical information form for bus drivers and emergency medical technicians. School districts are encouraged to create and use an emergency medical information form for bus drivers and emergency medical technicians for those students with special needs or medical conditions. The form may include without limitation information to be provided by the student's parent or legal guardian concerning the student's relevant medical conditions, medications that the student is taking, the student's communication skills, and how a bus driver or an emergency medical technician is to respond to certain behaviors of the student. If the form is used, the school district is encouraged to notify parents and legal guardians of the availability of the form. The parent or legal guardian of the student may fill out the form and submit it to the school that the student is attending. The school district is encouraged to keep one copy of the form on file at the school and another copy on the student's school bus in a secure location.
(Source: P.A. 95-331, eff. 8-21-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.36)
    Sec. 10-20.36. Psychotropic or psychostimulant medication; disciplinary action.
    (a) In this Section:
    "Psychostimulant medication" means medication that produces increased levels of mental and physical energy and alertness and an elevated mood by stimulating the central nervous system.
    "Psychotropic medication" means psychotropic medication as defined in Section 1-121.1 of the Mental Health and Developmental Disabilities Code.
    (b) Each school board must adopt and implement a policy that prohibits any disciplinary action that is based totally or in part on the refusal of a student's parent or guardian to administer or consent to the administration of psychotropic or psychostimulant medication to the student.
    The policy must require that, at least once every 2 years, the in-service training of certified school personnel and administrators include training on current best practices regarding the identification and treatment of attention deficit disorder and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, the application of non-aversive behavioral interventions in the school environment, and the use of psychotropic or psychostimulant medication for school-age children.
    (c) This Section does not prohibit school medical staff, an individualized educational program team, or a professional worker (as defined in Section 14-1.10 of this Code) from recommending that a student be evaluated by an appropriate medical practitioner or prohibit school personnel from consulting with the practitioner with the consent of the student's parents or guardian.
(Source: P.A. 95-331, eff. 8-21-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.37)
    Sec. 10-20.37. Summer kindergarten. A school board may establish, maintain, and operate, in connection with the kindergarten program of the school district, a summer kindergarten program that begins 2 months before the beginning of the regular school year and a summer kindergarten program for grade one readiness for those pupils making unsatisfactory progress during the regular kindergarten session that will continue for 2 months after the regular school year. The summer kindergarten program may be held within the school district or, pursuant to a contract that must be approved by the State Board of Education, may be operated by 2 or more adjacent school districts or by a public or private university or college. Transportation for students attending the summer kindergarten program shall be the responsibility of the school district. The expense of establishing, maintaining, and operating the summer kindergarten program may be paid from funds contributed or otherwise made available to the school district for that purpose by federal or State appropriation.
(Source: P.A. 95-331, eff. 8-21-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.38)
    Sec. 10-20.38. Provision of student information prohibited. A school district, including its agents, employees, student or alumni associations, or any affiliates, may not provide a student's name, address, telephone number, social security number, e-mail address, or other personal identifying information to a business organization or financial institution that issues credit or debit cards.
(Source: P.A. 95-331, eff. 8-21-07; 96-261, eff. 1-1-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.39)
    Sec. 10-20.39. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 93-997, eff. 8-23-04. Repealed by P.A. 100-1046, eff. 8-23-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.40)
    Sec. 10-20.40. Student biometric information.
    (a) For the purposes of this Section, "biometric information" means any information that is collected through an identification process for individuals based on their unique behavioral or physiological characteristics, including fingerprint, hand geometry, voice, or facial recognition or iris or retinal scans.
    (b) School districts that collect biometric information from students shall adopt policies that require, at a minimum, all of the following:
        (1) Written permission from the individual who has
    	
legal custody of the student, as defined in Section 10-20.12b of this Code, or from the student if he or she has reached the age of 18.
        (2) The discontinuation of use of a student's
    	
biometric information under either of the following conditions:
            (A) upon the student's graduation or withdrawal
        	
from the school district; or
            (B) upon receipt in writing of a request for
        	
discontinuation by the individual having legal custody of the student or by the student if he or she has reached the age of 18.
        (3) The destruction of all of a student's biometric
    	
information within 30 days after the use of the biometric information is discontinued in accordance with item (2) of this subsection (b).
        (4) The use of biometric information solely for
    	
identification or fraud prevention.
        (5) A prohibition on the sale, lease, or other
    	
disclosure of biometric information to another person or entity, unless:
            (A) the individual who has legal custody of the
        	
student or the student, if he or she has reached the age of 18, consents to the disclosure; or
            (B) the disclosure is required by court order.
        (6) The storage, transmittal, and protection of all
    	
biometric information from disclosure.
    (c) Failure to provide written consent under item (1) of subsection (b) of this Section by the individual who has legal custody of the student or by the student, if he or she has reached the age of 18, must not be the basis for refusal of any services otherwise available to the student.
    (d) Student biometric information may be destroyed without notification to or the approval of a local records commission under the Local Records Act if destroyed within 30 days after the use of the biometric information is discontinued in accordance with item (2) of subsection (b) of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 95-232, eff. 8-16-07; 95-793, eff. 1-1-09; 95-876, eff. 8-21-08; 96-328, eff. 8-11-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.41)
    Sec. 10-20.41. Use of facilities by community organizations. School boards are encouraged to allow community organizations to use school facilities during non-school hours. If a school board allows a community organization to use school facilities during non-school hours, the board must adopt a formal policy governing the use of school facilities by community organizations during non-school hours. The policy shall prohibit such use if it interferes with any school functions or the safety of students or school personnel or affects the property or liability of the school district.
(Source: P.A. 95-308, eff. 8-20-07; 95-876, eff. 8-21-08; 96-328, eff. 8-11-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.42)
    Sec. 10-20.42. Wind and solar farms. A school district may own and operate a wind or solar generation turbine farm, either individually or jointly with a unit of local government, school district, or community college district that is authorized to own and operate a wind or solar generation turbine farm, that directly or indirectly reduces the energy or other operating costs of the school district. The school district may ask for the assistance of any State agency, including without limitation the State Board of Education, the Illinois Power Agency, or the Environmental Protection Agency, in obtaining financing options for a wind or solar generation turbine farm.
(Source: P.A. 95-390, eff. 8-23-07; 95-805, eff. 8-12-08; 95-876, eff. 8-21-08; 96-725, eff. 8-25-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.43)
    Sec. 10-20.43. School facility and resources occupation tax fund. All proceeds received by a school district from a distribution under Section 3-14.31 must be maintained in a special fund known as the school facility and resources occupation tax fund. The district may use moneys in that fund only for school facility purposes, as that term is defined under Section 5-1006.7 of the Counties Code.
(Source: P.A. 101-455, eff. 8-23-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.44)
    Sec. 10-20.44. Report on contracts.
    (a) This Section applies to all school districts, including a school district organized under Article 34 of this Code.
    (b) A school board must list on the district's Internet website, if any, all contracts over $25,000 and any contract that the school board enters into with an exclusive bargaining representative.
    (c) Each year, in conjunction with the submission of the Statement of Affairs to the State Board of Education prior to December 1, provided for in Section 10-17, each school district shall submit to the State Board of Education an annual report on all contracts over $25,000 awarded by the school district during the previous fiscal year. The report shall include at least the following:
        (1) the total number of all contracts awarded by the
    	
school district;
        (2) the total value of all contracts awarded;
        (3) the number of contracts awarded to minority-owned
    	
businesses, women-owned businesses, and businesses owned by persons with disabilities, as defined in the Business Enterprise for Minorities, Women, and Persons with Disabilities Act, and locally owned businesses; and
        (4) the total value of contracts awarded to
    	
minority-owned businesses, women-owned businesses, and businesses owned by persons with disabilities, as defined in the Business Enterprise for Minorities, Women, and Persons with Disabilities Act, and locally owned businesses.
    The report shall be made available to the public, including publication on the school district's Internet website, if any.
(Source: P.A. 100-391, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.45)
    Sec. 10-20.45. Pay for performance.
    (a) Beginning with all newly-negotiated collective bargaining agreements entered into after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 95th General Assembly, a school board and the exclusive bargaining representative, if any, may include a performance-based teacher compensation plan in the subject of its collective bargaining agreement. Nothing in this Section shall preclude the school board and the exclusive bargaining representative from agreeing to and implementing a new performance-based teacher compensation plan prior to the termination of the current collective bargaining agreement.
    (b) The new teacher compensation plan bargained and agreed to by the school board and the exclusive bargaining representative under subsection (a) of this Section shall provide certificated personnel with base salaries and shall also provide that any increases in the compensation of individual teachers or groups of teachers beyond base salaries shall be pursuant, but not limited to, any of the following elements:
        (1) Superior teacher evaluations based on multiple
    	
evaluations of their classroom teaching.
        (2) Evaluation of a teacher's student classroom-level
    	
achievement growth as measured using a value-added model. "Value-added" means the improvement gains in student achievement that are made each year based on pre-test and post-test outcomes.
        (3) Evaluation of school-level achievement growth as
    	
measured using a value-added model. "Value-added" means the improvement gains in student achievement that are made each year based on pre-test and post-test outcomes.
        (4) Demonstration of superior, outstanding
    	
performance by an individual teacher or groups of teachers through the meeting of unique and specific teaching practice objectives defined and agreed to in advance in any given school year.
        (5) Preparation for meeting and contribution to the
    	
broader needs of the school organization (e.g., curriculum development, family liaison and community outreach, implementation of a professional development program for faculty, and participation in school management).
    (c) A school board and exclusive bargaining representative that initiate their own performance-based teacher compensation program shall submit the new plan to the State Board of Education for review not later than 150 days before the plan is to become effective. If the plan does not conform to this Section, the State Board of Education shall return the plan to the school board and the exclusive bargaining representative for modification. The school board and the exclusive bargaining representative shall then have 30 days after the plan is returned to them to submit a modified plan.
(Source: P.A. 95-707, eff. 1-11-08; 96-328, eff. 8-11-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.46)
    Sec. 10-20.46. Veterans' Day; moment of silence. If a school holds any type of event at the school on November 11, Veterans' Day, the school board shall require a moment of silence at that event to recognize Veterans' Day.
(Source: P.A. 96-84, eff. 7-27-09; 96-1000, eff. 7-2-10; 97-333, eff. 8-12-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.47)
    Sec. 10-20.47. Administrator and teacher salary and benefits; report. Each school board shall report to the State Board of Education, on or before October 1 of each year, the base salary and benefits of the district superintendent and all administrators and teachers employed by the school district. For the purposes of this Section, "benefits" includes without limitation vacation days, sick days, bonuses, annuities, and retirement enhancements.
    Prior to this annual reporting to the State Board of Education, the information must be presented at a regular school board meeting, subject to applicable notice requirements, and then posted on the Internet website of the school district, if any.
(Source: P.A. 96-266, eff. 1-1-10; 96-1000, eff. 7-2-10; 97-256, eff. 1-1-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.48)
    Sec. 10-20.48. Radon testing.
    (a) It is recommended that every occupied school building of a school district be tested every 5 years for radon pursuant to rules established by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency (IEMA).
    (b) It is recommended that new schools of a school district be built using radon resistant new construction techniques, as shown in the United States Environmental Protection Agency document, Radon Prevention in the Design and Construction of Schools and Other Large Buildings.
    (c) Each school district may maintain, make available for review, and notify parents and faculty of test results under this Section. The district shall report radon test results to the State Board of Education, which shall prepare a report every 2 years of the results from all schools that have performed tests, to be submitted to the General Assembly and the Governor.
    (d) If IEMA exempts an individual from being required to be a licensed radon professional, the individual does not need to be a licensed radon professional in order to perform screening tests under this Section. A school district may elect to have one or more employees from the district attend an IEMA-approved, Internet-based training course on school testing in order to receive an exemption to conduct testing in that school district. These school district employees must perform the measurements in accordance with procedures approved by IEMA. If an exemption from IEMA is not received, the school district must use a licensed radon professional to conduct measurements.
    (e) If the results of a radon screening test under this Section are found to be 4.0 pCi/L or above, the school district may hire a licensed radon professional to perform measurements before any mitigation decisions are made. If radon levels of 4.0 pCi/L or above are found, it is recommended that affected areas be mitigated by a licensed radon mitigation professional with respect to both design and installation. IEMA may provide the school district with a list of licensed radon mitigation professionals.
    (f) A screening test under this Section may be done with a test kit found in a hardware store, department store, or home improvement store or with a kit ordered through the mail or over the Internet. However, the kit must be provided by a laboratory licensed in accordance with the Radon Industry Licensing Act.
(Source: P.A. 96-417, eff. 1-1-10; 96-1000, eff. 7-2-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.49)
    Sec. 10-20.49. Compliance with Chemical Safety Acts. Each school district must adopt a procedure to comply with the requirements of the Lawn Care Products Application and Notice Act and the Structural Pest Control Act. The school district must designate a staff person who is responsible for compliance with the requirements of these Acts.
(Source: P.A. 96-424, eff. 8-13-09; 96-1000, eff. 7-2-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.50)
    Sec. 10-20.50. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 96-1000, eff. 7-2-10. Repealed by P.A. 97-256, eff. 1-1-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.51)
    Sec. 10-20.51. Press boxes; accessibility. A school board does not have to comply with the Illinois Accessibility Code (71 Ill. Adm. Code 400) with respect to accessibility to press boxes that are on school property if the press boxes are in bleachers that have points of entry at only one level, and the aggregate area of the press box is no more than 500 square feet.
(Source: P.A. 96-674, eff. 8-25-09; 96-1000, eff. 7-2-10; 97-355, eff. 1-1-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.52)
    Sec. 10-20.52. American Sign Language courses. School boards are encouraged to implement American Sign Language courses into school foreign language curricula.
(Source: P.A. 96-843, eff. 6-1-10; 97-333, eff. 8-12-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.53)
    Sec. 10-20.53. Minimum reading instruction. Each school board shall promote 60 minutes of minimum reading opportunities daily for students in kindergarten through 3rd grade whose reading level is one grade level or lower than their current grade level according to current learning standards and the school district.
(Source: P.A. 97-88, eff. 7-8-11; 97-813, eff. 7-13-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.54)
    Sec. 10-20.54. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-813, eff. 7-13-12. Repealed by P.A. 99-245, eff. 8-3-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.55)
    Sec. 10-20.55. Bring Your Parents to School Day. A school board may designate the first Monday in October of each year "Bring Your Parents to School Day" to promote parental involvement and student success. On this day, the school board may permit the parents or guardians of students to attend class with their children and meet with teachers and administrators during the school day.
(Source: P.A. 98-304, eff. 1-1-14.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.56)
    Sec. 10-20.56. E-learning days.
    (a) The State Board of Education shall establish and maintain, for implementation in school districts, a program for use of electronic-learning (e-learning) days, as described in this Section. School districts may utilize a program approved under this Section for use during remote learning days and blended remote learning days under Section 10-30 or 34-18.66.
    (b) The school board of a school district may, by resolution, adopt a research-based program or research-based programs for e-learning days district-wide that shall permit student instruction to be received electronically while students are not physically present in lieu of the district's scheduled emergency days as required by Section 10-19 of this Code. The research-based program or programs may not exceed the minimum number of emergency days in the approved school calendar and must be verified by the regional office of education or intermediate service center for the school district on or before September 1st annually to ensure access for all students. The regional office of education or intermediate service center shall ensure that the specific needs of all students are met, including special education students and English learners, and that all mandates are still met using the proposed research-based program. The e-learning program may utilize the Internet, telephones, texts, chat rooms, or other similar means of electronic communication for instruction and interaction between teachers and students that meet the needs of all learners. The e-learning program shall address the school district's responsibility to ensure that all teachers and staff who may be involved in the provision of e-learning have access to any and all hardware and software that may be required for the program. If a proposed program does not address this responsibility, the school district must propose an alternate program.
    (c) Before its adoption by a school board, the school board must hold a public hearing on a school district's initial proposal for an e-learning program or for renewal of such a program, at a regular or special meeting of the school board, in which the terms of the proposal must be substantially presented and an opportunity for allowing public comments must be provided. Notice of such public hearing must be provided at least 10 days prior to the hearing by:
        (1) publication in a newspaper of general circulation
    	
in the school district;
        (2) written or electronic notice designed to reach
    	
the parents or guardians of all students enrolled in the school district; and
        (3) written or electronic notice designed to reach
    	
any exclusive collective bargaining representatives of school district employees and all those employees not in a collective bargaining unit.
    (d) The regional office of education or intermediate service center for the school district must timely verify that a proposal for an e-learning program has met the requirements specified in this Section and that the proposal contains provisions designed to reasonably and practicably accomplish the following:
        (1) to ensure and verify at least 5 clock hours of
    	
instruction or school work, as required under Section 10-19.05, for each student participating in an e-learning day;
        (2) to ensure access from home or other appropriate
    	
remote facility for all students participating, including computers, the Internet, and other forms of electronic communication that must be utilized in the proposed program;
        (2.5) to ensure that non-electronic materials are
    	
made available to students participating in the program who do not have access to the required technology or to participating teachers or students who are prevented from accessing the required technology;
        (3) to ensure appropriate learning opportunities for
    	
students with special needs;
        (4) to monitor and verify each student's electronic
    	
participation;
        (5) to address the extent to which student
    	
participation is within the student's control as to the time, pace, and means of learning;
        (6) to provide effective notice to students and their
    	
parents or guardians of the use of particular days for e-learning;
        (7) to provide staff and students with adequate
    	
training for e-learning days' participation;
        (8) to ensure an opportunity for any collective
    	
bargaining negotiations with representatives of the school district's employees that would be legally required, including all classifications of school district employees who are represented by collective bargaining agreements and who would be affected in the event of an e-learning day;
        (9) to review and revise the program as implemented
    	
to address difficulties confronted; and
        (10) to ensure that the protocol regarding general
    	
expectations and responsibilities of the program is communicated to teachers, staff, and students at least 30 days prior to utilizing an e-learning day.
    The school board's approval of a school district's initial e-learning program and renewal of the e-learning program shall be for a term of 3 years.
    (e) The State Board of Education may adopt rules consistent with the provision of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 100-760, eff. 8-10-18; 101-12, eff. 7-1-19; 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.57)
    Sec. 10-20.57. Carbon monoxide alarm required.
    (a) In this Section:
    "Approved carbon monoxide alarm" and "alarm" have the meaning ascribed to those terms in the Carbon Monoxide Alarm Detector Act.
    "Carbon monoxide detector" and "detector" mean a device having a sensor that responds to carbon monoxide gas and that is connected to an alarm control unit and approved in accordance with rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal.
    (b) A school board shall require that each school under its authority be equipped with approved carbon monoxide alarms or carbon monoxide detectors. The alarms must be powered as follows:
        (1) For a school designed before January 1, 2016 (the
    	
effective date of Public Act 99-470), alarms powered by batteries are permitted. In accordance with Section 17-2.11 of this Code, alarms permanently powered by the building's electrical system and monitored by any required fire alarm system are also permitted. Fire prevention and safety tax levy proceeds or bond proceeds may be used for alarms.
        (2) For a school designed on or after January 1, 2016
    	
(the effective date of Public Act 99-470), alarms must be permanently powered by the building's electrical system or be an approved carbon monoxide detection system. An installation required in this subdivision (2) must be monitored by any required fire alarm system.
    Alarms or detectors must be located within 20 feet of a carbon monoxide emitting device. Alarms or detectors must be in operating condition and be inspected annually. A school is exempt from the requirements of this Section if it does not have or is not close to any sources of carbon monoxide. A school must require plans, protocols, and procedures in response to the activation of a carbon monoxide alarm or carbon monoxide detection system.
(Source: P.A. 99-470, eff. 1-1-16; 99-642, eff. 7-28-16.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.58)
    Sec. 10-20.58. Accelerate College pilot program. School districts may enter into Accelerate College educational partnership agreements as authorized under Section 3-42.4 of the Public Community College Act.
(Source: P.A. 99-611, eff. 7-22-16; 100-201, eff. 8-18-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.59)
    Sec. 10-20.59. DCFS liaison.
    (a) Each school board may appoint at least one employee to act as a liaison to facilitate the enrollment and transfer of records of students in the legal custody of the Department of Children and Family Services when enrolling in or changing schools. The school board may appoint any employee of the school district who is licensed under Article 21B of this Code to act as a liaison; however, employees who meet any of the following criteria must be prioritized for appointment:
        (1) Employees who have worked with mobile student
    	
populations or students in foster care.
        (2) Employees who are familiar with enrollment,
    	
record transfers, existing community services, and student support services.
        (3) Employees who serve as a high-level administrator.
        (4) Employees who are counselors or have experience
    	
with student counseling.
        (5) Employees who are knowledgeable on child welfare
    	
policies.
        (6) Employees who serve as a school social worker.
    (b) Liaisons under this Section are encouraged to build capacity and infrastructure within their school district to support students in the legal custody of the Department of Children and Family Services. Liaison responsibilities may include the following:
        (1) streamlining the enrollment processes for
    	
students in foster care;
        (2) implementing student data tracking and monitoring
    	
mechanisms;
        (3) ensuring that students in the legal custody of
    	
the Department of Children and Family Services receive all school nutrition and meal programs available;
        (4) coordinating student withdrawal from a school,
    	
record transfers, and credit recovery;
        (5) becoming experts on the foster care system and
    	
State laws and policies in place that support children under the legal custody of the Department of Children and Family Services;
        (6) coordinating with child welfare partners;
        (7) providing foster care-related information and
    	
training to the school district;
        (8) working with the Department of Children and
    	
Family Services to help students maintain their school placement, if appropriate;
        (9) reviewing student schedules to ensure that
    	
students are on track to graduate;
        (10) encouraging a successful transition into
    	
adulthood and post-secondary opportunities;
        (11) encouraging involvement in extracurricular
    	
activities; and
        (12) knowing what support is available within the
    	
school district and community for students in the legal custody of the Department of Children and Family Services.
    (c) A school district is encouraged to designate a liaison by the beginning of the 2017-2018 school year.
    (d) Individuals licensed under Article 21B of this Code acting as a liaison under this Section shall perform the duties of a liaison in addition to existing contractual obligations.
(Source: P.A. 99-781, eff. 8-12-16; 100-201, eff. 8-18-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.60)
    Sec. 10-20.60. Breastfeeding accommodations for pupils.
    (a) Each public school shall provide reasonable accommodations to a lactating pupil on a school campus to express breast milk, breastfeed an infant child, or address other needs related to breastfeeding. Reasonable accommodations under this Section include, but are not limited to, all of the following:
        (1) Access to a private and secure room, other than a
    	
restroom, to express breast milk or breastfeed an infant child.
        (2) Permission to bring onto a school campus a breast
    	
pump and any other equipment used to express breast milk.
        (3) Access to a power source for a breast pump or any
    	
other equipment used to express breast milk.
        (4) Access to a place to store expressed breast milk
    	
safely.
    (b) A lactating pupil on a school campus must be provided a reasonable amount of time to accommodate her need to express breast milk or breastfeed an infant child.
    (c) A public school shall provide the reasonable accommodations specified in subsections (a) and (b) of this Section only if there is at least one lactating pupil on the school campus.
    (d) A public school may use an existing facility to meet the requirements specified in subsection (a) of this Section.
    (e) A pupil may not incur an academic penalty as a result of her use, during the school day, of the reasonable accommodations specified in this Section and must be provided the opportunity to make up any work missed due to such use.
    (f) In instances where a student files a complaint of noncompliance with the requirements of this Section, the public school shall implement the grievance procedure of 23 Ill. Adm. Code 200, including appeals procedures.
(Source: P.A. 100-29, eff. 1-1-18; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.61)
    Sec. 10-20.61. Implicit bias training.
    (a) The General Assembly makes the following findings:
        (1) implicit racial bias influences evaluations of
    	
and behavior toward those who are the subject of the bias;
        (2) understanding implicit racial bias is needed in
    	
order to reduce that bias;
        (3) marginalized students would benefit from having
    	
access to educators who have worked to reduce their biases; and
        (4) training that helps educators overcome implicit
    	
racial bias has implication for classroom interactions, student evaluation, and classroom engagement; it also affects student academic self-concept.
    (b) Each school board shall require in-service training for school personnel to include training to develop cultural competency, including understanding and reducing implicit racial bias.
    (c) As used in this Section, "implicit racial bias" means a preference, positive or negative, for a racial or ethnic group that operates outside of awareness. This bias has 3 different components: affective, behavioral, and cognitive.
(Source: P.A. 100-14, eff. 7-1-17; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.62)
    Sec. 10-20.62. Dual enrollment and dual credit notification.
    (a) In this Section, "dual credit course" has the meaning ascribed to that term in the Dual Credit Quality Act.
    (b) A qualified student shall be allowed to enroll in an unlimited amount of dual credit courses and earn an unlimited amount of academic credits from dual credit courses if the courses are taught by an Illinois instructor, as provided under the Dual Credit Quality Act.
    (c) A school board shall require the school district's high schools, if any, to inform all 11th and 12th grade students of dual enrollment and dual credit opportunities at public community colleges for qualified students.
(Source: P.A. 100-133, eff. 1-1-18; 100-792, eff. 1-1-19; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.63)
    Sec. 10-20.63. Availability of feminine hygiene products.
    (a) The General Assembly finds the following:
        (1) Feminine hygiene products are a health care
    	
necessity and not an item that can be foregone or substituted easily.
        (2) Access to feminine hygiene products is a serious
    	
and ongoing need in this State.
        (3) When students do not have access to affordable
    	
feminine hygiene products, they may miss multiple days of school every month.
        (4) When students have access to quality feminine
    	
hygiene products, they are able to continue with their daily lives with minimal interruption.
    (b) In this Section:
    "Feminine hygiene products" means tampons and sanitary napkins for use in connection with the menstrual cycle.
    "School building" means any facility (i) that is owned or leased by a school district or over which the school board has care, custody, and control and (ii) in which there is a public school serving students in grades 6 through 12.
    (c) A school district shall make feminine hygiene products available, at no cost to students, in the bathrooms of school buildings.
(Source: P.A. 100-163, eff. 1-1-18; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.64)
    Sec. 10-20.64. Booking stations on school grounds.
    (a) There shall be no student booking station established or maintained on the grounds of any school.
    (b) This prohibition shall be applied to student booking stations only, as defined in this Section. The prohibition does not prohibit or affect the establishment or maintenance of any place operated by or under the control of law enforcement personnel, school resource officers, or other security personnel that does not also qualify as a student booking station as defined in paragraph (2) of subsection (d) of this Section. The prohibition does not affect or limit the powers afforded law enforcement officers to perform their duties within schools as otherwise prescribed by law.
    (c) When the underlying suspected or alleged criminal act is an act of violence, and isolation of a student or students is deemed necessary to the interest of public safety, and no other location is adequate for secure isolation of the student or students, offices as described in paragraph (1) of subsection (d) of this Section may be employed to detain students for a period no longer than that required to alleviate that threat to public safety.
    (d) As used in this Section, "student booking station" means a building, office, room, or any indefinitely established space or site, mobile or fixed, which operates concurrently as:
        (1) predominantly or regularly a place of operation
    	
for a municipal police department, county sheriff department, or other law enforcement agency, or under the primary control thereof; and
        (2) a site at which students are detained in
    	
connection with criminal charges or allegations against those students, taken into custody, or engaged with law enforcement personnel in any process that creates a law enforcement record of that contact with law enforcement personnel or processes.
(Source: P.A. 100-204, eff. 8-18-17; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.65)
    Sec. 10-20.65. School social worker. A school board may employ school social workers who have graduated with a master's or higher degree in social work from an accredited graduate school of social work and have such additional qualifications as may be required by the State Board of Education and who hold a Professional Educator License with a school support personnel endorsement for school social work pursuant to Section 21B-25 of this Code. Only persons so licensed and endorsed may use the title "school social worker". A school social worker may provide individual and group services to the general student population and to students with disabilities pursuant to Article 14 of this Code and rules set forth in 23 Ill. Adm. Code 226, Special Education, adopted by the State Board of Education and may provide support and consultation to administrators, teachers, and other school personnel consistent with their professional qualifications and the provisions of this Code and other applicable laws. School districts may employ a sufficient number of school social workers to address the needs of their students and schools and may maintain the nationally recommended student-to-school social worker ratio of 250 to 1. A school social worker may not provide such services outside his or her employment to any student in the district or districts that employ the school social worker.
(Source: P.A. 100-356, eff. 8-25-17; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.66)
    Sec. 10-20.66. School-grown produce. A school district may serve students produce grown and harvested by students in school-owned facilities utilizing hydroponics or aeroponics or in school-owned or community gardens if the soil and compost in which the produce is grown meets the standards adopted in 35 Ill. Adm. Code 830.503, if applicable, and the produce is served in accordance with the standards adopted in 77 Ill. Adm. Code 750.
(Source: P.A. 100-505, eff. 6-1-18; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.67)
    (Section scheduled to be repealed on July 1, 2023)
    Sec. 10-20.67. Short-term substitute teacher training.
    (a) Each school board shall, in collaboration with its teachers or, if applicable, the exclusive bargaining representative of its teachers, jointly develop a short-term substitute teacher training program that provides individuals who hold a Short-Term Substitute Teaching License under Section 21B-20 of this Code with information on curriculum, classroom management techniques, school safety, and district and building operations. The State Board of Education may develop a model short-term substitute teacher training program for use by a school board under this subsection (a) if the school board and its teachers or, if applicable, the exclusive bargaining representative of its teachers agree to use the State Board's model. A school board with a substitute teacher training program in place before July 1, 2018 (the effective date of Public Act 100-596) may utilize that program to satisfy the requirements of this subsection (a).
    (b) Nothing in this Section prohibits a school board from offering substitute training to substitute teachers licensed under paragraph (3) of Section 21B-20 of this Code or to substitute teachers holding a Professional Educator License.
    (c) This Section is repealed on July 1, 2023.
(Source: P.A. 100-596, eff. 7-1-18; 101-81, eff. 7-12-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.68)
    Sec. 10-20.68. School resource officer.
    (a) In this Section, "school resource officer" means a law enforcement officer who has been primarily assigned to a school or school district under an agreement with a local law enforcement agency.
    (b) Beginning January 1, 2021, any law enforcement agency that provides a school resource officer under this Section shall provide to the school district a certificate of completion, or approved waiver, issued by the Illinois Law Enforcement Training Standards Board under Section 10.22 of the Illinois Police Training Act indicating that the subject officer has completed the requisite course of instruction in the applicable subject areas within one year of assignment, or has prior experience and training which satisfies this requirement.
    (c) In an effort to defray the related costs, any law enforcement agency that provides a school resource officer should apply for grant funding through the federal Community Oriented Policing Services grant program.
(Source: P.A. 100-984, eff. 1-1-19; 101-81, eff. 7-12-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.69)
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-418)
    Sec. 10-20.69. Policy on sexual harassment. Each school district must create, maintain, and implement an age-appropriate policy on sexual harassment that must be posted on the school district's website and, if applicable, any other area where policies, rules, and standards of conduct are currently posted in each school and must also be included in the school district's student code of conduct handbook.
(Source: P.A. 101-418, eff. 1-1-20.)
 
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-451)
    Sec. 10-20.69. Class size reporting. No later than November 16, 2020, and annually thereafter, each school district must report to the State Board of Education information on the school district described under subsection (b) of Section 2-3.136a and must make that information available on its website.
(Source: P.A. 101-451, eff. 1-1-20.)
 
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-531)
    Sec. 10-20.69. Sexual abuse investigations at schools. Every 2 years, each school district must review all existing policies and procedures concerning sexual abuse investigations at schools to ensure consistency with Section 22-85.
(Source: P.A. 101-531, eff. 8-23-19.)
 
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-548)
    Sec. 10-20.69. Door security locking means.
    (a) In this Section, "door security locking means" means a door locking means intended for use by a trained school district employee in a school building for the purpose of preventing ingress through a door of the building.
    (b) A school district may install a door security locking means on a door of a school building to prevent unwanted entry through the door if all of the following requirements are met:
        (1) The door security locking means can be engaged
    	
without opening the door.
        (2) The unlocking and unlatching of the door security
    	
locking means from the occupied side of the door can be accomplished without the use of a key or tool.
        (3) The door security locking means complies with all
    	
applicable State and federal accessibility requirements.
        (4) Locks, if remotely engaged, can be unlocked from
    	
the occupied side.
        (5) The door security locking means is capable of
    	
being disengaged from the outside by school district employees, and school district employees may use a key or other credentials to unlock the door from the outside.
        (6) The door security locking means does not modify
    	
the door-closing hardware, panic hardware, or fire exit hardware.
        (7) Any bolts, stops, brackets, or pins employed by
    	
the door security locking means do not affect the fire rating of a fire door assembly.
        (8) School district employees are trained in the
    	
engagement and release of the door security locking means, from within and outside the room, as part of the emergency response plan.
        (9) For doors installed before July 1, 2019 only, the
    	
unlocking and unlatching of a door security locking means requires no more than 2 releasing operations. For doors installed on or after July 1, 2019, the unlocking and unlatching of a door security locking means requires no more than one releasing operation. If doors installed before July 1, 2019 are replaced on or after July 1, 2019, the unlocking and unlatching of a door security locking means on the replacement door requires no more than one releasing operation.
        (10) The door security locking means is no more than
    	
48 inches above the finished floor.
        (11) The door security locking means otherwise
    	
complies with the school building code prepared by the State Board of Education under Section 2-3.12.
    A school district may install a door security locking means that does not comply with paragraph (3) or (10) of this subsection if (i) the school district meets all other requirements under this subsection and (ii) prior to its installation, local law enforcement officials, the local fire department, and the school board agree, in writing, to the installation and use of the door security locking means. The school district must keep the agreement on file and must, upon request, provide the agreement to its regional office of education. The agreement must be included in the school district's filed school safety plan under the School Safety Drill Act.
    (c) A school district must include the location of any door security locking means and must address the use of the locking and unlocking means from within and outside the room in its filed school safety plan under the School Safety Drill Act. Local law enforcement officials and the local fire department must be notified of the location of any door security locking means and how to disengage it. Any specific tool needed to disengage the door security locking means from the outside of the room must, upon request, be made available to local law enforcement officials and the local fire department.
    (d) A door security locking means may be used only (i) by a school district employee trained under subsection (e), (ii) during an emergency that threatens the health and safety of students and employees or during an active shooter drill, and (iii) when local law enforcement officials and the local fire department have been notified of its installation prior to its use. The door security locking means must be engaged for a finite period of time in accordance with the school district's school safety plan adopted under the School Safety Drill Act.
    (e) A school district that has installed a door security locking means shall conduct an in-service training program for school district employees on the proper use of the door security locking means. The school district shall keep a file verifying the employees who have completed the program and must, upon request, provide the file to its regional office of education and the local fire department and local law enforcement agency.
    (f) A door security locking means that requires 2 releasing operations must be discontinued from use when the door is replaced or is a part of new construction. Replacement and new construction door hardware must include mortise locks, compliant with the applicable building code, and must be lockable from the occupied side without opening the door. However, mortise locks are not required if panic hardware or fire exit hardware is required.
(Source: P.A. 101-548, eff. 8-23-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.73)
    Sec. 10-20.73. Computer literacy skills. All school districts shall ensure that students receive developmentally appropriate opportunities to gain computer literacy skills beginning in elementary school.
(Source: P.A. 101-654, eff. 3-8-21.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-20.74)
    Sec. 10-20.74. Educational technology capacity and policies; report. School districts shall submit to the State Board of Education, or its designee, an annual report that shall include, at a minimum, information regarding educational technology capacity and policies, including device availability for students, school-based access and infrastructure, professional learning and training opportunities, and documentation of developmentally appropriate computer literacy instruction embedded in the district's curriculum at each grade level.
(Source: P.A. 101-654, eff. 3-8-21.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-21) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-21)
    Sec. 10-21. Additional duties of board. Boards of education in addition to the duties enumerated above shall have the additional duties enumerated in Sections 10-21.1 through 10-21.11.
(Source: P.A. 86-21; 86-890; 86-1028.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-21.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-21.1)
    Sec. 10-21.1. Employment of teachers.
    To examine teachers by examinations supplemental to any other examinations and to employ teachers and fix the amount of their salaries subject to limitations set forth in this Act. Provided, that in fixing salaries of certificated employees school boards shall make no discrimination on account of sex; provided, further, that sabbatical leaves, with full or partial salary, may be granted in accordance with the rules of the board.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-21.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-21.2)
    Sec. 10-21.2. Schools of different grades.
    To establish schools of different grades and to adopt regulations for the admission of pupils into them; however, in any district having less than 2,000 inhabitants no grades above the eighth shall be maintained unless they were maintained during the school year ended June 30, 1949.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-21.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-21.3)
    Sec. 10-21.3. Attendance units.
    To establish one or more attendance units within the district. As soon as practicable, and from time to time thereafter, the board shall change or revise existing units or create new units in a manner which will take into consideration the prevention of segregation and the elimination of separation of children in public schools because of color, race or nationality. All records pertaining to the creation, alteration or revision of attendance units shall be open to the public.
(Source: Laws 1963, p. 1107.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-21.3a)
    Sec. 10-21.3a. Transfer of students.
    (a) Each school board shall establish and implement a policy governing the transfer of a student from one attendance center to another within the school district upon the request of the student's parent or guardian. A student may not transfer to any of the following attendance centers, except by change in residence if the policy authorizes enrollment based on residence in an attendance area or unless approved by the board on an individual basis:
        (1) An attendance center that exceeds or as a result
    	
of the transfer would exceed its attendance capacity.
        (2) An attendance center for which the board has
    	
established academic criteria for enrollment if the student does not meet the criteria.
        (3) Any attendance center if the transfer would
    	
prevent the school district from meeting its obligations under a State or federal law, court order, or consent decree applicable to the school district.
    (b) Each school board shall establish and implement a policy governing the transfer of students within a school district from a persistently dangerous school to another public school in that district that is not deemed to be persistently dangerous. In order to be considered a persistently dangerous school, the school must meet all of the following criteria for 2 consecutive years:
        (1) Have greater than 3% of the students enrolled in
    	
the school expelled for violence-related conduct.
        (2) Have one or more students expelled for bringing a
    	
firearm to school as defined in 18 U.S.C. 921.
        (3) Have at least 3% of the students enrolled in the
    	
school exercise the individual option to transfer schools pursuant to subsection (c) of this Section.
    (c) A student may transfer from one public school to another public school in that district if the student is a victim of a violent crime as defined in Section 3 of the Rights of Crime Victims and Witnesses Act. The violent crime must have occurred on school grounds during regular school hours or during a school-sponsored event.
    (d) (Blank).
(Source: P.A. 100-1046, eff. 8-23-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-21.4) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-21.4)
    Sec. 10-21.4. Superintendent - Duties. Except in districts in which there is only one school with fewer than 4 teachers, to employ a superintendent, who shall have charge of the administration of the schools under the direction of the board of education. However, in any school district that has boundaries that lie in 3 counties, one county of which has a population exceeding 1,000,000 inhabitants, that has an enrollment of more than 35,000 students, and that has on staff properly licensed assistant superintendents or directors in the areas of instruction, finance, special education, assessments, and career and technology education, the school board may instead, by a vote of a majority of its full membership, appoint a chief executive officer to serve as its superintendent, who shall be a person of recognized administrative ability and management experience, hold a master's degree, have been employed with the school district for a minimum of 5 years in an administrative capacity, be responsible for the management of the district, and have all other powers and duties of a superintendent as set forth in this Code, but who shall be exempt from the provisions and requirements of Section 21B-15 of this Code for a period of 5 years.
    In addition to the administrative duties, the superintendent shall make recommendations to the board concerning the budget, building plans, the locations of sites, the selection, retention and dismissal of teachers and all other employees, the selection of textbooks, instructional material and courses of study. However, in districts under a Financial Oversight Panel pursuant to Section 1A-8 for violating a financial plan, the duties and responsibilities of the superintendent in relation to the financial and business operations of the district shall be approved by the Panel. In the event the Board refuses or fails to follow a directive or comply with an information request of the Panel, the performance of those duties shall be subject to the direction of the Panel. The superintendent shall also notify the State Board of Education, the board and the chief administrative official, other than the alleged perpetrator himself, in the school where the alleged perpetrator serves, that any person who is employed in a school or otherwise comes into frequent contact with children in the school has been named as a perpetrator in an indicated report filed pursuant to the Abused and Neglected Child Reporting Act, approved June 26, 1975, as amended. The superintendent shall keep or cause to be kept the records and accounts as directed and required by the board, aid in making reports required by the board, and perform such other duties as the board may delegate to him.
    In addition, each year at a time designated by the State Superintendent of Education, each superintendent shall report to the State Board of Education the number of high school students in the district who are enrolled in accredited courses (for which high school credit will be awarded upon successful completion of the courses) at any community college, together with the name and number of the course or courses which each such student is taking.
    The provisions of this Section shall also apply to board of director districts.
    Notice of intent not to renew a contract must be given in writing stating the specific reason therefor by April 1 of the contract year unless the contract specifically provides otherwise. Failure to do so will automatically extend the contract for an additional year. Within 10 days after receipt of notice of intent not to renew a contract, the superintendent may request a closed session hearing on the dismissal. At the hearing the superintendent has the privilege of presenting evidence, witnesses and defenses on the grounds for dismissal. The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to a district under a Financial Oversight Panel pursuant to Section 1A-8 for violating a financial plan.
(Source: P.A. 99-846, eff. 6-1-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-21.4a) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-21.4a)
    Sec. 10-21.4a. Principals and assistant principals - Duties. To employ principals and assistant principals who hold valid supervisory or administrative certificates. The principal, with the assistance of any assistant principals, shall supervise the operation of attendance centers as the board shall determine necessary. In an attendance center having fewer than 4 teachers, a head teacher who does not qualify as a principal may be assigned in the place of a principal.
    The principal, with the assistance of any assistant principals, shall assume administrative responsibilities and instructional leadership, under the supervision of the superintendent, and in accordance with reasonable rules and regulations of the board, for the planning, operation and evaluation of the educational program of the attendance area to which he or she is assigned. However, in districts under a Financial Oversight Panel pursuant to Section 1A-8 for violating a financial plan, the duties and responsibilities of principals and assistant principals in relation to the financial and business operations of the district shall be approved by the Panel. In the event the Board refuses or fails to follow a directive or comply with an information request of the Panel, the performance of those duties shall be subject to the direction of the Panel.
    School boards shall specify in their formal job description for principals that his or her primary responsibility is in the improvement of instruction. A majority of the time spent by a principal shall be spent on curriculum and staff development through both formal and informal activities, establishing clear lines of communication regarding school goals, accomplishments, practices and policies with parents and teachers.
    Unless residency within a school district is made an express condition of a person's employment or continued employment as a principal or assistant principal of that school district at the time of the person's initial employment as a principal or assistant principal of that district, residency within that school district may not at any time thereafter be made a condition of that person's employment or continued employment as a principal or assistant principal of the district, without regard to whether the person's initial employment as a principal or assistant principal of the district began before or begins on or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1996 and without regard to whether that person's residency within or outside of the district began or was changed before or begins or changes on or after that effective date. In no event shall residency within a school district be considered in determining the compensation of a principal or assistant principal or the assignment or transfer of a principal or assistant principal to an attendance center of the district.
    School boards shall ensure that their principals and assistant principals are evaluated on their instructional leadership ability and their ability to maintain a positive education and learning climate.
    It shall also be the responsibility of the principal to utilize resources of proper law enforcement agencies when the safety and welfare of students and teachers are threatened by illegal use of drugs and alcohol, by illegal use or possession of weapons, or by illegal gang activity.
    The principal shall submit recommendations to the superintendent concerning the appointment, retention, promotion and assignment of all personnel assigned to the attendance center.
(Source: P.A. 97-217, eff. 7-28-11; 98-59, eff. 1-1-14.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-21.5) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-21.5)
    Sec. 10-21.5. Establishment of high schools. The board of education of any community high school district, township high school district, consolidated high school district, or community unit district heretofore created shall within 4 years from the date of such creation establish within the district one or more high schools with a program of studies extending through the ninth to twelfth years, inclusive, and in such districts created hereafter the board of education shall within four years following the creation of the district establish such high schools.
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, any unit district that has a majority of its territory in the same county as a special charter district that, as authorized by Section 12-24, accepts tuition students in grades 9-12 from a neighboring unit district that does not maintain a high school may, by agreement between the school board of the unit district and the school board of the charter district, send its students in grades 9-12 to the charter district upon payment of such tuition and other terms as may be agreed by the boards.
    Except as otherwise provided in Section 5-32, if the board of education fails to establish a high school as required by this section the district shall become automatically dissolved and the property and territory of such district shall be disposed of in the manner provided in this Act, provided that no community high school district shall be dissolved under this Act where an election has been held, a site selected, and bonds to construct a high school building have been sold prior to September 1, 1955.
(Source: P.A. 87-1022.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-21.6)
    Sec. 10-21.6. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 83-795. Repealed by P.A. 97-256, eff. 1-1-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-21.7) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-21.7)
    Sec. 10-21.7. Attacks on school personnel.
    (a) In the Section, "school" means any public or private elementary or secondary school.
    (b) Upon receipt of a written complaint from any school personnel, the superintendent, or other appropriate administrative officer for a private school, shall report all incidents of battery committed against teachers, teacher personnel, administrative personnel or educational support personnel to the local law enforcement authorities immediately after the occurrence of the attack and to the Department of State Police's Illinois Uniform Crime Reporting Program no later than 3 days after the occurrence of the attack. The State Board of Education shall receive monthly as well as annual statistical compilations of attacks on school personnel from the Department of State Police through the Illinois Uniform Crime Reporting Program. The State Board of Education shall compile this information by school district and make it available to the public.
(Source: P.A. 91-491, eff. 8-13-99.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-21.8) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-21.8)
    Sec. 10-21.8. Correspondence and Reports. In the absence of any court order to the contrary to require that, upon the request of either parent of a pupil whose parents are divorced, copies of the following: reports or records which reflect the pupil's academic progress, reports of the pupil's emotional and physical health, notices of school-initiated parent-teacher conference, notices of major school-sponsored events, such as open houses, which involve pupil-parent interaction, and copies of the school calendar regarding the child which are furnished by the school district to one parent be furnished by mail to the other parent. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Section a school board shall not, under the authority of this Section, refuse to mail copies of reports, records, notices or other documents regarding a pupil to a parent of the pupil as provided by this Section, unless the school board first has been furnished with a certified copy of the court order prohibiting the release of such reports, records, notices or other documents to that parent. No such reports or records with respect to a pupil shall be provided to a parent who has been prohibited by an order of protection from inspecting or obtaining school records of that pupil pursuant to the Illinois Domestic Violence Act of 1986, as now or hereafter amended.
(Source: P.A. 86-966.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-21.9) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-21.9)
    Sec. 10-21.9. Criminal history records checks and checks of the Statewide Sex Offender Database and Statewide Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth Database.
    (a) Licensed and nonlicensed applicants for employment with a school district, except school bus driver applicants, are required as a condition of employment to authorize a fingerprint-based criminal history records check to determine if such applicants have been convicted of any disqualifying, enumerated criminal or drug offenses in subsection (c) of this Section or have been convicted, within 7 years of the application for employment with the school district, of any other felony under the laws of this State or of any offense committed or attempted in any other state or against the laws of the United States that, if committed or attempted in this State, would have been punishable as a felony under the laws of this State. Authorization for the check shall be furnished by the applicant to the school district, except that if the applicant is a substitute teacher seeking employment in more than one school district, a teacher seeking concurrent part-time employment positions with more than one school district (as a reading specialist, special education teacher or otherwise), or an educational support personnel employee seeking employment positions with more than one district, any such district may require the applicant to furnish authorization for the check to the regional superintendent of the educational service region in which are located the school districts in which the applicant is seeking employment as a substitute or concurrent part-time teacher or concurrent educational support personnel employee. Upon receipt of this authorization, the school district or the appropriate regional superintendent, as the case may be, shall submit the applicant's name, sex, race, date of birth, social security number, fingerprint images, and other identifiers, as prescribed by the Department of State Police, to the Department. The regional superintendent submitting the requisite information to the Department of State Police shall promptly notify the school districts in which the applicant is seeking employment as a substitute or concurrent part-time teacher or concurrent educational support personnel employee that the check of the applicant has been requested. The Department of State Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation shall furnish, pursuant to a fingerprint-based criminal history records check, records of convictions, forever and hereinafter, until expunged, to the president of the school board for the school district that requested the check, or to the regional superintendent who requested the check. The Department shall charge the school district or the appropriate regional superintendent a fee for conducting such check, which fee shall be deposited in the State Police Services Fund and shall not exceed the cost of the inquiry; and the applicant shall not be charged a fee for such check by the school district or by the regional superintendent, except that those applicants seeking employment as a substitute teacher with a school district may be charged a fee not to exceed the cost of the inquiry. Subject to appropriations for these purposes, the State Superintendent of Education shall reimburse school districts and regional superintendents for fees paid to obtain criminal history records checks under this Section.
    (a-5) The school district or regional superintendent shall further perform a check of the Statewide Sex Offender Database, as authorized by the Sex Offender Community Notification Law, for each applicant. The check of the Statewide Sex Offender Database must be conducted by the school district or regional superintendent once for every 5 years that an applicant remains employed by the school district.
    (a-6) The school district or regional superintendent shall further perform a check of the Statewide Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth Database, as authorized by the Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth Community Notification Law, for each applicant. The check of the Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth Database must be conducted by the school district or regional superintendent once for every 5 years that an applicant remains employed by the school district.
    (b) Any information concerning the record of convictions obtained by the president of the school board or the regional superintendent shall be confidential and may only be transmitted to the superintendent of the school district or his designee, the appropriate regional superintendent if the check was requested by the school district, the presidents of the appropriate school boards if the check was requested from the Department of State Police by the regional superintendent, the State Board of Education and a school district as authorized under subsection (b-5), the State Superintendent of Education, the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board, any other person necessary to the decision of hiring the applicant for employment, or for clarification purposes the Department of State Police or Statewide Sex Offender Database, or both. A copy of the record of convictions obtained from the Department of State Police shall be provided to the applicant for employment. Upon the check of the Statewide Sex Offender Database or Statewide Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth Database, the school district or regional superintendent shall notify an applicant as to whether or not the applicant has been identified in the Database. If a check of an applicant for employment as a substitute or concurrent part-time teacher or concurrent educational support personnel employee in more than one school district was requested by the regional superintendent, and the Department of State Police upon a check ascertains that the applicant has not been convicted of any of the enumerated criminal or drug offenses in subsection (c) of this Section or has not been convicted, within 7 years of the application for employment with the school district, of any other felony under the laws of this State or of any offense committed or attempted in any other state or against the laws of the United States that, if committed or attempted in this State, would have been punishable as a felony under the laws of this State and so notifies the regional superintendent and if the regional superintendent upon a check ascertains that the applicant has not been identified in the Sex Offender Database or Statewide Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth Database, then the regional superintendent shall issue to the applicant a certificate evidencing that as of the date specified by the Department of State Police the applicant has not been convicted of any of the enumerated criminal or drug offenses in subsection (c) of this Section or has not been convicted, within 7 years of the application for employment with the school district, of any other felony under the laws of this State or of any offense committed or attempted in any other state or against the laws of the United States that, if committed or attempted in this State, would have been punishable as a felony under the laws of this State and evidencing that as of the date that the regional superintendent conducted a check of the Statewide Sex Offender Database or Statewide Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth Database, the applicant has not been identified in the Database. The school board of any school district may rely on the certificate issued by any regional superintendent to that substitute teacher, concurrent part-time teacher, or concurrent educational support personnel employee or may initiate its own criminal history records check of the applicant through the Department of State Police and its own check of the Statewide Sex Offender Database or Statewide Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth Database as provided in this Section. Any unauthorized release of confidential information may be a violation of Section 7 of the Criminal Identification Act.
    (b-5) If a criminal history records check or check of the Statewide Sex Offender Database or Statewide Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth Database is performed by a regional superintendent for an applicant seeking employment as a substitute teacher with a school district, the regional superintendent may disclose to the State Board of Education whether the applicant has been issued a certificate under subsection (b) based on those checks. If the State Board receives information on an applicant under this subsection, then it must indicate in the Educator Licensure Information System for a 90-day period that the applicant has been issued or has not been issued a certificate.
    (c) No school board shall knowingly employ a person who has been convicted of any offense that would subject him or her to license suspension or revocation pursuant to Section 21B-80 of this Code, except as provided under subsection (b) of Section 21B-80. Further, no school board shall knowingly employ a person who has been found to be the perpetrator of sexual or physical abuse of any minor under 18 years of age pursuant to proceedings under Article II of the Juvenile Court Act of 1987. As a condition of employment, each school board must consider the status of a person who has been issued an indicated finding of abuse or neglect of a child by the Department of Children and Family Services under the Abused and Neglected Child Reporting Act or by a child welfare agency of another jurisdiction.
    (d) No school board shall knowingly employ a person for whom a criminal history records check and a Statewide Sex Offender Database check have not been initiated.
    (e) Within 10 days after a superintendent, regional office of education, or entity that provides background checks of license holders to public schools receives information of a pending criminal charge against a license holder for an offense set forth in Section 21B-80 of this Code, the superintendent, regional office of education, or entity must notify the State Superintendent of Education of the pending criminal charge.
    If permissible by federal or State law, no later than 15 business days after receipt of a record of conviction or of checking the Statewide Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth Database or the Statewide Sex Offender Database and finding a registration, the superintendent of the employing school board or the applicable regional superintendent shall, in writing, notify the State Superintendent of Education of any license holder who has been convicted of a crime set forth in Section 21B-80 of this Code. Upon receipt of the record of a conviction of or a finding of child abuse by a holder of any license issued pursuant to Article 21B or Section 34-8.1 or 34-83 of the School Code, the State Superintendent of Education may initiate licensure suspension and revocation proceedings as authorized by law. If the receipt of the record of conviction or finding of child abuse is received within 6 months after the initial grant of or renewal of a license, the State Superintendent of Education may rescind the license holder's license.
    (e-5) The superintendent of the employing school board shall, in writing, notify the State Superintendent of Education and the applicable regional superintendent of schools of any license holder whom he or she has reasonable cause to believe has committed an intentional act of abuse or neglect with the result of making a child an abused child or a neglected child, as defined in Section 3 of the Abused and Neglected Child Reporting Act, and that act resulted in the license holder's dismissal or resignation from the school district. This notification must be submitted within 30 days after the dismissal or resignation. The license holder must also be contemporaneously sent a copy of the notice by the superintendent. All correspondence, documentation, and other information so received by the regional superintendent of schools, the State Superintendent of Education, the State Board of Education, or the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board under this subsection (e-5) is confidential and must not be disclosed to third parties, except (i) as necessary for the State Superintendent of Education or his or her designee to investigate and prosecute pursuant to Article 21B of this Code, (ii) pursuant to a court order, (iii) for disclosure to the license holder or his or her representative, or (iv) as otherwise provided in this Article and provided that any such information admitted into evidence in a hearing is exempt from this confidentiality and non-disclosure requirement. Except for an act of willful or wanton misconduct, any superintendent who provides notification as required in this subsection (e-5) shall have immunity from any liability, whether civil or criminal or that otherwise might result by reason of such action.
    (f) After January 1, 1990 the provisions of this Section shall apply to all employees of persons or firms holding contracts with any school district including, but not limited to, food service workers, school bus drivers and other transportation employees, who have direct, daily contact with the pupils of any school in such district. For purposes of criminal history records checks and checks of the Statewide Sex Offender Database on employees of persons or firms holding contracts with more than one school district and assigned to more than one school district, the regional superintendent of the educational service region in which the contracting school districts are located may, at the request of any such school district, be responsible for receiving the authorization for a criminal history records check prepared by each such employee and submitting the same to the Department of State Police and for conducting a check of the Statewide Sex Offender Database for each employee. Any information concerning the record of conviction and identification as a sex offender of any such employee obtained by the regional superintendent shall be promptly reported to the president of the appropriate school board or school boards.
    (f-5) Upon request of a school or school district, any information obtained by a school district pursuant to subsection (f) of this Section within the last year must be made available to the requesting school or school district.
    (g) Prior to the commencement of any student teaching experience or required internship (which is referred to as student teaching in this Section) in the public schools, a student teacher is required to authorize a fingerprint-based criminal history records check. Authorization for and payment of the costs of the check must be furnished by the student teacher to the school district where the student teaching is to be completed. Upon receipt of this authorization and payment, the school district shall submit the student teacher's name, sex, race, date of birth, social security number, fingerprint images, and other identifiers, as prescribed by the Department of State Police, to the Department of State Police. The Department of State Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation shall furnish, pursuant to a fingerprint-based criminal history records check, records of convictions, forever and hereinafter, until expunged, to the president of the school board for the school district that requested the check. The Department shall charge the school district a fee for conducting the check, which fee must not exceed the cost of the inquiry and must be deposited into the State Police Services Fund. The school district shall further perform a check of the Statewide Sex Offender Database, as authorized by the Sex Offender Community Notification Law, and of the Statewide Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth Database, as authorized by the Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth Registration Act, for each student teacher. No school board may knowingly allow a person to student teach for whom a criminal history records check, a Statewide Sex Offender Database check, and a Statewide Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth Database check have not been completed and reviewed by the district.
    A copy of the record of convictions obtained from the Department of State Police must be provided to the student teacher. Any information concerning the record of convictions obtained by the president of the school board is confidential and may only be transmitted to the superintendent of the school district or his or her designee, the State Superintendent of Education, the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board, or, for clarification purposes, the Department of State Police or the Statewide Sex Offender Database or Statewide Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth Database. Any unauthorized release of confidential information may be a violation of Section 7 of the Criminal Identification Act.
    No school board shall knowingly allow a person to student teach who has been convicted of any offense that would subject him or her to license suspension or revocation pursuant to subsection (c) of Section 21B-80 of this Code, except as provided under subsection (b) of Section 21B-80. Further, no school board shall allow a person to student teach if he or she has been found to be the perpetrator of sexual or physical abuse of a minor under 18 years of age pursuant to proceedings under Article II of the Juvenile Court Act of 1987. Each school board must consider the status of a person to student teach who has been issued an indicated finding of abuse or neglect of a child by the Department of Children and Family Services under the Abused and Neglected Child Reporting Act or by a child welfare agency of another jurisdiction.
    (h) (Blank).
(Source: P.A. 101-72, eff. 7-12-19; 101-531, eff. 8-23-19; 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-21.10) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-21.10)
    Sec. 10-21.10. Electronic paging devices on school property. (a) The General Assembly finds and declares that the educational development of all persons to the limits of their capacities is a fundamental goal of the people of this State, that to achieve such goal it is essential to provide a safe and secure learning environment within the public schools, and that the unrestricted and unregulated use by students of pocket pagers and similar electronic paging devices on school grounds or in school buildings which are owned, occupied or leased by a school board for school purposes and activities adversely affects the educational environment, welfare and safety of students enrolled in the public schools, in that pocket pagers and similar electronic paging devices are being regularly used for the conduct of unlawful activities during school hours and on school property, including activities directly related to the unlawful possession, sale, delivery or other trafficking in drugs or other substances which constitute a "controlled substance" as that term is defined in the Illinois Controlled Substances Act. It is the purpose and intention of the General Assembly, in enacting this legislation, to reduce or eliminate the occurrence of such unlawful activities during school hours and on school property by restricting and regulating student use or possession of pocket pagers and similar electronic paging devices as provided in this Section, and by providing for the imposition of appropriate discipline and sanctions for any violation of the provisions of this Section.
    (b) No student shall use or have in his or her possession any pocket pager or similar electronic paging device while in any school building or on any school property, during regular school hours or at any other time, unless the use or possession of such device by such student has first been expressly authorized by the school board acting in accordance with standards developed as provided in subsection (c) for the granting of approved exceptions to the general prohibition of this Section against such use or possession.
    (c) The school board shall develop and promulgate written standards under which the board:
    (1) may authorize the use or possession of a pocket pager or similar electronic paging device by a student while in a school building or on school property as an approved exception to the general prohibition of this Section against such use or possession; and
    (2) may impose appropriate discipline or other sanctions against any student who violates any provision of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 86-791.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-21.11) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-21.11)
    Sec. 10-21.11. Infectious disease policies and rules. To develop policies and adopt rules relating to the appropriate manner of managing children with chronic infectious diseases, not inconsistent with guidelines published by the State Board of Education and the Illinois Department of Public Health. Such policies and rules must include evaluation of students with a chronic infectious disease on an individual case-by-case basis, and may include different provisions for different age groups, classes of instruction, types of educational institution, and other reasonable classifications, as the school board may find appropriate.
    This requirement applies to all school districts and public schools of this State, including special charter districts, Department of Corrections school districts, laboratory schools operated by the governing board of a public university, and alternative schools operated by a regional superintendent of schools.
(Source: P.A. 86-890; 86-1028.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-21.12) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-21.12)
    Sec. 10-21.12. Transfer of teachers. The employment of a teacher transferred from one board or administrative agent to the control of a new or different board or administrative agent shall be considered continuous employment if such transfer of employment occurred by reason of any of the following events:
        (1) a boundary change or the creation or
    	
reorganization of any school district pursuant to Article 7 or 11E; or
        (2) the deactivation or reactivation of any high
    	
school or elementary school pursuant to Section 10-22.22b; or
        (3) the creation, expansion, reduction or dissolution
    	
of a special education program pursuant to Section 10-22.31, or the creation, expansion, reduction or dissolution of a joint educational program established under Section 10-22.31a; or
        (4) the creation, expansion, reduction, termination
    	
or dissolution of any joint agreement program operated by a regional superintendent, governing board, or other administrative agent or any program operated pursuant to an Intergovernmental Joint Agreement. The changes made by this amendatory Act of 1990 are declaratory of existing law.
(Source: P.A. 94-213, eff. 7-14-05; 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22)
    Sec. 10-22. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 76-2268. Repealed by P.A. 89-159, eff. 1-1-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.1)
    Sec. 10-22.1. Book for records.
    To purchase a suitable book for their records.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.2)
    Sec. 10-22.2. Compensation of clerk or secretary.
    To allow the clerk or secretary a reasonable compensation for services, payable out of money not otherwise appropriated.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.3)
    Sec. 10-22.3. Liability insurance for school board members, school board employees and student teachers. To insure against any loss or liability of the school district, members of school boards, employees, volunteer personnel authorized in Sections 10-22.34, 10-22.34a and 10-22.34b of this Code and student teachers by reason of civil rights damage claims and suits, constitutional rights damage claims and suits and death and bodily injury and property damage claims and suits, including defense thereof, when damages are sought for negligent or wrongful acts allegedly committed during the scope of employment or under the direction of the school board. Such insurance shall be carried in a company licensed to write such coverage in this State.
(Source: P.A. 79-210.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.3a) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.3a)
    Sec. 10-22.3a. To provide for or to participate in provisions for insurance protection and benefits for its employees and their dependents including but not limited to retirement annuities, medical, surgical and hospitalization benefits in such types and amounts, if any, as shall be determined by the board, for the purpose of aiding in securing and retaining the services of competent employees. Where employee participation in such provisions is involved, the board, with the consent of the employee, may withhold deductions from the employee's salary necessary to defray the employee's share of such insurance costs. Such insurance or benefits may be contracted for only with an insurance company authorized to do business in this State. Such insurance may include provisions for employees and their dependents who rely on treatment by prayer or spiritual means alone for healing, in accordance with the tenets and practice of a recognized religious denomination.
    For purposes of this Section, the term "dependent" means an employee's spouse and any unmarried child (1) under the age of 19 years including (a) an adopted child and (b) a step-child or recognized child who lives with the employee in a regular parent-child relationship, or (2) under the age of 23 who is enrolled as a full-time student in any accredited school, college or university. Nothing contained in this Code may preclude an elected school board member from participating in a group health insurance program provided to an employee of the school district that the board member serves if the board member is a dependent of that employee.
(Source: P.A. 94-410, eff. 8-2-05.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.3b) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.3b)
    Sec. 10-22.3b. Health insurance for retired teachers. To make health insurance premium payments to the Teachers' Retirement System of the State of Illinois for those costs of participating in the health benefit program established under Article 16 of the Illinois Pension Code that are not paid by the System under Section 16-153.4 of the Illinois Pension Code and for the cost of premiums charged for participation in the health benefit program established under Section 6.5 of the State Employees Group Insurance Act of 1971, for eligible participants who retired from the school district.
(Source: P.A. 89-25, eff. 6-21-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.3c) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.3c)
    Sec. 10-22.3c. Orders of protection. To prohibit the disclosure by any school employee to any person against whom the school district has received a certified copy of an order of protection the location or address of the petitioner for the order of protection or the identity of the schools in the district in which the petitioner's child or children are enrolled. The school district shall maintain the copy of the order of protection in the records of the child or children enrolled in the district whose parent is the petitioner of an order of protection.
(Source: P.A. 87-437.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.3d)
    Sec. 10-22.3d. Woman's health care provider. Insurance protection and benefits for employees are subject to the provisions of Section 356r of the Illinois Insurance Code.
(Source: P.A. 89-514, eff. 7-17-96; 90-14, eff. 7-1-97.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.3e)
    Sec. 10-22.3e. Post-parturition care. Insurance protection and benefits for employees shall provide the post-parturition care benefits required to be covered by a policy of accident and health insurance under Section 356s of the Illinois Insurance Code.
(Source: P.A. 89-513, eff. 9-15-96; 90-14, eff. 7-1-97.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.3f)
    Sec. 10-22.3f. Required health benefits. Insurance protection and benefits for employees shall provide the post-mastectomy care benefits required to be covered by a policy of accident and health insurance under Section 356t and the coverage required under Sections 356g, 356g.5, 356g.5-1, 356u, 356w, 356x, 356z.6, 356z.8, 356z.9, 356z.11, 356z.12, 356z.13, 356z.14, 356z.15, 356z.22, 356z.25, 356z.26, 356z.29, 356z.30a, 356z.32, 356z.33, 356z.36, and 356z.41 of the Illinois Insurance Code. Insurance policies shall comply with Section 356z.19 of the Illinois Insurance Code. The coverage shall comply with Sections 155.22a, 355b, and 370c of the Illinois Insurance Code. The Department of Insurance shall enforce the requirements of this Section.
    Rulemaking authority to implement Public Act 95-1045, if any, is conditioned on the rules being adopted in accordance with all provisions of the Illinois Administrative Procedure Act and all rules and procedures of the Joint Committee on Administrative Rules; any purported rule not so adopted, for whatever reason, is unauthorized.
(Source: P.A. 100-24, eff. 7-18-17; 100-138, eff. 8-18-17; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18; 100-1024, eff. 1-1-19; 100-1057, eff. 1-1-19; 100-1102, eff. 1-1-19; 101-81, eff. 7-12-19; 101-281, eff. 1-1-20; 101-393, eff. 1-1-20; 101-461, eff. 1-1-20; 101-625, eff. 1-1-21.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.4) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.4)
    Sec. 10-22.4. Dismissal of teachers. To dismiss a teacher for incompetency, cruelty, negligence, immorality or other sufficient cause, to dismiss any teacher on the basis of performance and to dismiss any teacher whenever, in its opinion, he is not qualified to teach, or whenever, in its opinion, the interests of the schools require it, subject, however, to the provisions of Sections 24-10 to 24-16.5, inclusive. Temporary mental or physical incapacity to perform teaching duties, as found by a medical examination, is not a cause for dismissal. Marriage is not a cause of removal.
(Source: P.A. 97-8, eff. 6-13-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.4a) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.4a)
    Sec. 10-22.4a. Arbitration of disputes. The school board may enter into agreements with employees or representatives of employees to resolve disputes and grievances by binding arbitration before disinterested third parties.
(Source: P.A. 82-107.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.5) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.5)
    Sec. 10-22.5. Assignment of pupils to schools - Non-resident pupils - Tuition - Race discrimination. To assign pupils to the several schools in the district; to admit non-resident pupils when it can be done without prejudice to the rights of resident pupils and provide them with any services of the school including transportation; to fix the rates of tuition in accordance with Section 10-20.12a, and to collect and pay the same to the treasurer for the use of the district; but no pupil shall be excluded from or segregated in any such school on account of his color, race, sex, or nationality. Nothing herein shall be construed to permit or empower the State Board of Education to order, mandate or require busing or other transportation of pupils for the purpose of achieving racial balance in any school.
(Source: P.A. 81-1508.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.5a) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.5a)
    Sec. 10-22.5a. Attendance by dependents of United States military personnel, foreign exchange students, and certain nonresident pupils.
    (a) To enter into written agreements with cultural exchange organizations, or with nationally recognized eleemosynary institutions that promote excellence in the arts, mathematics, or science. The written agreements may provide for tuition free attendance at the local district school by foreign exchange students, or by nonresident pupils of eleemosynary institutions. The local board of education, as part of the agreement, may require that the cultural exchange program or the eleemosynary institutions provide services to the district in exchange for the waiver of nonresident tuition.
    To enter into written agreements with adjacent school districts to provide for tuition free attendance by a student of the adjacent district when requested for the student's health and safety by the student or parent and both districts determine that the student's health or safety will be served by such attendance. Districts shall not be required to enter into such agreements nor be required to alter existing transportation services due to the attendance of such non-resident pupils.
    (a-5) If, at the time of enrollment, a dependent of United States military personnel is housed in temporary housing located outside of a school district, but will be living within the district within 60 days after the time of initial enrollment, the dependent must be allowed to enroll, subject to the requirements of this subsection (a-5), and must not be charged tuition. Any United States military personnel attempting to enroll a dependent under this subsection (a-5) shall provide proof that the dependent will be living within the district within 60 days after the time of initial enrollment. Proof of residency may include, but is not limited to, postmarked mail addressed to the military personnel and sent to an address located within the district, a lease agreement for occupancy of a residence located within the district, or proof of ownership of a residence located within the district.
    (b) Nonresident pupils and foreign exchange students attending school on a tuition free basis under such agreements and nonresident dependents of United States military personnel attending school on a tuition free basis may be counted for the purposes of determining the apportionment of State aid provided under Section 18-8.05 or 18-8.15 of this Code. No organization or institution participating in agreements authorized under this Section may exclude any individual for participation in its program on account of the person's race, color, sex, religion or nationality.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.6) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.6)
    Sec. 10-22.6. Suspension or expulsion of pupils; school searches.
    (a) To expel pupils guilty of gross disobedience or misconduct, including gross disobedience or misconduct perpetuated by electronic means, pursuant to subsection (b-20) of this Section, and no action shall lie against them for such expulsion. Expulsion shall take place only after the parents have been requested to appear at a meeting of the board, or with a hearing officer appointed by it, to discuss their child's behavior. Such request shall be made by registered or certified mail and shall state the time, place and purpose of the meeting. The board, or a hearing officer appointed by it, at such meeting shall state the reasons for dismissal and the date on which the expulsion is to become effective. If a hearing officer is appointed by the board, he shall report to the board a written summary of the evidence heard at the meeting and the board may take such action thereon as it finds appropriate. If the board acts to expel a pupil, the written expulsion decision shall detail the specific reasons why removing the pupil from the learning environment is in the best interest of the school. The expulsion decision shall also include a rationale as to the specific duration of the expulsion. An expelled pupil may be immediately transferred to an alternative program in the manner provided in Article 13A or 13B of this Code. A pupil must not be denied transfer because of the expulsion, except in cases in which such transfer is deemed to cause a threat to the safety of students or staff in the alternative program.
    (b) To suspend or by policy to authorize the superintendent of the district or the principal, assistant principal, or dean of students of any school to suspend pupils guilty of gross disobedience or misconduct, or to suspend pupils guilty of gross disobedience or misconduct on the school bus from riding the school bus, pursuant to subsections (b-15) and (b-20) of this Section, and no action shall lie against them for such suspension. The board may by policy authorize the superintendent of the district or the principal, assistant principal, or dean of students of any school to suspend pupils guilty of such acts for a period not to exceed 10 school days. If a pupil is suspended due to gross disobedience or misconduct on a school bus, the board may suspend the pupil in excess of 10 school days for safety reasons.
    Any suspension shall be reported immediately to the parents or guardian of a pupil along with a full statement of the reasons for such suspension and a notice of their right to a review. The school board must be given a summary of the notice, including the reason for the suspension and the suspension length. Upon request of the parents or guardian, the school board or a hearing officer appointed by it shall review such action of the superintendent or principal, assistant principal, or dean of students. At such review, the parents or guardian of the pupil may appear and discuss the suspension with the board or its hearing officer. If a hearing officer is appointed by the board, he shall report to the board a written summary of the evidence heard at the meeting. After its hearing or upon receipt of the written report of its hearing officer, the board may take such action as it finds appropriate. If a student is suspended pursuant to this subsection (b), the board shall, in the written suspension decision, detail the specific act of gross disobedience or misconduct resulting in the decision to suspend. The suspension decision shall also include a rationale as to the specific duration of the suspension. A pupil who is suspended in excess of 20 school days may be immediately transferred to an alternative program in the manner provided in Article 13A or 13B of this Code. A pupil must not be denied transfer because of the suspension, except in cases in which such transfer is deemed to cause a threat to the safety of students or staff in the alternative program.
    (b-5) Among the many possible disciplinary interventions and consequences available to school officials, school exclusions, such as out-of-school suspensions and expulsions, are the most serious. School officials shall limit the number and duration of expulsions and suspensions to the greatest extent practicable, and it is recommended that they use them only for legitimate educational purposes. To ensure that students are not excluded from school unnecessarily, it is recommended that school officials consider forms of non-exclusionary discipline prior to using out-of-school suspensions or expulsions.
    (b-10) Unless otherwise required by federal law or this Code, school boards may not institute zero-tolerance policies by which school administrators are required to suspend or expel students for particular behaviors.
    (b-15) Out-of-school suspensions of 3 days or less may be used only if the student's continuing presence in school would pose a threat to school safety or a disruption to other students' learning opportunities. For purposes of this subsection (b-15), "threat to school safety or a disruption to other students' learning opportunities" shall be determined on a case-by-case basis by the school board or its designee. School officials shall make all reasonable efforts to resolve such threats, address such disruptions, and minimize the length of suspensions to the greatest extent practicable.
    (b-20) Unless otherwise required by this Code, out-of-school suspensions of longer than 3 days, expulsions, and disciplinary removals to alternative schools may be used only if other appropriate and available behavioral and disciplinary interventions have been exhausted and the student's continuing presence in school would either (i) pose a threat to the safety of other students, staff, or members of the school community or (ii) substantially disrupt, impede, or interfere with the operation of the school. For purposes of this subsection (b-20), "threat to the safety of other students, staff, or members of the school community" and "substantially disrupt, impede, or interfere with the operation of the school" shall be determined on a case-by-case basis by school officials. For purposes of this subsection (b-20), the determination of whether "appropriate and available behavioral and disciplinary interventions have been exhausted" shall be made by school officials. School officials shall make all reasonable efforts to resolve such threats, address such disruptions, and minimize the length of student exclusions to the greatest extent practicable. Within the suspension decision described in subsection (b) of this Section or the expulsion decision described in subsection (a) of this Section, it shall be documented whether other interventions were attempted or whether it was determined that there were no other appropriate and available interventions.
    (b-25) Students who are suspended out-of-school for longer than 4 school days shall be provided appropriate and available support services during the period of their suspension. For purposes of this subsection (b-25), "appropriate and available support services" shall be determined by school authorities. Within the suspension decision described in subsection (b) of this Section, it shall be documented whether such services are to be provided or whether it was determined that there are no such appropriate and available services.
    A school district may refer students who are expelled to appropriate and available support services.
    A school district shall create a policy to facilitate the re-engagement of students who are suspended out-of-school, expelled, or returning from an alternative school setting.
    (b-30) A school district shall create a policy by which suspended pupils, including those pupils suspended from the school bus who do not have alternate transportation to school, shall have the opportunity to make up work for equivalent academic credit. It shall be the responsibility of a pupil's parent or guardian to notify school officials that a pupil suspended from the school bus does not have alternate transportation to school.
    (c) The Department of Human Services shall be invited to send a representative to consult with the board at such meeting whenever there is evidence that mental illness may be the cause for expulsion or suspension.
    (c-5) School districts shall make reasonable efforts to provide ongoing professional development to teachers, administrators, school board members, school resource officers, and staff on the adverse consequences of school exclusion and justice-system involvement, effective classroom management strategies, culturally responsive discipline, the appropriate and available supportive services for the promotion of student attendance and engagement, and developmentally appropriate disciplinary methods that promote positive and healthy school climates.
    (d) The board may expel a student for a definite period of time not to exceed 2 calendar years, as determined on a case-by-case basis. A student who is determined to have brought one of the following objects to school, any school-sponsored activity or event, or any activity or event that bears a reasonable relationship to school shall be expelled for a period of not less than one year:
        (1) A firearm. For the purposes of this Section,
    	
"firearm" means any gun, rifle, shotgun, weapon as defined by Section 921 of Title 18 of the United States Code, firearm as defined in Section 1.1 of the Firearm Owners Identification Card Act, or firearm as defined in Section 24-1 of the Criminal Code of 2012. The expulsion period under this subdivision (1) may be modified by the superintendent, and the superintendent's determination may be modified by the board on a case-by-case basis.
        (2) A knife, brass knuckles or other knuckle weapon
    	
regardless of its composition, a billy club, or any other object if used or attempted to be used to cause bodily harm, including "look alikes" of any firearm as defined in subdivision (1) of this subsection (d). The expulsion requirement under this subdivision (2) may be modified by the superintendent, and the superintendent's determination may be modified by the board on a case-by-case basis.
Expulsion or suspension shall be construed in a manner consistent with the federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Act. A student who is subject to suspension or expulsion as provided in this Section may be eligible for a transfer to an alternative school program in accordance with Article 13A of the School Code.
    (d-5) The board may suspend or by regulation authorize the superintendent of the district or the principal, assistant principal, or dean of students of any school to suspend a student for a period not to exceed 10 school days or may expel a student for a definite period of time not to exceed 2 calendar years, as determined on a case-by-case basis, if (i) that student has been determined to have made an explicit threat on an Internet website against a school employee, a student, or any school-related personnel, (ii) the Internet website through which the threat was made is a site that was accessible within the school at the time the threat was made or was available to third parties who worked or studied within the school grounds at the time the threat was made, and (iii) the threat could be reasonably interpreted as threatening to the safety and security of the threatened individual because of his or her duties or employment status or status as a student inside the school.
    (e) To maintain order and security in the schools, school authorities may inspect and search places and areas such as lockers, desks, parking lots, and other school property and equipment owned or controlled by the school, as well as personal effects left in those places and areas by students, without notice to or the consent of the student, and without a search warrant. As a matter of public policy, the General Assembly finds that students have no reasonable expectation of privacy in these places and areas or in their personal effects left in these places and areas. School authorities may request the assistance of law enforcement officials for the purpose of conducting inspections and searches of lockers, desks, parking lots, and other school property and equipment owned or controlled by the school for illegal drugs, weapons, or other illegal or dangerous substances or materials, including searches conducted through the use of specially trained dogs. If a search conducted in accordance with this Section produces evidence that the student has violated or is violating either the law, local ordinance, or the school's policies or rules, such evidence may be seized by school authorities, and disciplinary action may be taken. School authorities may also turn over such evidence to law enforcement authorities.
    (f) Suspension or expulsion may include suspension or expulsion from school and all school activities and a prohibition from being present on school grounds.
    (g) A school district may adopt a policy providing that if a student is suspended or expelled for any reason from any public or private school in this or any other state, the student must complete the entire term of the suspension or expulsion in an alternative school program under Article 13A of this Code or an alternative learning opportunities program under Article 13B of this Code before being admitted into the school district if there is no threat to the safety of students or staff in the alternative program.
    (h) School officials shall not advise or encourage students to drop out voluntarily due to behavioral or academic difficulties.
    (i) A student may not be issued a monetary fine or fee as a disciplinary consequence, though this shall not preclude requiring a student to provide restitution for lost, stolen, or damaged property.
    (j) Subsections (a) through (i) of this Section shall apply to elementary and secondary schools, charter schools, special charter districts, and school districts organized under Article 34 of this Code.
    (k) The expulsion of children enrolled in programs funded under Section 1C-2 of this Code is subject to the requirements under paragraph (7) of subsection (a) of Section 2-3.71 of this Code.
    (l) Beginning with the 2018-2019 school year, an in-school suspension program provided by a school district for any students in kindergarten through grade 12 may focus on promoting non-violent conflict resolution and positive interaction with other students and school personnel. A school district may employ a school social worker or a licensed mental health professional to oversee an in-school suspension program in kindergarten through grade 12.
(Source: P.A. 100-105, eff. 1-1-18; 100-810, eff. 1-1-19; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18; 100-1035, eff. 8-22-18; 101-81, eff. 7-12-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.6a) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.6a)
    Sec. 10-22.6a. To provide by home instruction, correspondence courses or otherwise courses of instruction for pupils who are unable to attend school because of pregnancy. Such instruction shall be provided to the pupil (1) before the birth of the child when the pupil's physician, physician assistant, or advanced practice nurse has indicated to the district, in writing, that the pupil is medically unable to attend regular classroom instruction and (2) for up to 3 months following the birth of the child or a miscarriage. The instruction course shall be designed to offer educational experiences that are equivalent to those given to pupils at the same grade level in the district and that are designed to enable the pupil to return to the classroom.
(Source: P.A. 100-443, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.6b) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.6b)
    Sec. 10-22.6b. Non-disclosure of information. Except as otherwise provided in the "Abused and Neglected Child Reporting Act" or other applicable State or federal law, to permit school officials to withhold, from any person, information on the whereabouts of any child removed from school premises when the child has been taken into protective custody as a victim of suspected child abuse. School officials shall direct such person to the Department of Children and Family Services, or to the local law enforcement agency if appropriate.
(Source: P.A. 85-238.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.7) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.7)
    Sec. 10-22.7. Repairs and improvements. To repair and improve schoolhouses and furnish them with the necessary fixtures, furniture, apparatus, libraries, and fuel, to receive and review the reports of architects and professional engineers licensed in the State of Illinois prescribed in Section 2-3.12, to set priorities for the recommendations set forth in the report, and to ensure that those facilities used for student occupancy under their control will remain in compliance with the building code authorized in Section 2-3.12.
(Source: P.A. 87-984.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.8) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.8)
    Sec. 10-22.8. Sale of personal property.
    To sell at public or private sale any personal property belonging to the school district, and either not needed for school purposes or available through an arrangement under which such personal property may be leased by the district from the purchaser.
(Source: P.A. 90-789, eff. 8-14-98.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.9) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.9)
    Sec. 10-22.9. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31. Repealed by P.A. 89-159, eff. 1-1-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.10) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.10)
    Sec. 10-22.10. Control and supervision of school houses and school grounds.
    To have the control and supervision of all public schoolhouses in their district, and to grant the temporary use of them, when not occupied by schools, for religious meetings and Sunday schools, for evening schools and literary societies, and for such other meetings as the board deems proper; to grant the use of assembly halls and class rooms when not otherwise needed, including light, heat and attendants, for public lectures, concerts, and other educational and social interests, under such provisions and control as they may see fit to impose; to grant the use of school grounds under such provisions and control as they may see fit to impose and to conduct, or provide for the conducting of recreational, social and civic activities in the school buildings or on the school grounds or both.
(Source: Laws 1967, p. 264.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.10a) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.10a)
    Sec. 10-22.10a. Inspection for drugs. School boards are empowered to adopt a policy to authorize school officials to request the assistance of law enforcement officials for the purpose of conducting reasonable searches of school grounds and lockers for illegal drugs, including searches conducted through the use of specially trained dogs.
(Source: P.A. 86-850.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.11) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.11)
    Sec. 10-22.11. Lease of school property.
    (a) To lease school property to another school district, municipality or body politic and corporate for a term of not to exceed 25 years, except as otherwise provided in this Section, and upon such terms and conditions as may be agreed if in the opinion of the school board use of such property will not be needed by the district during the term of such lease; provided, the school board shall not make or renew any lease for a term longer than 10 years, nor alter the terms of any lease whose unexpired term may exceed 10 years without the vote of 2/3 of the full membership of the board.
    (b) Whenever the school board considers such action advisable and in the best interests of the school district, to lease vacant school property for a period not exceeding 51 years to a private not for profit school organization for use in the care of persons with a mental disability who are trainable and educable in the district or in the education of the gifted children in the district. Before leasing such property to a private not for profit school organization, the school board must adopt a resolution for the leasing of such property, fixing the period and price therefor, and order submitted to referendum at an election to be held in the district as provided in the general election law, the question of whether the lease should be entered into. Thereupon, the secretary shall certify to the proper election authorities the proposition for submission in accordance with the general election law. If the majority of the voters voting upon the proposition vote in favor of the leasing, the school board may proceed with the leasing. The proposition shall be in substantially the following form:
--------------------------------------------------------------
    Shall School District No. ..... of
..... County, Illinois lease to            YES
..... (here name and identify the
lessee) the following described vacant  ----------------------
school property (here describe the
property) for a term of ..... years        NO
for the sum of ..... Dollars?
--------------------------------------------------------------
    This paragraph (b) shall not be construed in such a manner as to relieve the responsibility of the Board of Education as set out in Article 14 of the School Code.
    (c) To lease school buildings and land to suitable lessees for educational purposes or for any other purpose which serves the interests of the community, for a term not to exceed 25 years and upon such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon by the parties, when such buildings and land are declared by the board to be unnecessary or unsuitable or inconvenient for a school or the uses of the district during the term of the lease and when, in the opinion of the board, the best interests of the residents of the school district will be enhanced by entering into such a lease. Such leases shall include provisions for adequate insurance for both liability and property damage or loss, and reasonable charges for maintenance and depreciation of such buildings and land.
(Source: P.A. 99-143, eff. 7-27-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.12) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.12)
    Sec. 10-22.12. Lease of property for school purposes. To lease, for a period not exceeding 99 years, any building, rooms, grounds and appurtenances to be used by the district for the use of schools or for school administration purposes; and to pay for the use of such leased property in accordance with the terms of the lease. The board shall not make or renew any lease for a term longer than 10 years, nor alter the terms of any lease whose unexpired term may exceed 10 years without the vote of 2/3 of the full membership of the board.
(Source: P.A. 80-1044.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.13) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.13)
    Sec. 10-22.13. Necessity, suitability or convenience of site or building.
    To decide when a site or building has become unnecessary, unsuitable or inconvenient for a school.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.13a)
    Sec. 10-22.13a. Zoning changes, variations, and special uses for school district property; zoning compliance. To seek zoning changes, variations, or special uses for property held or controlled by the school district.
    A school district is subject to and its school board must comply with any valid local government zoning ordinance or resolution that applies where the pertinent part of the building, structure, or site owned by the school district is located. The changes to this Section made by this amendatory Act of the 99th General Assembly are declarative of existing law and do not change the substantive operation of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 99-890, eff. 8-25-16.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.14) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.14)
    Sec. 10-22.14. Borrowing money and issuing bonds. To borrow money, and issue bonds for the purposes and in the manner provided by this Act.
    When bond proceeds from the sale of bonds include a premium, or when the proceeds of bonds issued for fire prevention, safety, energy conservation, and school security purposes as specified in Section 17-2.11 are invested as authorized by law, the board shall determine by resolution whether the interest earned on the investment of bond proceeds authorized under Section 17-2.11 or the premium realized in the sale of bonds, as the case may be, is to be used for the purposes for which the bonds were issued or, instead, for payment of the principal indebtedness and interest on those bonds.
    When bonds, other than bonds issued for fire prevention, safety, energy conservation, and school security purposes as specified in Section 17-2.11 are issued by any school district, and the purposes for which the bonds have been issued are accomplished and paid for in full, and there remain funds on hand from the proceeds of the bonds so issued, the board by resolution may transfer those excess funds to the operations and maintenance fund.
    When bonds are issued by any school district for fire prevention, safety, energy conservation, and school security purposes as specified in Section 17-2.11, and the purposes for which the bonds have been issued are accomplished and paid in full, and there remain funds on hand from the proceeds of the bonds issued, the board by resolution shall use those excess funds (1) for other authorized fire prevention, safety, energy conservation, and school security purposes as specified in Section 17-2.11 or (2) for transfer to the Bond and Interest Fund for payment of principal and interest on those bonds. If any transfer is made to the Bond and Interest Fund, the secretary of the school board shall within 30 days notify the county clerk of the amount of that transfer and direct the clerk to abate the taxes to be extended for the purposes of principal and interest payments on the respective bonds issued under Section 17-2.11 by an amount equal to such transfer.
(Source: P.A. 86-970; 87-984.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.15) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.15)
    Sec. 10-22.15. Flag and flag staff.
    To furnish each school with a flag and a staff as provided by law.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.16)
    Sec. 10-22.16. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 83-1362. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.17)
    Sec. 10-22.17. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.18) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.18)
    Sec. 10-22.18. Kindergartens. To establish kindergartens for the instruction of children between the ages of 4 and 6 years, if in their judgment the public interest requires it, and to pay the necessary expenses thereof out of the school funds of the district. Upon petition of at least 50 parents or guardians of children between the ages of 4 and 6, residing within any school district and within one mile of the public school where such kindergarten is proposed to be established, the board of directors shall, if funds are available, establish a kindergarten in connection with the public school designated in the petition and maintain it as long as the annual average daily attendance therein is not less than 15. The board may establish a kindergarten with half-day attendance or with full-day attendance. If the board establishes full-day kindergarten, it shall also establish half-day kindergarten. No one shall be employed to teach in a kindergarten who does not hold a certificate as provided by law.
(Source: P.A. 84-1308.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.18a) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.18a)
    Sec. 10-22.18a. Child care and training centers - Charges - Public aid payments for certain children). To establish Child Care and Training Centers for children under the age of compulsory school attendance for the purpose of providing them (1) social and educational guidance and developmental aids supplemental to parental care and training designed to assist them in attaining their greatest potential during their school years and adult life and (2) care and services, in addition to the services specified in (1), required because of the absence from home for all or part of the day of their parents or other persons in charge of their care as a result of employment or other reason. The board may also make the facilities of the Centers available before and after as well as during regular school hours to school age and preschool age children who may benefit thereby, including children who require care and supervision pending the return of their parents or other persons in charge of their care from employment or other activity requiring absence from the home.
    In establishing standards for the Centers, the board shall take into account standards established by the Department of Children and Family Services for like facilities. The board shall pay the necessary expenses out of school funds of the district, subject to State payment for certain children as hereinafter provided, and may charge for care and training of children for whom the State does not assume responsibility. The charge shall not exceed the per capita cost of the Center and, to the extent feasible, shall be fixed at a level which will permit utilization of the Center by employed parents of low or moderate income.
    The Department of Human Services shall pay to the district the cost of care and training provided in the Centers for any child who is a recipient of financial aid under "The Illinois Public Aid Code", approved April 11, 1967, as amended. The Department shall submit to the board written notice designating each child for whom it assumes the cost of care and training. The board shall submit claims for payment at the end of each monthly period. If satisfied of their correctness, the Department shall approve the claims and provide for their payment out of funds appropriated to it for such purposes and from Federal funds available therefor.
    The board may permit any other State or local governmental agency or private agency providing care for children to purchase care and training in the Centers for children under their charge.
    After July 1, 1970 when the provisions of Section 10-20.20 become operative in the district, children in a Child Care and Training Center shall be transferred to the kindergarten established under that Section for such portion of the day as may be required for the kindergarten program, and only the pro-rated costs of care and training provided in the Center for the remaining period shall be charged to the Illinois Department or other persons or agencies paying for such care.
(Source: P.A. 89-507, eff. 7-1-97.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.18b) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.18b)
    Sec. 10-22.18b. Before and after school programs. To develop and maintain before school and after school programs for students in kindergarten through the 6th grade. Such programs may include time for homework, physical exercise, afternoon nutritional snacks and educational offerings which are in addition to those offered during the regular school day. The chief administrator in each district shall be a certified teacher or a person who meets the requirements for supervising a day care center under the Child Care Act of 1969. Individual programs shall be coordinated by certified teachers or by persons who meet the requirements for supervising a day care center under the Child Care Act of 1969. Additional employees who are not so qualified may also be employed for such programs.
    The schedule of these programs may follow the work calendar of the local community rather than the regular school calendar. Parents or guardians of the participating students shall be responsible for providing transportation for the students to and from the programs. The school board may charge parents of participating students a fee, not to exceed the actual cost of such before and after school programs.
(Source: P.A. 83-639.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.18c) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.18c)
    Sec. 10-22.18c. Model day care services program. Local school districts may establish, in cooperation with the State Board of Education, a model program for the provision of day care services in a school. The program shall be administered by the local school district and shall be funded from monies available from private and public sources. Student parents shall not be charged a fee for the day care services; school personnel also may utilize the services, but shall be charged a fee. The program shall be supervised by a trained child care professional who is qualified to teach students parenting skills. As part of the program, the school shall offer a course in child behavior in which students shall receive course credits for helping to care for the children in the program while learning parenting skills. The State Board of Education shall evaluate the programs' effectiveness in reducing school absenteeism and dropouts among teenage parents and shall report to the General Assembly concerning its findings after the program has been in operation for 2 years.
(Source: P.A. 85-769.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.18d) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.18d)
    Sec. 10-22.18d. Parental institutes. A school district may utilize up to two days allowed by law for teachers' institutes to conduct parental institutes for the parents and guardians of children attending the district. No district may utilize teachers' institute days as parental institute days without the consent of the district's inservice advisory committee created under Section 3-11. If a district does not have an inservice advisory committee, parental institute days must be approved by the district's teaching staff.
    Parental institutes shall be designed by the school district upon consultation with the district's teaching staff, administrators, and parents' organizations. The district may provide appropriate personnel, including district staff, to conduct, attend, or participate in all or any portion of the institutes.
    Parental institutes shall provide information on such topics as the district shall deem necessary to achieve the following purposes:
        (1) Enhance parental involvement in the education of
    	
the district's students;
        (2) Improve parental communication and involvement
    	
with the district;
        (3) Enhance parental knowledge of child development,
    	
district programs, school conditions, and societal problems threatening students; and
        (4) Improve parental skill development.
    Districts shall use every means available to inform parents and guardians about parental institutes and to encourage attendance at and active participation in such events.
    Parental institutes may be held during that period of the day which is not part of the regular school day and may be held on Saturdays. Days scheduled for parental institutes may be scheduled separately for different grade levels and different attendance centers of the district.
    Districts may establish reasonable fees, not to exceed the cost of holding parental institutes, for attendance and shall waive any fees so established for any parents or guardians who may be unable to afford such fees. Nothing shall preclude districts from applying for or accepting private funds to conduct parental institutes.
(Source: P.A. 86-1250.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.19) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.19)
    Sec. 10-22.19. Sidewalks, bridges, culverts and other approaches.
    To appropriate school funds for the construction of such sidewalks, bridges, culverts and other approaches leading to the schoolhouse or school grounds as are necessary for the convenience and safety of pupils attending such school, but such approaches shall not exceed one-half mile in length.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 3420.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.19a)
    Sec. 10-22.19a. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 91-830, eff. 7-1-00. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.20) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.20)
    Sec. 10-22.20. Classes for adults and youths whose schooling has been interrupted; conditions for State reimbursement; use of child care facilities.
    (a) To establish special classes for the instruction (1) of persons of age 21 years or over and (2) of persons less than age 21 and not otherwise in attendance in public school, for the purpose of providing adults in the community and youths whose schooling has been interrupted with such additional basic education, vocational skill training, and other instruction as may be necessary to increase their qualifications for employment or other means of self-support and their ability to meet their responsibilities as citizens, including courses of instruction regularly accepted for graduation from elementary or high schools and for Americanization and high school equivalency testing review classes.
    The board shall pay the necessary expenses of such classes out of school funds of the district, including costs of student transportation and such facilities or provision for child-care as may be necessary in the judgment of the board to permit maximum utilization of the courses by students with children, and other special needs of the students directly related to such instruction. The expenses thus incurred shall be subject to State reimbursement, as provided in Section 2-12.5 of the Public Community College Act. The board may make a tuition charge for persons taking instruction who are not subject to State reimbursement, such tuition charge not to exceed the per capita cost of such classes.
    The cost of such instruction, including the additional expenses herein authorized, shall be assumed in its entirety from funds appropriated by the State to the Illinois Community College Board as provided in Section 2-12.5 of the Public Community College Act.
    (b) The Illinois Community College Board shall establish the standards for the courses of instruction reimbursed under this Section. The Illinois Community College Board shall supervise the administration of the programs. The Illinois Community College Board shall determine the cost of instruction in accordance with standards established by the Illinois Community College Board, including therein other incidental costs as herein authorized, which shall serve as the basis of State reimbursement in accordance with the provisions of the Public Community College Act. In the approval of programs and the determination of the cost of instruction, the Illinois Community College Board shall provide for the maximum utilization of federal funds for such programs.
    (c) (Blank).
    (d) (Blank).
    (e) (Blank).
    (f) (Blank).
    (g) (Blank).
    (h) (Blank).
    (i) (Blank).
    (j) In addition to claiming reimbursement under this Section, a school district may claim evidence-based funding under Section 18-8.15 for any student under age 21 who is enrolled in courses accepted for graduation from elementary or high school and who otherwise meets the requirements of Section 18-8.15.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17; 101-289, eff. 8-9-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.20a) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.20a)
    Sec. 10-22.20a. Advanced vocational training program, and career education. To enter into joint agreements with community college districts and other school districts for the purpose of providing career education or advanced vocational training of students in the 11th and higher grades who desire preparation for a trade. Transportation for students to any facility covered by a joint agreement as described in this Section shall be provided by the participating school district, or by the participating school district in conjunction with other school districts. Joint agreements entered into under this Section may include provisions for joint authority to acquire and improve sites, construct and equip facilities thereon and lease and equip facilities deemed necessary by the parties to the joint agreement, to maintain programs and to provide for financing of the foregoing jointly by the respective parties, all in accordance with the terms of the joint agreement.
    Nothing herein contained shall be construed to restrict or prohibit the rights of community college districts or school districts to enter into joint agreements under the provisions of the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, as now or hereinafter amended.
    The duration of the career education or advanced vocational training program shall be such period as the school district may approve but it may not exceed 2 years for any school district pupil. Participation in the program is accorded the same credit toward a high school diploma as time spent in other courses.
    The participating community college shall bill each participating student's school district for an amount equal to the per capita cost of operating the community college attended or a charge for participation may be made in accordance with the joint agreement between the community college district and the student's school district. Such agreement shall not provide for payments in excess of the actual cost of operating the course or courses in which the student is enrolled. Participating high schools may use State aid monies to pay the charges.
    The community college instructors teaching in such programs need not be certified by the State Teacher Certification Board.
(Source: P.A. 79-76.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.20b) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.20b)
    Sec. 10-22.20b. To appoint a person, who meets the standards of qualification and certification established by the Illinois Community College Board, as director of adult education to be responsible for the development and general supervision of the adult education program described in Section 10-22.20 and the Adult Education Act.
(Source: P.A. 91-830, eff. 7-1-01.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.20c) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.20c)
    Sec. 10-22.20c. Tutorial programs. To establish and implement peer assistance, tutorial programs whereby qualified, able students assist less able students with their studies and course work, and to provide appropriate recognition for students furnishing such tutorial services. In addition, a school board is authorized to cooperate with institutions of higher education and may accept tutorial services provided by qualified students of such institutions under the Educational Partnership Act, as now or hereafter amended.
(Source: P.A. 84-712.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.21) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.21)
    Sec. 10-22.21. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31. Repealed by P.A. 89-159, eff. 1-1-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.21a) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.21a)
    Sec. 10-22.21a. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1967, p. 2186. Repealed by P.A. 89-159, eff. 1-1-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.21b) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.21b)
    Sec. 10-22.21b. Administering medication.
    (a) In this Section, "asthma action plan" has the meaning given to that term under Section 22-30.
    (b) To provide for the administration of medication to students. It shall be the policy of the State of Illinois that the administration of medication to students during regular school hours and during school-related activities should be discouraged unless absolutely necessary for the critical health and well-being of the student. Under no circumstances shall teachers or other non-administrative school employees, except certified school nurses and non-certificated registered professional nurses, be required to administer medication to students. This Section shall not prohibit a school district from adopting guidelines for self-administration of medication by students that are consistent with this Section and this Code. This Section shall not prohibit any school employee from providing emergency assistance to students.
    (c) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a school district must allow any student with an asthma action plan, an Individual Health Care Action Plan, an Illinois Food Allergy Emergency Action Plan and Treatment Authorization Form, a plan pursuant to Section 504 of the federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973, or a plan pursuant to the federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Act to self-administer any medication required under those plans if the student's parent or guardian provides the school district with (i) written permission for the student's self-administration of medication and (ii) written authorization from the student's physician, physician assistant, or advanced practice registered nurse for the student to self-administer the medication. A parent or guardian must also provide to the school district the prescription label for the medication, which must contain the name of the medication, the prescribed dosage, and the time or times at which or the circumstances under which the medication is to be administered. Information received by a school district under this subsection shall be kept on file in the office of the school nurse or, in the absence of a school nurse, the school's administrator.
    (d) Each school district must adopt an emergency action plan for a student who self-administers medication under subsection (c). The plan must include both of the following:
        (1) A plan of action in the event a student is unable
    	
to self-administer medication.
        (2) The situations in which a school must call 9-1-1.
    (e) A school district and its employees and agents shall incur no liability, except for willful and wanton conduct, as a result of any injury arising from the self-administration of medication by a student under subsection (c). The student's parent or guardian must sign a statement to this effect, which must acknowledge that the parent or guardian must indemnify and hold harmless the school district and its employees and agents against any claims, except a claim based on willful and wanton conduct, arising out of the self-administration of medication by a student.
(Source: P.A. 101-205, eff. 1-1-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.22) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.22)
    Sec. 10-22.22. Transportation for pupils-Tuition.
    To provide free transportation for pupils, and where in its judgment the interests of the district and of the pupils therein will be best subserved by so doing the school board may permit the pupils in the district or in any particular grade to attend the schools of other districts and may permit any pupil to attend an area secondary vocational school operated by a public school district or a public or non-public vocational school within the State of Illinois or adjacent states approved by the Board of Vocational Education, and may provide free transportation for such pupils and shall pay the tuition of such pupils in the schools attended; such tuition shall be based upon per capita cost computed in the following manner: The cost of conducting and maintaining any area secondary vocational school facility shall be first determined and shall include the following expenses applicable only to such educational facility under rules and regulations established by the Board of Vocational Education and Rehabilitation as follows:
        a. Salaries of teachers, vocational counselors, and
    	
supporting professional workers, necessary non-certified workers, clerks, custodial employees, and any district taxes specifically for their pension and retirement benefits.
        b. Equipment and supplies necessary for program
    	
operation.
        c. Administrative costs.
        d. Operation of physical plant, including heat,
    	
light, water, repairs, and maintenance.
        e. Auxiliary service, not including any
    	
transportation cost.
    From such total cost thus determined there shall be deducted the State reimbursement due on account of such educational facility for the same year, not including any State reimbursement for area secondary vocational school transportation. Such net cost shall be divided by the average number of pupils in average daily attendance in such area secondary vocational school facility for the school year in order to arrive at the net per capita tuition cost. Such costs shall be computed on pupils regularly enrolled in an area secondary vocational school on the basis of one-sixth day for every class hour attended pursuant to such enrollment. Provided, that the board subject to the approval of the county superintendent of schools may determine what schools outside of their district such pupils shall attend. This section does not require the board of directors or board of education of any district to admit pupils from another district.
(Source: P.A. 94-213, eff. 7-14-05.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.22a)
    Sec. 10-22.22a. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 81-1508. Repealed by P.A. 95-793, eff. 1-1-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.22b) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.22b)
    Sec. 10-22.22b. (a) The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the deactivation of a high school facility under subsection (c). Where in its judgment the interests of the district and of the students therein will be best served, to deactivate any high school facility or elementary school facility in the district and send the students of such high school in grades 9 through 12 or such elementary school in grades kindergarten through 8, as applicable, to schools in other districts. Such action may be taken only with the approval of the voters in the district and the approval, by proper resolution, of the school board of the receiving district. The board of the district contemplating deactivation shall, by proper resolution, cause the proposition to deactivate the school facility to be submitted to the voters of the district at a regularly scheduled election. Notice shall be published at least 10 days prior to the date of the election at least once in one or more newspapers published in the district or, if no newspaper is published in the district, in one or more newspapers with a general circulation within the district. The notice shall be substantially in the following form:
NOTICE OF REFERENDUM TO
DEACTIVATE THE ... SCHOOL FACILITY
IN SCHOOL DISTRICT NO. ........
    Notice is hereby given that on (insert date), a referendum will be held in ........ County (Counties) for the purpose of voting for or against the proposition to deactivate the ...... School facility in School District No. ...... and to send pupils in ...... School to School District(s) No. .......
    The polls will be open at .... o'clock ... m., and close at .... o'clock ... m. of the same day.
          ............
Dated (insert date).
 
The proposition shall be in substantially the following form:
--------------------------------------------------------------
    Shall the Board
of Education of School
District No. ....,                       YES
..... County, Illinois, be
authorized to deactivate            --------------------------
the ....  School facility
and to send pupils in .......             NO
 School to School
District(s) No. .....?
--------------------------------------------------------------
If the majority of those voting upon the proposition in the district contemplating deactivation vote in favor of the proposition, the board of that district, upon approval of the board of the receiving district, shall execute a contract with the receiving district providing for the reassignment of students to the receiving district. If the deactivating district seeks to send its students to more than one district, it shall execute a contract with each receiving district. The length of the contract shall be for 2 school years, but the districts may renew the contract for additional one year or 2 year periods. Contract renewals shall be executed by January 1 of the year in which the existing contract expires. If the majority of those voting upon the proposition do not vote in favor of the proposition, the school facility may not be deactivated.
    The sending district shall pay to the receiving district an amount agreed upon by the 2 districts.
    When the deactivation of school facilities becomes effective pursuant to this Section, the provisions of subsection (h) of Section 24-11 of this Code relative to the contractual continued service status of teachers having contractual continued service whose positions are transferred from one board to the control of a different board shall apply, and the positions at the school facilities being deactivated held by teachers, as that term is defined in subsection (a) of Section 24-11 of this Code, having contractual continued service with the school district at the time of the deactivation shall be transferred to the control of the board or boards who shall be receiving the district's students on the following basis:
        (1) positions of such teachers in contractual
    	
continued service that were full time positions shall be transferred to the control of whichever of such boards such teachers shall request with the teachers making such requests proceeding in the order of those with the greatest length of continuing service with the board to those with the shortest length of continuing service with the board, provided that the number selecting one board over another board or other boards shall not exceed that proportion of the school students going to such board or boards; and
        (2) positions of such teachers in contractual
    	
continued service that were full time positions and as to which there is no selection left under subparagraph 1 hereof shall be transferred to the appropriate board.
    The contractual continued service status of any teacher thereby transferred to another district is not lost and the receiving board is subject to the School Code with respect to such transferred teacher in the same manner as if such teacher was the district's employee during the time such teacher was actually employed by the board of the deactivating district from which the position was transferred.
    When the deactivation of school facilities becomes effective pursuant to this Section, the provisions of subsection (b) of Section 10-23.5 of this Code relative to the transfer of educational support personnel employees shall apply, and the positions at the school facilities being deactivated that are held by educational support personnel employees at the time of the deactivation shall be transferred to the control of the board or boards that will be receiving the district's students on the following basis:
        (A) positions of such educational support personnel
    	
employees that were full-time positions shall be transferred to the control of whichever of the boards the employees request, with the educational support personnel employees making these requests proceeding in the order of those with the greatest length of continuing service with the board to those with the shortest length of continuing service with the board, provided that the number selecting one board over another board or other boards must not exceed that proportion of students going to such board or boards; and
        (B) positions of such educational support personnel
    	
employees that were full-time positions and as to which there is no selection left under subdivision (A) shall be transferred to the appropriate board.
The length of continuing service of any educational support personnel employee thereby transferred to another district is not lost and the receiving board is subject to this Code with respect to that transferred educational support personnel employee in the same manner as if the educational support personnel employee was the district's employee during the time the educational support personnel employee was actually employed by the board of the deactivating district from which the position was transferred.
    (b) The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the reactivation of a high school facility which is deactivated under subsection (c). The sending district may, with the approval of the voters in the district, reactivate the school facility which was deactivated. The board of the district seeking to reactivate the school facility shall, by proper resolution, cause the proposition to reactivate to be submitted to the voters of the district at a regularly scheduled election. Notice shall be published at least 10 days prior to the date of the election at least once in one or more newspapers published in the district or, if no newspaper is published in the district, in one or more newspapers with a general circulation within the district. The notice shall be substantially in the following form:
NOTICE OF REFERENDUM TO
REACTIVATE THE ...... SCHOOL FACILITY
IN SCHOOL DISTRICT NO. ......
    Notice is hereby given that on (insert date), a referendum will be held in ...... County (Counties) for the purpose of voting for or against the proposition to reactivate the ..... School facility in School District No. ..... and to discontinue sending pupils of School District No. ...... to School District(s) No. .....
    The polls will be opened at ... o'clock .. m., and closed at ... o'clock .. m. of the same day.
          ............
Dated (insert date).
 
The proposition shall be in substantially the following form:
--------------------------------------------------------------
    Shall the Board
of Education of School                       YES
District No. ......,
...... County, Illinois,
be  authorized  to                        --------------------
reactivate the ....  School
facility and to discontinue sending
pupils of School District No. ....            NO
to School District(s) No. ......?
--------------------------------------------------------------
    (c) The school board of any unit school district which experienced a strike by a majority of its certified employees that endured for over 6 months during the regular school term of the 1986-1987 school year, and which during the ensuing 1987-1988 school year had an enrollment in grades 9 through 12 of less than 125 students may, when in its judgment the interests of the district and of the students therein will be best served thereby, deactivate the high school facilities within the district for the regular term of the 1988-1989 school year and, for that school year only, send the students of such high school in grades 9 through 12 to schools in adjoining or adjacent districts. Such action may only be taken: (a) by proper resolution of the school board deactivating its high school facilities and the approval, by proper resolution, of the school board of the receiving district or districts, and (b) pursuant to a contract between the sending and each receiving district, which contract or contracts: (i) shall provide for the reassignment of all students of the deactivated high school in grades 9 through 12 to the receiving district or districts; (ii) shall apply only to the regular school term of the 1988-1989 school year; (iii) shall not be subject to renewal or extension; and (iv) shall require the sending district to pay to the receiving district the cost of educating each student who is reassigned to the receiving district, such costs to be an amount agreed upon by the sending and receiving district but not less than the per capita cost of maintaining the high school in the receiving district during the 1987-1988 school year. Any high school facility deactivated pursuant to this subsection for the regular school term of the 1988-1989 school year shall be reactivated by operation of law as of the end of the regular term of the 1988-1989 school year. The status as a unit school district of a district which deactivates its high school facilities pursuant to this subsection shall not be affected by reason of such deactivation of its high school facilities and such district shall continue to be deemed in law a school district maintaining grades kindergarten through 12 for all purposes relating to the levy, extension, collection and payment of the taxes of the district under Article 17 for the 1988-1989 school year.
    (d) Whenever a school facility is reactivated pursuant to the provisions of this Section, then all teachers in contractual continued service who were honorably dismissed or transferred as part of the deactivation process, in addition to other rights they may have under the School Code, shall be recalled or transferred back to the original district.
(Source: P.A. 99-657, eff. 7-28-16.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.22c) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.22c)
    Sec. 10-22.22c. (a) Subject to the following provisions of this Section two or more contiguous school districts each of which has an enrollment in grades 9 through 12 of less than 600 students may, when in their judgment the interest of the districts and of the students therein will be best served, jointly operate one or more cooperative high schools. Such action shall be taken for a minimum period of 20 school years, and may be taken only with the approval of the voters of each district. A district with 600 or more students enrolled in grades 9 through 12 may qualify for inclusion with one or more districts having less than 600 such students by receiving a size waiver from the State Board of Education based on a finding that such inclusion would significantly increase the educational opportunities of the district's students, and by meeting the other prerequisites of this Section. The board of each district contemplating such joint operation shall, by proper resolution, cause the proposition to enter into such joint operation to be submitted to the voters of the district at a regularly scheduled election. Notice shall be published at least 10 days prior to the date of the election at least once in one or more newspapers published in the district or, if no newspaper is published in the district, in one or more newspapers with a general circulation within the district. The notice shall be substantially in the following form:
NOTICE OF REFERENDUM FOR SCHOOL DISTRICT
NO. ....... AND SCHOOL DISTRICT NO. .......
TO JOINTLY OPERATE (A) COOPERATIVE HIGH
SCHOOL (SCHOOLS)
    Notice is hereby given that on (insert date), a referendum will be held in ....... County (Counties) for the purpose of voting for or against the proposition for School District No. ....... and School District No. ....... to jointly operate (a) cooperative high school (schools).
    The polls will be open at ....... o'clock ... m., and close at ....... o'clock ... m., of the same day.
A ........ B ........
Dated (insert date).
Regional Superintendent of Schools
 
    The proposition shall be in substantially the following form:
--------------------------------------------------------------
Shall the Board of Education of
School District No. ...., .....                 YES
County (Counties), Illinois be
authorized to enter with
into an agreement with School          -----------------------
District No. ...., .... County
(Counties), Illinois to jointly
operate (a) cooperative high                     NO
school (schools)?
--------------------------------------------------------------
If the majority of those voting on the proposition in each district vote in favor of the proposition, the school boards of the participating districts may, if they agree on terms, execute a contract for such joint operation subject to the following provisions of this Section.
    (b) The agreement for joint operation of any such cooperative high school shall include, but not be limited to, provisions for administration, staff, programs, financing, facilities, and transportation. Such agreements may be modified, extended, or terminated by approval of each of the participating districts, provided that a district may withdraw from the agreement during its initial 20-year term only if the district is reorganizing with one or more districts under other provisions of this Code. Even if 2 or more of the participating district boards approve an extension of the agreement, any other participating district shall, upon failure of its board to approve such extension, disengage from such participation at the end of the then current agreement term.
    (c) A governing board, which shall govern the operation of any such cooperative high school, shall be composed of an equal number of board members from each of the participating districts, except that where all participating district boards concur, membership on the governing board may be apportioned to reflect the number of students in each respective district who attend the cooperative high school. The membership of the governing board shall be not less than 6 nor more than 10 and shall be set by the agreement entered into by the participating districts. The school board of each participating district shall select, from its membership, its representatives on the governing board. The governing board shall prepare and adopt a budget for the cooperative high school. The governing board shall administer the cooperative high school in accordance with the agreement of the districts and shall have the power to hire, supervise, and terminate staff; to enter into contracts; to adopt policies for the school; and to take all other actions necessary and proper for the operation of the school. However, the governing board may not levy taxes or incur any indebtedness except within the annual budget approved by the participating districts.
    (d) (Blank).
    (e) Each participating district shall pay its per capita cost of educating the students residing in its district and attending any such cooperative high school into the budget for the maintenance and operation of the cooperative high school.
    The manner of determining per capita cost shall be set forth in the agreement. Each district shall pay the amount owed the governing board under the terms of the agreement from the fund that the district would have used if the district had incurred the costs directly and may levy taxes and issue bonds as otherwise authorized for these purposes in order to make payments to the governing board.
    (f) Additional school districts having an enrollment in grades 9 through 12 of less than 600 students may be added to the agreement in accordance with the process described in subsection (a) of this Section. In the event additional districts are added, a new contract shall be executed in accordance with the provisions of this Section.
    (g) Upon formation of the cooperative high school, the school board of each participating district shall:
        (1) confer and coordinate with each other and the
    	
governing board, if the governing board is then in existence, as to staffing needs for the cooperative high school;
        (2) in consultation with any exclusive employee
    	
representatives and the governing board, if the governing board is then in existence, establish a combined list of teachers in all participating districts, categorized by positions, showing the length of service and the contractual continued service status, if any, of each teacher in each participating district who is qualified to hold any such positions at the cooperative high school, and then distribute this list to the exclusive employee representatives on or before February 1 of the school year prior to the commencement of the operation of the cooperative high school or within 30 days after the date of the referendum election if the proposition receives a majority of those voting in each district, whichever occurs first. This list is in addition to and not a substitute for any list mandated by Section 24-12 of this Code; and
        (3) transfer to the governing board of the
    	
cooperative high school the employment and the position of so many of the full-time or part-time high school teachers employed by a participating district as are jointly determined by the school boards of the participating districts and the governing board, if the governing board is then in existence, to be needed at the cooperative high school, provided that these teacher transfers shall be done:
            (A) by categories listed on the seniority list
        	
mentioned in subdivision (2) of this subsection (g);
            (B) in each category, by having teachers in
        	
contractual continued service being transferred before any teachers who are not in contractual continued service; and
            (C) in order from greatest seniority first
        	
through lesser amounts of seniority.
    A teacher who is not in contractual continued service shall not be transferred if there is a teacher in contractual continued service in the same category who is qualified to hold the position that is to be filled.
    If there are more teachers who have entered upon contractual continued service than there are available positions at the cooperative high school or within other assignments in the district, a school board shall first remove or dismiss all teachers who have not entered upon contractual continued service before removing or dismissing any teacher who has entered upon contractual continued service and who is legally qualified (i) to hold a position at the cooperative high school planned to be held by a teacher who has not entered upon contractual continued service or (ii) to hold another position in the participating district. As between teachers who have entered upon contractual continued service, the teacher or teachers with the shorter length of continuing service in any of the participating districts shall be dismissed first. Any teacher dismissed as a result of such a decrease shall be paid all earned compensation on or before the third business day following the last day of pupil attendance in the regular school term. If the school board that has dismissed a teacher or the governing board has any vacancies for the following school term or within one calendar year from the beginning of the following school term, the positions thereby becoming available shall be tendered to the teachers so removed or dismissed so far as they are legally qualified to hold such positions. However, if the number of honorable dismissal notices in all participating districts exceeds 15% of full-time equivalent positions filled by certified employees (excluding principals and administrative personnel) during the preceding school year in all participating districts and if the school board that has dismissed a teacher or the governing board has any vacancies for the following school term or within 2 calendar years from the beginning of the following school term, the positions so becoming available shall be tendered to the teachers who were so notified, removed, or dismissed whenever these teachers are legally qualified to hold such positions.
    The provisions of subsection (h) of Section 24-11 of this Code concerning teachers whose positions are transferred from one board to the control of a different board shall apply to the teachers who are transferred. The contractual continued service of any transferred teacher is not lost and the governing board is subject to this Code with respect to the teacher in the same manner as if the teacher had been the governing board's employee during the time the teacher was actually employed by the board of the district from which the position and the teacher's employment were transferred. The time spent in employment with a participating district by any teacher who has not yet entered upon contractual continued service and who is transferred to the governing board is not lost when computing the time necessary for the teacher to enter upon contractual continued service, and the governing board is subject to this Code with respect to the teacher in the same manner as if the teacher had been the governing board's employee during the time the teacher was actually employed by the school board from which the position and the teacher's employment were transferred.
    If the cooperative high school is dissolved, any teacher who was transferred from a participating district shall be transferred back to the district and subsection (h) of Section 24-11 of this Code shall apply. In that case, a district is subject to this Code in the same manner as if the teacher transferred back had been continuously in the service of the receiving district.
    (h) Upon formation of the cooperative high school, the school board of each participating district shall:
        (1) confer and coordinate with each other and the
    	
governing board, if the governing board is then in existence, as to needs for educational support personnel for the cooperative high school;
        (2) in consultation with any exclusive employee
    	
representative or bargaining agent and the governing board, if the governing board is then in existence, establish a combined list of educational support personnel in participating districts, categorized by positions, showing the length of continuing service of each full-time educational support personnel employee who is qualified to hold any such position at the cooperative high school, and then distribute this list to the exclusive employee representative or bargaining agent on or before February 1 of the school year prior to the commencement of the operation of the cooperative high school or within 30 days after the date of the referendum election if the proposition receives a majority of those voting in each district, whichever occurs first; and
        (3) transfer to the governing board of the
    	
cooperative high school the employment and the positions of so many of the full-time educational support personnel employees employed by a participating district as are jointly determined by the school boards of the participating districts and the governing board, if the governing board is then in existence, to be needed at the cooperative high school, provided that the full-time educational personnel employee transfers shall be done by categories on the seniority list mentioned in subdivision (2) of this subsection (h) and done in order from greatest seniority first through lesser amounts of seniority.
    If there are more full-time educational support personnel employees than there are available positions at the cooperative high school or in the participating district, a school board shall first remove or dismiss those educational support personnel employees with the shorter length of continuing service in any of the participating districts, within the respective category of position. The governing board is subject to this Code with respect to the educational support personnel employee as if the educational support personnel employee had been the governing board's employee during the time the educational support personnel employee was actually employed by the school board of the district from which the employment and position were transferred. Any educational support personnel employee dismissed as a result of such a decrease shall be paid all earned compensation on or before the third business day following his or her last day of employment. If the school board that has dismissed the educational support personnel employee or the governing board has any vacancies for the following school term or within one calendar year from the beginning of the following school term, the positions thereby becoming available within a specific category of position shall be tendered to the employees so removed or dismissed from that category of position so far as they are legally qualified to hold such positions. If the cooperative high school is dissolved, any educational support personnel employee who was transferred from a participating district shall be transferred back to the district and Section 10-23.5 of this Code shall apply. In that case, a district is subject to this Code in the same manner as if the educational support personnel employee transferred back had been continuously in the service of the receiving district.
    (i) Two or more school districts not contiguous to each other, each of which has an enrollment in grades 9 through 12 of less than 600 students, may jointly operate one or more cooperative high schools if the following requirements are met and documented within 2 calendar years prior to the proposition filing date, pursuant to subsection (a) of this Section:
        (1) the distance between each district administrative
    	
office is documented as no more than 30 miles;
        (2) every district contiguous to the district wishing
    	
to operate one or more cooperative high schools under the provisions of this Section determines that it is not interested in participating in such joint operation, through a vote of its school board, and documents that non-interest in a letter to the districts wishing to form the cooperative high school containing approved minutes that record the school board vote;
        (3) documentation of meeting these requirements is
    	
attached to the board resolution required under subsection (a) of this Section; and
        (4) all other provisions of this Section are
    	
followed.
(Source: P.A. 98-125, eff. 8-2-13; 99-657, eff. 7-28-16.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.22d)
    Sec. 10-22.22d. Pilot cooperative elementary school and pilot cooperative high school.
    (a) Subject to the provisions of this Section, 2 contiguous school districts that are (i) located all or in part in Vermilion County; (ii) have an enrollment in grades 6-8 of less than 150 during the 2008-2009 school year and in grades 9-12 of less than 400 during the 2008-2009 school year; and (iii) have a Junior High School serving grades 6, 7, and 8 in one of the districts may, when in their judgment the interest of the districts and of the students will be best served, jointly pilot a cooperative elementary school or cooperative high school, or both.
    The board of each district contemplating a joint operation shall, by proper resolution, cause the proposition to enter into such joint operation for a period not to exceed 3 years.
    The school boards of the participating districts may, if they agree on terms, execute a contract for such joint operation subject to the provisions of this Section.
    (b) The agreement for joint operation of any such cooperative elementary school or cooperative high school, or both, shall include, but not be limited to, provisions for administration, staff, programs, financing, facilities, and transportation. Agreements may be modified, by approval of each of the participating districts, provided that a district may withdraw from the agreement only if the district is reorganizing with one or more districts under other provisions of this Code.
    (c) A governing board, which shall govern the operation of any such cooperative elementary school or cooperative high school, or both, shall be apportioned to reflect the number of students in each respective district who attend the cooperative elementary school or cooperative high school, or both. The membership of the governing board shall be 5 members. The school board of each participating district shall select, from its membership, its representatives on the governing board. The governing board shall prepare and adopt a budget for the cooperative elementary school or cooperative high school, or both. The governing board shall administer the cooperative elementary school or cooperative high school, or both, in accordance with the agreement of the districts and shall have the power to hire, supervise, and terminate staff; to enter into contracts; to adopt policies for the school or schools; and to take all other actions necessary and proper for the operation of the school or schools. The governing board may not levy taxes or incur any indebtedness except within the annual budget approved by the participating districts.
    (d) Each participating district shall pay its per capita cost of educating the students residing in its district and attending any cooperative elementary school or cooperative high school into the budget for the maintenance and operation of the cooperative elementary school or cooperative high school, or both.
    The manner of determining per capita cost shall be set forth in the agreement. Each district shall pay the amount owed the governing board under the terms of the agreement from the fund that the district would have used if the district had incurred the costs directly and may levy taxes and issue bonds as otherwise authorized for these purposes in order to make payments to the governing board.
    (e) Upon formation of the cooperative elementary school or cooperative high school, or both, the school board of each participating district shall:
        (1) confer and coordinate with each other and the
    	
governing board, if the governing board is then in existence, as to staffing needs for the cooperative elementary school or cooperative high school, or both;
        (2) in consultation with any exclusive employee
    	
representatives and the governing board, if the governing board is then in existence, establish a combined list of teachers in all participating districts, categorized by positions, showing the length of service and the contractual continued service status, if any, of each teacher in each participating district who is qualified to hold any positions at the cooperative elementary school or cooperative high school, or both, and then distribute this list to the exclusive employee representatives on or before February 1 of the school year prior to the commencement of the operation of the cooperative elementary school or cooperative high school, or both, or within 30 days after the date of the board resolutions, whichever occurs first; this list is in addition to and not a substitute for the list mandated by Section 24-12 of this Code; and
        (3) transfer to the governing board of the
    	
cooperative elementary school or cooperative high school, or both, the employment and the position of so many of the full-time or part-time school teachers employed by a participating district as are jointly determined by the school boards of the participating districts and the governing board, if the governing board is then in existence, to be needed at the cooperative school or schools, provided that these teacher transfers shall be done:
            (A) by categories listed on the seniority list
        	
mentioned in item (2) of this subsection (e);
            (B) in each category, by having teachers in
        	
contractual continued service being transferred before any teachers who are not in contractual continued service; and
            (C) in order from greatest seniority first
        	
through lesser amounts of seniority.
    A teacher who is not in contractual continued service shall not be transferred if there is a teacher in contractual continued service in the same category who is qualified to hold the position that is to be filled.
    If there are more teachers who have entered upon contractual continued service than there are available positions at the cooperative elementary school or cooperative high school, or both or within other assignments in the district, a school board shall first remove or dismiss all teachers who have not entered upon contractual continued service before removing or dismissing any teacher who has entered upon contractual continued service and who is legally qualified (i) to hold a position at the cooperative elementary school or cooperative high school, or both planned to be held by a teacher who has not entered upon contractual continued service or (ii) to hold another position in the participating district. As between teachers who have entered upon contractual continued service, the teacher or teachers with the shorter length of continuing service in any of the participating districts shall be dismissed first. Any teacher dismissed as a result of such a decrease shall be paid all earned compensation on or before the third business day following the last day of pupil attendance in the regular school term. If the school board that has dismissed a teacher or the governing board has any vacancies for the following school term or within one calendar year from the beginning of the following school term, then the positions thereby becoming available shall be tendered to the teachers so removed or dismissed so far as they are legally qualified to hold such positions. If the number of honorable dismissal notices in all participating districts exceeds 15% of full-time equivalent positions filled by certified employees (excluding principals and administrative personnel) during the preceding school year in all participating districts and if the school board that has dismissed a teacher or the governing board has any vacancies for the following school term or within 2 calendar years from the beginning of the following school term, the positions so becoming available shall be tendered to the teachers who were so notified, removed, or dismissed whenever these teachers are legally qualified to hold those positions.
    The provisions of subsection (h) of Section 24-11 of this Code concerning teachers whose positions are transferred from one board to the control of a different board shall apply to the teachers who are transferred. The contractual continued service of any transferred teacher is not lost and the governing board is subject to this Code with respect to the teacher in the same manner as if the teacher had been the governing board's employee during the time the teacher was actually employed by the board of the district from which the position and the teacher's employment were transferred. The time spent in employment with a participating district by any teacher who has not yet entered upon contractual continued service and who is transferred to the governing board is not lost when computing the time necessary for the teacher to enter upon contractual continued service, and the governing board is subject to this Code with respect to the teacher in the same manner as if the teacher had been the governing board's employee during the time the teacher was actually employed by the school board from which the position and the teacher's employment were transferred.
    At the conclusion of the pilot program, any teacher who was transferred from a participating district shall be transferred back to the district and subsection (h) of Section 24-11 of this Code shall apply. In that case, a district is subject to this Code in the same manner as if the teacher transferred back had been continuously in the service of the receiving district.
    (f) Upon formation of the cooperative elementary school or cooperative high school, or both, the school board of each participating district shall:
        (1) confer and coordinate with each other and the
    	
governing board, if the governing board is then in existence, as to needs for educational support personnel for the cooperative elementary school or cooperative high school, or both;
        (2) in consultation with any exclusive employee
    	
representative or bargaining agent and the governing board, if the governing board is then in existence, establish a combined list of educational support personnel in participating districts, categorized by positions, showing the length of continuing service of each full-time educational support personnel employee who is qualified to hold any such position at the cooperative elementary school or cooperative high school, or both, and then distribute this list to the exclusive employee representative or bargaining agent on or before February 1 of the school year prior to the commencement of the operation of the cooperative elementary school or cooperative high school, or both or within 30 days after the date of the board resolutions, whichever occurs first; and
        (3) transfer to the governing board of the
    	
cooperative elementary school or cooperative high school, or both the employment and the positions of so many of the full-time educational support personnel employees employed by a participating district as are jointly determined by the school boards of the participating districts and the governing board, if the governing board is then in existence, to be needed at the cooperative elementary school or cooperative high school, or both, provided that the full-time educational personnel employee transfers shall be done by categories on the seniority list mentioned in item (2) of this subsection (f) and done in order from greatest seniority first through lesser amounts of seniority.
    If there are more full-time educational support personnel employees than there are available positions at the cooperative elementary school or cooperative high school, or both or in the participating district, then a school board shall first remove or dismiss those educational support personnel employees with the shorter length of continuing service in any of the participating districts, within the respective category of position. The governing board is subject to this Code with respect to the educational support personnel employee as if the educational support personnel employee had been the governing board's employee during the time the educational support personnel employee was actually employed by the school board of the district from which the employment and position were transferred. Any educational support personnel employee dismissed as a result of such a decrease shall be paid all earned compensation on or before the third business day following his or her last day of employment. If the school board that has dismissed the educational support personnel employee or the governing board has any vacancies for the following school term or within one calendar year from the beginning of the following school term, then the positions thereby becoming available within a specific category of position shall be tendered to the employees so removed or dismissed from that category of position so far as they are legally qualified to hold such positions. At the conclusion of the pilot, any educational support personnel employee who was transferred from a participating district shall be transferred back to the district and Section 10-23.5 of this Code shall apply. In that case, a district is subject to this Code in the same manner as if the educational support personnel employee transferred back had been continuously in the service of the receiving district.
    (g) This Section repeals 3 years after the beginning date of operation of a pilot cooperative elementary school or a pilot cooperative high school.
(Source: P.A. 99-657, eff. 7-28-16.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.22e)
    Sec. 10-22.22e. Science and mathematics partnership school.
    (a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary and subject to the provisions of this Section, 2 or more contiguous school districts with all or a portion of their territory located within the geographic boundaries of the same municipality may, when in their judgment the interest of the districts and of the students therein will be best served, jointly operate, through an institution of higher education located in the municipality, a science and mathematics partnership school for serving some or all of grades kindergarten through 8. The partnership school may (i) restrict attendance to pupils who reside within the geographic boundaries of the areas served by the school districts and (ii) select students for enrollment based on admission criteria that focuses on academic proficiency in science and mathematics established by the partnership school and approved by the districts' school boards; however, in no case may the partnership school discriminate on the basis of disability, race, creed, color, gender, national origin, religion, ancestry, marital status, or need for special education services in the establishment of its attendance boundaries or in the selection of students for enrollment. The number of students enrolled from each school district shall be approximately equal in number. If there are more students eligible for enrollment in the partnership school from a school district than there are spaces available, eligible students must be selected by lottery.
    (b) The school board of each school district shall, by proper resolution, enter into the joint operation of the partnership school. The school boards of the participating districts shall execute a partnership school contract with the institution of higher education for the joint operation, subject to the provisions of this Section. The agreement for joint operation of the partnership school shall include, but not be limited to, provisions for administration, staff, programs, financing, facilities, and transportation.
    (c) Each participating school district shall pay its per capita cost of educating the students residing in the district and attending the partnership school for the maintenance and operation of the partnership school. The manner of determining per capita cost must be set forth in the agreement. Each district shall pay the amount owed under the terms of the agreement from the fund that the district would have used if the district had incurred the costs directly and may levy taxes and issue bonds as otherwise authorized for these purposes in order to make payments.
    (d) The teachers and other non-administrative, certified employees who work in the partnership school must be selected according to criteria established by the partnership school and agreed to by the school districts' school boards. The number of such employees selected from each school district must be approximately equal in number. Their selection must be for a 2-year or 4-year period, upon the completion of which they must be assigned to a comparable position in the school from which they were selected. While working in the partnership school, these employees shall remain employees of and be paid by the school district from which they were selected, and their wages and benefits must be the same as if they were teaching or otherwise working in that district, provided that additional wages and benefits may be provided to these teachers and other staff if the participating school districts and the exclusive bargaining representatives of their teachers and other staff agree. The contractual continued service status of a teacher and the retirement benefits of those employees who accept work with the partnership school must not be affected. A school term worked in the partnership school must be considered a school term worked in the school district from which the employees were selected for contractual continued service attainment purposes. The time spent in employment with a participating district by any teacher who has not yet entered upon contractual continued service and accepts selection to work in the partnership school is not lost when computing the time necessary for the teacher to enter upon contractual continued service.
(Source: P.A. 97-97, eff. 1-1-12; 98-786, eff. 7-25-14.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.23) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.23)
    Sec. 10-22.23. School Nurse. To employ a registered professional nurse and define the duties of the school nurse within the guidelines of rules and regulations promulgated by the State Board of Education. Any school nurse first employed on or after July 1, 1976, whose duties require teaching or the exercise of instructional judgment or educational evaluation of pupils, must be certificated under Section 21-25 of this Act. School districts may employ non-certificated registered professional nurses to perform professional nursing services.
(Source: P.A. 90-548, eff. 1-1-98.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.23a) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.23a)
    Sec. 10-22.23a. Chief school business official. To employ a chief school business official and define the duties of the chief school business official. Any chief school business official first employed on or after July 1, 1977 shall be certificated under Section 21-7.1. For the purposes of this Section, experience as a school business official in an Illinois public school district prior to July 1, 1977 shall be deemed the equivalent of certification.
(Source: P.A. 82-387.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.24) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.24)
    Sec. 10-22.24. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31. Repealed by P.A. 89-159, eff. 1-1-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.24a) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.24a)
    Sec. 10-22.24a. School counselor. To employ school counselors. A school counselor is a qualified specialist who holds a School Service Personnel certificate endorsed in school counseling issued pursuant to Section 21-25 of this Code and who either (i) holds or is qualified for an elementary, secondary, special K-12, or special preschool-age 21 certificate issued pursuant to Section 21-2 or 21-4 of this Code or (ii) in lieu of holding or qualifying for a teaching certificate, has fulfilled such other requirements as the State Board of Education and the State Teacher Certification Board may by rule establish. An individual who has completed an approved program in another state may apply for a School Service Personnel certificate endorsed in school counseling and shall receive such a certificate if a review of his or her credentials indicates that he or she meets the additional requirements of this Section. Only persons so licensed and endorsed may use the title "school counselor".
(Source: P.A. 100-1136, eff. 1-1-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.24b)
    Sec. 10-22.24b. School counseling services. School counseling services in public schools may be provided by school counselors as defined in Section 10-22.24a of this Code or by individuals who hold a Professional Educator License with a school support personnel endorsement in the area of school counseling under Section 21B-25 of this Code.
    School counseling services may include, but are not limited to:
        (1) designing and delivering a comprehensive school
    	
counseling program that promotes student achievement and wellness;
        (2) incorporating the common core language into the
    	
school counselor's work and role;
        (3) school counselors working as culturally skilled
    	
professionals who act sensitively to promote social justice and equity in a pluralistic society;
        (4) providing individual and group counseling;
        (5) providing a core counseling curriculum that
    	
serves all students and addresses the knowledge and skills appropriate to their developmental level through a collaborative model of delivery involving the school counselor, classroom teachers, and other appropriate education professionals, and including prevention and pre-referral activities;
        (6) making referrals when necessary to appropriate
    	
offices or outside agencies;
        (7) providing college and career development
    	
activities and counseling;
        (8) developing individual career plans with students;
        (9) assisting all students with a college or
    	
post-secondary education plan, which must include a discussion on all post-secondary education options, including 4-year colleges or universities, community colleges, and vocational schools;
        (10) intentionally addressing the career and college
    	
needs of first generation students;
        (11) educating all students on scholarships,
    	
financial aid, and preparation of the Federal Application for Federal Student Aid;
        (12) collaborating with institutions of higher
    	
education and local community colleges so that students understand post-secondary education options and are ready to transition successfully;
        (13) providing crisis intervention and contributing
    	
to the development of a specific crisis plan within the school setting in collaboration with multiple stakeholders;
        (14) educating students, teachers, and parents on
    	
anxiety, depression, cutting, and suicide issues and intervening with students who present with these issues;
        (15) providing counseling and other resources to
    	
students who are in crisis;
        (16) providing resources for those students who do
    	
not have access to mental health services;
        (17) addressing bullying and conflict resolution with
    	
all students;
        (18) teaching communication skills and helping
    	
students develop positive relationships;
        (19) using culturally-sensitive skills in working
    	
with all students to promote wellness;
        (20) addressing the needs of undocumented students in
    	
the school, as well as students who are legally in the United States, but whose parents are undocumented;
        (21) contributing to a student's functional
    	
behavioral assessment, as well as assisting in the development of non-aversive behavioral intervention strategies;
        (22) (i) assisting students in need of special
    	
education services by implementing the academic supports and social-emotional and college or career development counseling services or interventions per a student's individualized education program (IEP); (ii) participating in or contributing to a student's IEP and completing a social-developmental history; or (iii) providing services to a student with a disability under the student's IEP or federal Section 504 plan, as recommended by the student's IEP team or Section 504 plan team and in compliance with federal and State laws and rules governing the provision of educational and related services and school-based accommodations to students with disabilities and the qualifications of school personnel to provide such services and accommodations;
        (23) assisting in the development of a personal
    	
educational plan with each student;
        (24) educating students on dual credit and learning
    	
opportunities on the Internet;
        (25) providing information for all students in the
    	
selection of courses that will lead to post-secondary education opportunities toward a successful career;
        (26) interpreting achievement test results and
    	
guiding students in appropriate directions;
        (27) counseling with students, families, and
    	
teachers, in compliance with federal and State laws;
        (28) providing families with opportunities for
    	
education and counseling as appropriate in relation to the student's educational assessment;
        (29) consulting and collaborating with teachers and
    	
other school personnel regarding behavior management and intervention plans and inclusion in support of students;
        (30) teaming and partnering with staff, parents,
    	
businesses, and community organizations to support student achievement and social-emotional learning standards for all students;
        (31) developing and implementing school-based
    	
prevention programs, including, but not limited to, mediation and violence prevention, implementing social and emotional education programs and services, and establishing and implementing bullying prevention and intervention programs;
        (32) developing culturally-sensitive assessment
    	
instruments for measuring school counseling prevention and intervention effectiveness and collecting, analyzing, and interpreting data;
        (33) participating on school and district committees
    	
to advocate for student programs and resources, as well as establishing a school counseling advisory council that includes representatives of key stakeholders selected to review and advise on the implementation of the school counseling program;
        (34) acting as a liaison between the public schools
    	
and community resources and building relationships with important stakeholders, such as families, administrators, teachers, and board members;
        (35) maintaining organized, clear, and useful records
    	
in a confidential manner consistent with Section 5 of the Illinois School Student Records Act, the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act, and the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act;
        (36) presenting an annual agreement to the
    	
administration, including a formal discussion of the alignment of school and school counseling program missions and goals and detailing specific school counselor responsibilities;
        (37) identifying and implementing
    	
culturally-sensitive measures of success for student competencies in each of the 3 domains of academic, social and emotional, and college and career learning based on planned and periodic assessment of the comprehensive developmental school counseling program;
        (38) collaborating as a team member in Response to
    	
Intervention (RtI) and other school initiatives;
        (39) conducting observations and participating in
    	
recommendations or interventions regarding the placement of children in educational programs or special education classes;
        (40) analyzing data and results of school counseling
    	
program assessments, including curriculum, small-group, and closing-the-gap results reports, and designing strategies to continue to improve program effectiveness;
        (41) analyzing data and results of school counselor
    	
competency assessments;
        (42) following American School Counselor Association
    	
Ethical Standards for School Counselors to demonstrate high standards of integrity, leadership, and professionalism;
        (43) knowing and embracing common core standards by
    	
using common core language;
        (44) practicing as a culturally-skilled school
    	
counselor by infusing the multicultural competencies within the role of the school counselor, including the practice of culturally-sensitive attitudes and beliefs, knowledge, and skills;
        (45) infusing the Social-Emotional Standards, as
    	
presented in the State Board of Education standards, across the curriculum and in the counselor's role in ways that empower and enable students to achieve academic success across all grade levels;
        (46) providing services only in areas in which the
    	
school counselor has appropriate training or expertise, as well as only providing counseling or consulting services within his or her employment to any student in the district or districts which employ such school counselor, in accordance with professional ethics;
        (47) having adequate training in supervision
    	
knowledge and skills in order to supervise school counseling interns enrolled in graduate school counselor preparation programs that meet the standards established by the State Board of Education;
        (48) being involved with State and national
    	
professional associations;
        (49) participating, at least once every 2 years, in
    	
an in-service training program for school counselors conducted by persons with expertise in domestic and sexual violence and the needs of expectant and parenting youth, which shall include training concerning (i) communicating with and listening to youth victims of domestic or sexual violence and expectant and parenting youth, (ii) connecting youth victims of domestic or sexual violence and expectant and parenting youth to appropriate in-school services and other agencies, programs, and services as needed, and (iii) implementing the school district's policies, procedures, and protocols with regard to such youth, including confidentiality; at a minimum, school personnel must be trained to understand, provide information and referrals, and address issues pertaining to youth who are parents, expectant parents, or victims of domestic or sexual violence;
        (50) participating, at least every 2 years, in an
    	
in-service training program for school counselors conducted by persons with expertise in anaphylactic reactions and management;
        (51) participating, at least once every 2 years, in
    	
an in-service training on educator ethics, teacher-student conduct, and school employee-student conduct for all personnel;
        (52) participating, in addition to other topics at
    	
in-service training programs, in training to identify the warning signs of mental illness and suicidal behavior in adolescents and teenagers and learning appropriate intervention and referral techniques;
        (53) obtaining training to have a basic knowledge of
    	
matters relating to acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), including the nature of the disease, its causes and effects, the means of detecting it and preventing its transmission, and the availability of appropriate sources of counseling and referral and any other information that may be appropriate considering the age and grade level of the pupils; the school board shall supervise such training and the State Board of Education and the Department of Public Health shall jointly develop standards for such training; and
        (54) participating in mandates from the State Board
    	
of Education for bullying education and social-emotional literary.
    School districts may employ a sufficient number of school counselors to maintain the national and State recommended student-counselor ratio of 250 to 1. School districts may have school counselors spend at least 80% of his or her work time in direct contact with students.
    Nothing in this Section prohibits other qualified professionals, including other endorsed school support personnel, from providing the services listed in this Section.
(Source: P.A. 101-290, eff. 8-9-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.25) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.25)
    Sec. 10-22.25. Purchase and rent of textbooks.
    To purchase textbooks and rent them to the pupils.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.25a) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.25a)
    Sec. 10-22.25a. To obtain personal property, when authorized by an affirmative vote of 2/3 of the members of the board, by lease, with or without an option to purchase, for a period not to exceed 5 years or by purchase under an installment contract extending over a period of not more than 5 years, with interest at a rate not to exceed the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract; provided that the term of guaranteed energy savings contracts as defined in Article 19b of the School Code may exceed 5 years. For the purpose of this Section, personal property shall include computer hardware and software and all equipment, fixtures, renovations, and improvements to existing facilities of the district necessary to accommodate computers.
    With respect to instruments for the payment of money issued under this Section either before, on, or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1989, it is and always has been the intention of the General Assembly (i) that the Omnibus Bond Acts are and always have been supplementary grants of power to issue instruments in accordance with the Omnibus Bond Acts, regardless of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts, (ii) that the provisions of this Section are not a limitation on the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts, and (iii) that instruments issued under this Section within the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts are not invalid because of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts.
(Source: P.A. 90-97, eff. 7-11-97.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.25b) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.25b)
    Sec. 10-22.25b. School uniforms. The school board may adopt a school uniform or dress code policy that governs all or certain individual attendance centers and that is necessary to maintain the orderly process of a school function or prevent endangerment of student health or safety. A school uniform or dress code policy adopted by a school board: (i) shall not be applied in such manner as to discipline or deny attendance to a transfer student or any other student for noncompliance with that policy during such period of time as is reasonably necessary to enable the student to acquire a school uniform or otherwise comply with the dress code policy that is in effect at the attendance center or in the district into which the student's enrollment is transferred; and (ii) shall include criteria and procedures under which the school board will accommodate the needs of or otherwise provide appropriate resources to assist a student from an indigent family in complying with an applicable school uniform or dress code policy. A student whose parents or legal guardians object on religious grounds to the student's compliance with an applicable school uniform or dress code policy shall not be required to comply with that policy if the student's parents or legal guardians present to the school board a signed statement of objection detailing the grounds for the objection. This Section applies to school boards of all districts, including special charter districts and districts organized under Article 34.
(Source: P.A. 89-610, eff. 8-6-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.26) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.26)
    Sec. 10-22.26. School Lunch Program - Purchase of Equipment. To maintain and operate a school lunch program in accordance with applicable regulations of the State Board of Education and agencies of the United States government. Equipment to be used in the school lunch program shall be paid for from the operations and maintenance fund of the district or from any surplus remaining in the school lunch account at the end of the school term.
(Source: P.A. 86-970.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.27) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.27)
    Sec. 10-22.27. Schools outside district for exceptional children. To rent suitable facilities outside of the district and maintain classes therein for the instruction of children from any home for orphans, dependent, abandoned, or maladjusted children as provided in Section 18-3 of this Act; provided that written consent is secured from the school board of the district wherein such facilities and classes are located.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.28) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.28)
    Sec. 10-22.28. School safety patrol.
    To establish and maintain a school safety patrol and with the written consent of the parents of individual pupils to appoint such pupils to participate as members thereof for the purpose of influencing and encouraging the other pupils to refrain from crossing public streets and highways at points other than at regular crossings and for the purpose of directing pupils not to cross streets and highways at times when the presence of traffic would render such crossing unsafe.
    The safety patrol shall function only under the direction and control of school authorities; however, upon request of the school board other agencies may cooperate to such extent as may be agreed upon.
    No liability shall attach either to the school district or any individual, trustee, board member, superintendent, principal, teacher or other school employee by virtue of the organization, maintenance or operation of a school safety patrol organized, maintained and operated under authority of this section.
    Nothing herein contained shall be construed to authorize or permit the use of any safety patrol member for the purpose of directing vehicular traffic.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.28a) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.28a)
    Sec. 10-22.28a. To acquire, install, operate and maintain traffic signals relative to school crossing protection and school crossing stop signals and to employ persons for the purpose of directing traffic upon school grounds and on or along streets and highways or portions thereof within a radius of one mile from such school grounds, or to share the cost of employing such persons with or accept the employment of such persons by any unit of local government. The school board may determine whether the crossing guard employment costs shall be paid from its educational, transportation or operations and maintenance fund. The powers in this Section are subject to the following:
    1. The power to acquire, install, operate and maintain traffic signals may not be exercised in any city, village or incorporated town;
    2. Prior approval must be obtained from the Department of Transportation with respect to highways for which it has maintenance jurisdiction, and any public body or official having jurisdiction over any street or highway affected;
    3. All signs and signals to be erected shall conform to the Department of Transportation's Manual and Specifications and shall be justified by traffic warrants stated in the Manual, and all pertinent provisions of The Illinois Vehicle Code, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Section, shall apply.
(Source: P.A. 86-970.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.29) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.29)
    Sec. 10-22.29. Outdoor education. To offer, if deemed appropriate, outdoor education, and to use school funds for the expenses of the outdoor education program, within the State of Illinois, or adjacent States, whether within the school district or not, including the purchase or renting of facilities either individually or jointly with any other school district or districts.
(Source: Laws 1968, p. 414.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.29a) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.29a)
    Sec. 10-22.29a. To authorize the establishment of an investment club, in any high school within the district, to be organized on a purely voluntary basis. The State Board of Education may, however, promulgate reasonable standards regarding the establishment, organization and operation of investment clubs formed pursuant to this Section which standards must be complied with by all those concerned. The superintendent of schools shall, when the board has authorized the establishment of an investment club, designate a teacher in the high school where the club is organized to serve as sponsor of the club and as the fiduciary for members of the club in making the purchases and sales of securities on behalf of the members and shall also designate an investment dealer registered with the Secretary of State of Illinois as an investment dealer; to provide investment counseling and brokerage services for the members of the club. That investment dealer shall (a) reflect all transactions entered into on behalf of the investment club in an account in the name of the teacher as fiduciary, (b) submit monthly to the fiduciary a statement of account reflecting all transactions entered into on behalf of the club during the previous month including the prices paid on purchases and the proceeds received on sales of securities and the costs and fees incurred in each transaction and listing the accumulated holdings of the investment club by type of security, number of shares of stock, name of the issuer and any other information necessary to identify the composition of the accumulated security holdings of the club, and (c) handle transactions on behalf of the club, through the designated fiduciary as a street account rather than through issuance of certificates in the name of the fiduciary or of individual club members. Any investment club formed under this Section must sell all securities purchased through the club and distribute the proceeds of sales to its members by May 20th each year. All investment clubs are subject to the provisions of the Illinois Securities Law of 1953.
(Source: P.A. 100-201, eff. 8-18-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.29b) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.29b)
    Sec. 10-22.29b. Educational tours. As a supplement to a particular course of instruction, to conduct educational tours, within or without the district, the State of Illinois or the United States, for the pupils or employees, or both, of any school or schools within the district. Nothing in this Section authorizes the use of any school funds for any expenditures incurred on such a tour such as meals, lodging and transportation costs nor does this Section apply to any outdoor education class, field trip or travel to and from a school sponsored event as permitted under Sections 10-22.29, 29-3.1 and 34-18, subsection (11). Nothing in this Section prohibits payment of the salaries of necessary personnel while on a tour or field trip if the personnel are performing in the ordinary course of their employment.
(Source: P.A. 85-1389.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.30) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.30)
    Sec. 10-22.30. Television and radio programs.
    To enter into contracts, either alone or in cooperation with other school boards, for the purpose of participating in or the procuring of television or radio broadcasts or both, for use in the educational program of the schools; to provide television or radio studio facilities or both; to grant the use of such studio facilities to a licensed television or radio station located in the school district; to maintain and operate such school television or radio transmitting devices, or both, as are necessary to distribute adequate instructional television or radio programming with closed-circuit, fixed-circuit or standard broadcasting equipment; and to provide programs for educational purposes.
(Source: Laws 1965, p. 573.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.31) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.31)
    Sec. 10-22.31. Special education.
    (a) To enter into joint agreements with other school boards to provide the needed special educational facilities and to employ a director and other professional workers as defined in Section 14-1.10 and to establish facilities as defined in Section 14-1.08 for the types of children described in Sections 14-1.02 and 14-1.03a. The director (who may be employed under a contract as provided in subsection (c) of this Section) and other professional workers may be employed by one district, which shall be reimbursed on a mutually agreed basis by other districts that are parties to the joint agreement. Such agreements may provide that one district may supply professional workers for a joint program conducted in another district. Such agreement shall provide that any full-time professional worker who is employed by a joint agreement program and spends over 50% of his or her time in one school district shall not be required to work a different teaching schedule than the other professional worker in that district. Such agreement shall include, but not be limited to, provisions for administration, staff, programs, financing, housing, transportation, an advisory body, and the method or methods to be employed for disposing of property upon the withdrawal of a school district or dissolution of the joint agreement and shall specify procedures for the withdrawal of districts from the joint agreement as long as these procedures are consistent with this Section. Such agreement may be amended at any time as provided in the joint agreement or, if the joint agreement does not so provide, then such agreement may be amended at any time upon the adoption of concurring resolutions by the school boards of all member districts, provided that no later than 6 months after August 28, 2009 (the effective date of Public Act 96-783), all existing agreements shall be amended to be consistent with Public Act 96-783. Such an amendment may include the removal of a school district from or the addition of a school district to the joint agreement without a petition as otherwise required in this Section if all member districts adopt concurring resolutions to that effect. A fully executed copy of any such agreement or amendment entered into on or after January 1, 1989 shall be filed with the State Board of Education. Petitions for withdrawal shall be made to the regional board or boards of school trustees exercising oversight or governance over any of the districts in the joint agreement. Upon receipt of a petition for withdrawal, the regional board of school trustees shall publish notice of and conduct a hearing or, in instances in which more than one regional board of school trustees exercises oversight or governance over any of the districts in the joint agreement, a joint hearing, in accordance with rules adopted by the State Board of Education. In instances in which a single regional board of school trustees holds the hearing, approval of the petition must be by a two-thirds majority vote of the school trustees. In instances in which a joint hearing of 2 or more regional boards of school trustees is required, approval of the petition must be by a two-thirds majority of all those school trustees present and voting. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 6 of this Code, in instances in which the competent regional board or boards of school trustees has been abolished, petitions for withdrawal shall be made to the school boards of those districts that fall under the oversight or governance of the abolished regional board of school trustees in accordance with rules adopted by the State Board of Education. If any petition is approved pursuant to this subsection (a), the withdrawal takes effect as provided in Section 7-9 of this Act. The changes to this Section made by Public Act 96-769 apply to all changes to special education joint agreement membership initiated after July 1, 2009.
    (b) To either (1) designate an administrative district to act as fiscal and legal agent for the districts that are parties to the joint agreement, or (2) designate a governing board composed of one member of the school board of each cooperating district and designated by such boards to act in accordance with the joint agreement. No such governing board may levy taxes and no such governing board may incur any indebtedness except within an annual budget for the joint agreement approved by the governing board and by the boards of at least a majority of the cooperating school districts or a number of districts greater than a majority if required by the joint agreement. The governing board may appoint an executive board of at least 7 members to administer the joint agreement in accordance with its terms. However, if 7 or more school districts are parties to a joint agreement that does not have an administrative district: (i) at least a majority of the members appointed by the governing board to the executive board shall be members of the school boards of the cooperating districts; or (ii) if the governing board wishes to appoint members who are not school board members, they shall be superintendents from the cooperating districts.
    (c) To employ a full-time director of special education of the joint agreement program under a one-year or multi-year contract. No such contract can be offered or accepted for less than one year. Such contract may be discontinued at any time by mutual agreement of the contracting parties, or may be extended for an additional one-year or multi-year period at the end of any year.
    The contract year is July 1 through the following June 30th, unless the contract specifically provides otherwise. Notice of intent not to renew a contract when given by a controlling board or administrative district must be in writing stating the specific reason therefor. Notice of intent not to renew the contract must be given by the controlling board or the administrative district at least 90 days before the contract expires. Failure to do so will automatically extend the contract for one additional year.
    By accepting the terms of the contract, the director of a special education joint agreement waives all rights granted under Sections 24-11 through 24-16 for the duration of his or her employment as a director of a special education joint agreement.
    (d) To designate a district that is a party to the joint agreement as the issuer of bonds or notes for the purposes and in the manner provided in this Section. It is not necessary for such district to also be the administrative district for the joint agreement, nor is it necessary for the same district to be designated as the issuer of all series of bonds or notes issued hereunder. Any district so designated may, from time to time, borrow money and, in evidence of its obligation to repay the borrowing, issue its negotiable bonds or notes for the purpose of acquiring, constructing, altering, repairing, enlarging and equipping any building or portion thereof, together with any land or interest therein, necessary to provide special educational facilities and services as defined in Section 14-1.08. Title in and to any such facilities shall be held in accordance with the joint agreement.
    Any such bonds or notes shall be authorized by a resolution of the board of education of the issuing district. The resolution may contain such covenants as may be deemed necessary or advisable by the district to assure the payment of the bonds or notes. The resolution shall be effective immediately upon its adoption.
    Prior to the issuance of such bonds or notes, each school district that is a party to the joint agreement shall agree, whether by amendment to the joint agreement or by resolution of the board of education, to be jointly and severally liable for the payment of the bonds and notes. The bonds or notes shall be payable solely and only from the payments made pursuant to such agreement.
    Neither the bonds or notes nor the obligation to pay the bonds or notes under any joint agreement shall constitute an indebtedness of any district, including the issuing district, within the meaning of any constitutional or statutory limitation.
    As long as any bonds or notes are outstanding and unpaid, the agreement by a district to pay the bonds and notes shall be irrevocable notwithstanding the district's withdrawal from membership in the joint special education program.
    (e) If a district whose employees are on strike was, prior to the strike, sending students with disabilities to special educational facilities and services in another district or cooperative, the district affected by the strike shall continue to send such students during the strike and shall be eligible to receive appropriate State reimbursement.
    (f) With respect to those joint agreements that have a governing board composed of one member of the school board of each cooperating district and designated by those boards to act in accordance with the joint agreement, the governing board shall have, in addition to its other powers under this Section, the authority to issue bonds or notes for the purposes and in the manner provided in this subsection. The governing board of the joint agreement may from time to time borrow money and, in evidence of its obligation to repay the borrowing, issue its negotiable bonds or notes for the purpose of acquiring, constructing, altering, repairing, enlarging and equipping any building or portion thereof, together with any land or interest therein, necessary to provide special educational facilities and services as defined in Section 14-1.08 and including also facilities for activities of administration and educational support personnel employees. Title in and to any such facilities shall be held in accordance with the joint agreement.
    Any such bonds or notes shall be authorized by a resolution of the governing board. The resolution may contain such covenants as may be deemed necessary or advisable by the governing board to assure the payment of the bonds or notes and interest accruing thereon. The resolution shall be effective immediately upon its adoption.
    Each school district that is a party to the joint agreement shall be automatically liable, by virtue of its membership in the joint agreement, for its proportionate share of the principal amount of the bonds and notes plus interest accruing thereon, as provided in the resolution. Subject to the joint and several liability hereinafter provided for, the resolution may provide for different payment schedules for different districts except that the aggregate amount of scheduled payments for each district shall be equal to its proportionate share of the debt service in the bonds or notes based upon the fraction that its equalized assessed valuation bears to the total equalized assessed valuation of all the district members of the joint agreement as adjusted in the manner hereinafter provided. In computing that fraction the most recent available equalized assessed valuation at the time of the issuance of the bonds and notes shall be used, and the equalized assessed valuation of any district maintaining grades K to 12 shall be doubled in both the numerator and denominator of the fraction used for all of the districts that are members of the joint agreement. In case of default in payment by any member, each school district that is a party to the joint agreement shall automatically be jointly and severally liable for the amount of any deficiency. The bonds or notes and interest thereon shall be payable solely and only from the funds made available pursuant to the procedures set forth in this subsection. No project authorized under this subsection may require an annual contribution for bond payments from any member district in excess of 0.15% of the value of taxable property as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue in the case of districts maintaining grades K-8 or 9-12 and 0.30% of the value of taxable property as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue in the case of districts maintaining grades K-12. This limitation on taxing authority is expressly applicable to taxing authority provided under Section 17-9 and other applicable Sections of this Act. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed as an exception to the property tax limitations contained in Section 17-2, 17-2.2a, 17-5, or any other applicable Section of this Act.
    Neither the bonds or notes nor the obligation to pay the bonds or notes under any joint agreement shall constitute an indebtedness of any district within the meaning of any constitutional or statutory limitation.
    As long as any bonds or notes are outstanding and unpaid, the obligation of a district to pay its proportionate share of the principal of and interest on the bonds and notes as required in this Section shall be a general obligation of the district payable from any and all sources of revenue designated for that purpose by the board of education of the district and shall be irrevocable notwithstanding the district's withdrawal from membership in the joint special education program.
    (g) A member district wishing to withdraw from a joint agreement may obtain from its school board a written resolution approving the withdrawal. The withdrawing district must then present a written petition for withdrawal from the joint agreement to the other member districts. Under no circumstances may the petition be presented to the other member districts less than 12 months from the date of the proposed withdrawal, unless the member districts agree to waive this timeline. Upon approval by school board written resolution of all of the remaining member districts, the petitioning member district shall notify the State Board of Education of the approved withdrawal in writing and must submit a comprehensive plan developed under subsection (g-5) for review by the State Board. If the petition for withdrawal is not approved, the petitioning member district may appeal the disapproval decision to the trustees of schools of the township that has jurisdiction and authority over the withdrawing district. If a withdrawing district is not under the jurisdiction and authority of the trustees of schools of a township, a hearing panel shall be established by the chief administrative officer of the intermediate service center having jurisdiction over the withdrawing district. The hearing panel shall be made up of 3 persons who have a demonstrated interest and background in education. Each hearing panel member must reside within an educational service region of 2,000,000 or more inhabitants but not within the withdrawing district and may not be a current school board member or employee of the withdrawing district or hold any county office. None of the hearing panel members may reside within the same school district. The hearing panel shall serve without remuneration; however, the necessary expenses, including travel, attendant upon any meeting or hearing in relation to these proceedings must be paid. Prior to the hearing, the withdrawing district shall (i) provide written notification to all parents or guardians of students with disabilities residing within the district of its intent to withdraw from the special education joint agreement; (ii) hold a public hearing to allow for members of the community, parents or guardians of students with disabilities, or any other interested parties an opportunity to review the plan for educating students after the withdrawal and to provide feedback on the plan; and (iii) prepare and provide a comprehensive plan as outlined under subsection (g-5). The trustees of schools of the township having jurisdiction and authority over the withdrawing district or the hearing panel established by the chief administrative officer of the intermediate service center having jurisdiction over the withdrawing district shall convene and hear testimony to determine whether the withdrawing district has presented sufficient evidence that the district, standing alone, will provide a full continuum of services and support to all its students with disabilities in the foreseeable future. If the trustees of schools of the township having jurisdiction and authority over the withdrawing district or the hearing panel established by the chief administrative officer of the intermediate service center having jurisdiction over the withdrawing district approves the petition for withdrawal, then the petitioning member district shall be withdrawn from the joint agreement effective the following July 1 and shall notify the State Board of Education of the approved withdrawal in writing.
    (g-5) Each withdrawing district shall develop a comprehensive plan that includes the administrative policies and procedures outlined in Sections 226.50, 226.100, 226.110, 226.180, 226.230, 226.250, 226.260, 226.300, 226.310, 226.320, 226.330, 226.340, 226.350, 226.500, 226.520, 226.530, 226.540, 226.560, 226.700, 226.740, 226.800, and 226.820 and Subpart G of Part 226 of Title 23 of the Illinois Administrative Code and all relevant portions of the federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Act. The withdrawing district must also demonstrate its ability to provide education for a wide range of students with disabilities, including a full continuum of support and services. To demonstrate an appropriate plan for educating all currently enrolled students with disabilities upon withdrawal from the joint agreement, the withdrawing district must provide a written plan for educating and placing all currently eligible students with disabilities.
    (h) The changes to this Section made by Public Act 96-783 apply to withdrawals from or dissolutions of special education joint agreements initiated after August 28, 2009 (the effective date of Public Act 96-783).
    (i) Notwithstanding subsections (a), (g), and (h) of this Section or any other provision of this Code to the contrary, an elementary school district that maintains grades up to and including grade 8, that had a 2014-2015 best 3 months' average daily attendance of 5,209.57, and that had a 2014 equalized assessed valuation of at least $451,500,000, but not more than $452,000,000, may withdraw from its special education joint agreement program consisting of 6 school districts upon submission and approval of the comprehensive plan, in compliance with the applicable requirements of Section 14-4.01 of this Code, in addition to the approval by the school board of the elementary school district and notification to and the filing of an intent to withdraw statement with the governing board of the joint agreement program. Such notification and statement shall specify the effective date of the withdrawal, which in no case shall be less than 60 days after the date of the filing of the notification and statement. Upon receipt of the notification and statement, the governing board of the joint agreement program shall distribute a copy to each member district of the joint agreement and shall initiate any appropriate allocation of assets and liabilities among the remaining member districts to take effect upon the date of the withdrawal. The withdrawal shall take effect upon the date specified in the notification and statement.
(Source: P.A. 100-66, eff. 8-11-17; 101-164, eff. 7-26-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.31a) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.31a)
    Sec. 10-22.31a. Joint educational programs. To enter into joint agreements with other school boards or public institutions of higher education to establish any type of educational program which any district may establish individually, to provide the needed educational facilities and to employ a director and other professional workers for such program. The director and other professional workers may be employed by one district which shall be reimbursed on a mutually agreed basis by other districts that are parties to the joint agreement. Such agreements may provide that one district may supply professional workers for a joint program conducted in another district. Such agreement shall be executed on forms provided by the State Board of Education and shall include, but not be limited to, provisions for administration, staff, programs, financing, housing, transportation and advisory body and provide for the withdrawal of districts from the joint agreement by petition to the regional board of school trustees. Such petitions for withdrawal shall be made to the regional board of school trustees of the region having supervision and control over the administrative district and shall be acted upon in the manner provided in Article 7 for the detachment of territory from a school district.
    To designate an administrative district to act as fiscal and legal agent for the districts that are parties to such a joint agreement.
(Source: P.A. 86-198; 86-1318.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.31b) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.31b)
    Sec. 10-22.31b. Joint building programs. To enter into joint agreements either under this Act or under the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act with other school boards to acquire, build, establish and maintain sites and buildings including residential facilities, that may be needed for area vocational education buildings or the education of one or more of the types of children with disabilities defined in Sections 14-1.02 through 14-1.07 of this Act, who are residents of such joint agreement area, upon the review and recommendation of the Advisory Council on Education of Children with Disabilities and approval of the State Superintendent. Proposals shall be submitted on forms promulgated by the State Advisory Council. The State Advisory Council shall have 45 days to review the proposal and make a recommendation. The State Superintendent shall then approve or deny the proposal. Any establishment of residential facilities under this Section for the education of children with disabilities shall consider and utilize whenever possible the existing residential service delivery systems including state operated and privately operated facilities. Residential facilities shall be maintained in accordance with applicable health, licensing and life safety requirements, including the applicable provisions of the building code authorized under Section 2-3.12. Such sites may be acquired and buildings built at any place within the area embraced by such joint agreement or within 2 miles of the boundaries of any school district which is a party to the joint agreement. The title to any site or building so acquired shall be held in accordance with Section 16-2 of this Act.
    Any funds obtained from the participating governmental entities as a result of a joint agreement entered into under this Act or the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act shall be accounted for in the same manner as provided for the majority of the participating governmental entities under the laws of this State.
(Source: P.A. 89-397, eff. 8-20-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.31c) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.31c)
    Sec. 10-22.31c. Meetings; notice. The elected board members serving either as an administrative district or as a governing board under Section 10-22.31 or Section 10-22.31a shall fix a time and place for regular meetings. Special meetings may be called by any 2 such members by giving notice thereof in writing, stating the time, place and purpose of the meeting. Public notice of all meetings must be given as prescribed in Sections 2.02 and 2.03 of the Open Meetings Act, as now or hereafter amended.
    At each regular and special meeting which is open to the public, members of the public and employees of any of the districts which are parties to the joint agreement shall be afforded reasonable time to comment to or ask questions of the board members.
(Source: P.A. 84-1334.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.31.1)
    Sec. 10-22.31.1. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 91-241, eff. 7-22-99. Repealed by P.A. 96-783, eff. 8-28-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.32) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.32)
    Sec. 10-22.32. To authorize the advancement to school board members the anticipated actual and necessary expenses incurred in attending the following meetings:
    1. Meetings sponsored by the State Board of Education or by the regional superintendents of schools,
    2. County or regional meetings and the annual meeting sponsored by any school board association complying with the provisions of Article 23 of this Act, and
    3. Meetings sponsored by a national organization in the field of public school education.
    The school board may advance to teachers and other certified employees the anticipated actual and necessary expenses incurred in attending meetings which are related to that employee's duties and will contribute to the professional development of that employee.
    Such advanced actual and necessary expenses are those reasonably anticipated to be incurred on the days necessary for travel to and from and for attendance at such meetings.
    After a meeting for which money was advanced to a school board member or teacher or other certified employee for actual and necessary expenses, such member or employee shall submit an itemized verified expense voucher showing the amount of his actual expenses. Receipts shall be attached where possible. If the actual and necessary expenses exceed the amount advanced, the member or employee shall be reimbursed for the amount not advanced. If the actual and necessary expenses are less than the amount advanced, the member or employee shall refund the excess amount.
    For purposes of this Section only, a person elected at the consolidated election held in April of 1999 or April of 2001 to serve as a school board member for a term commencing upon the termination of his or her predecessor's term of office shall be deemed to be a school board member for whom moneys of the school district may be advanced and expended under this Section in order to provide, or to arrange for a school board association that complies with Article 23 to provide, to that person, after he or she has been elected and before his or her term of office as a school board member commences, training in matters relating to the powers, duties, and responsibilities of school board membership.
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Section 10-22.32, no money for expenses shall be advanced nor shall any member or employee be reimbursed, for any expenses incurred on behalf of any person other than such member, employee, or person deemed to be a school board member for purposes of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 90-637, eff. 7-24-98.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.33) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.33)
    Sec. 10-22.33. Interfund loans. To authorize the treasurer to make interfund loans from (1) the operations and maintenance fund to the educational fund or fire prevention and safety fund, or (2) from the educational fund to the operations and maintenance fund or fire prevention and safety fund, or (3) from the operations and maintenance or educational fund to the transportation fund, or (4) from the transportation fund to the operations and maintenance, educational, or fire prevention and safety fund and to make the necessary transfers on his books, but such loans shall be repaid and retransferred to the proper fund within 3 years. In case such repayment is not made within 3 years the regional superintendent shall withhold further payments on claims authorized by Article 18 of this Act until repayment is made.
(Source: P.A. 89-3, eff. 2-27-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.33A) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.33A)
    Sec. 10-22.33A. Summer school. During that period of the calendar year not embraced within the regular school term to provide and conduct courses in subject matters normally embraced in the program of the schools during the regular school term, to fix and collect a charge for attendance at such courses in an amount not to exceed the per capita cost of the operation thereof, except that the board may waive all or part of such charges if it determines that the family of an individual pupil is indigent or that the educational needs of the pupil require his attendance at such courses, and to give regular school credit for satisfactory completion by the student of such courses as may be approved for credit by the State Board of Education.
(Source: P.A. 81-1508.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.33B)
    Sec. 10-22.33B. Summer school; required attendance. To conduct a high quality summer school program for those resident students identified by the school district as being academically at risk in such critical subject areas as language arts (reading and writing) and mathematics who will be entering any of the school district's grades for the next school term and to require attendance at such program by such students who have not been identified as a person with a disability under Article 14, but who meet criteria established under this Section. Summer school programs established under this Section shall be designed to raise the level of achievement and improve opportunities for success in subsequent grade levels of those students required to attend. The parent or guardian of any student required to attend summer school shall be given written notice from the school district requiring attendance not later than the close of the school term which immediately precedes the required summer school program.
(Source: P.A. 99-143, eff. 7-27-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.34) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.34)
    Sec. 10-22.34. Non-certificated personnel.
    (a) School Boards may employ non-teaching personnel or utilize volunteer personnel for: (1) non-teaching duties not requiring instructional judgment or evaluation of pupils; and (2) supervising study halls, long distance teaching reception areas used incident to instructional programs transmitted by electronic media such as computers, video, and audio, and detention and discipline areas, and school-sponsored extracurricular activities.
    (b) School boards may further utilize volunteer non-certificated personnel or employ non-certificated personnel to assist in the instruction of pupils under the immediate supervision of a teacher, holding a valid certificate, directly engaged in teaching subject matter or conducting activities. The teacher shall be continuously aware of the non-certificated persons' activities and shall be able to control or modify them. The State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Teacher Certification Board, shall determine qualifications of such personnel and shall prescribe rules for determining the duties and activities to be assigned to such personnel. In the determination of qualifications of such personnel, the State Board of Education shall accept coursework earned in a recognized institution or from an institution of higher learning accredited by the North Central Association or other comparable regional accrediting association and shall accept qualifications based on relevant life experiences as determined by the State Board of Education by rule.
    (b-5) A school board may utilize volunteer personnel from a regional School Crisis Assistance Team (S.C.A.T.), created as part of the Safe to Learn Program established pursuant to Section 25 of the Illinois Violence Prevention Act of 1995, to provide assistance to schools in times of violence or other traumatic incidents within a school community by providing crisis intervention services to lessen the effects of emotional trauma on individuals and the community. The School Crisis Assistance Team Steering Committee shall determine the qualifications for volunteers.
    (c) School boards may also employ students holding a bachelor's degree from a recognized institution of higher learning as teaching interns when such students are enrolled in a college or university internship program, which has prior approval by the State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Teacher Certification Board, leading to a masters degree.
    Regional offices of education have the authority to initiate and collaborate with institutions of higher learning to establish internship programs referenced in this subsection (c). The State Board of Education has 90 days from receiving a written proposal to establish the internship program to seek the State Teacher Certification Board's consultation on the internship program. If the State Board of Education does not consult the State Teacher Certification Board within 90 days, the regional office of education may seek the State Teacher Certification Board's consultation without the State Board of Education's approval.
    (d) Nothing in this Section shall require constant supervision of a student teacher enrolled in a student teaching course at a college or university, provided such activity has the prior approval of the representative of the higher education institution and teaching plans have previously been discussed with and approved by the supervising teacher and further provided that such teaching is within guidelines established by the State Board of Education in consultation with the State Teacher Certification Board.
(Source: P.A. 92-200, eff. 1-1-02; 92-724, eff. 7-25-02; 93-332, eff. 1-1-04.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.34a) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.34a)
    Sec. 10-22.34a. Supervision of non-academic activities.
    To designate non-certificated persons of good character to serve as supervisors, chaperones or sponsors, either on a voluntary or on a compensated basis, for school activities not connected with the academic program of the schools.
(Source: Laws 1967, p. 1029.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.34b) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.34b)
    Sec. 10-22.34b. Utilization of noncertificated personnel. To utilize noncertificated persons, under the direction of a certificated teacher, for providing specialized instruction related to a course assigned to the certificated teacher on a regular basis, not otherwise readily available in the immediate school environment, in the fields for which they are particularly qualified by reason of their specialized knowledge or skills. The duration of the instruction shall be determined by the certificated teacher under whose direction the program is conducted in view of the educational need to be satisfied.
    Before a noncertificated person may be utilized for such specialized instruction, the school board must secure the written approval of the regional superintendent of schools as to the qualifications of the particular noncertificated person, the particular instruction he is to provide, the specific functions to be served, the total number of hours he is to provide such instruction and any compensation to be paid that person. The State Board of Education shall prescribe, by rule, criteria for determining qualifications of such persons and the nature of specialized instruction for which, and the extent to which, such persons may be used.
    Nothing in this Section shall prevent the utilization of a person with specialized knowledge or experiences as a guest lecturer or resource person in the classroom under the direct supervision of a certificated teacher assigned to the classroom on a regular basis, with prior approval of the school administration.
(Source: P.A. 81-1508.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.34c)
    Sec. 10-22.34c. Third party non-instructional services.
    (a) A board of education may enter into a contract with a third party for non-instructional services currently performed by any employee or bargaining unit member or lay off those educational support personnel employees upon 90 days written notice to the affected employees, provided that:
        (1) a contract must not be entered into and become
    	
effective during the term of a collective bargaining agreement, as that term is set forth in the agreement, covering any employees who perform the non-instructional services;
        (2) a contract may only take effect upon the
    	
expiration of an existing collective bargaining agreement;
        (3) any third party that submits a bid to perform
    	
the non-instructional services shall provide the following:
            (A) evidence of liability insurance in scope and
        	
amount equivalent to the liability insurance provided by the school board pursuant to Section 10-22.3 of this Code;
            (B) a benefits package for the third party's
        	
employees who will perform the non-instructional services comparable to the benefits package provided to school board employees who perform those services;
            (C) a list of the number of employees who will
        	
provide the non-instructional services, the job classifications of those employees, and the wages the third party will pay those employees;
            (D) a minimum 3-year cost projection, using
        	
generally accepted accounting principles and which the third party is prohibited from increasing if the bid is accepted by the school board, for each and every expenditure category and account for performing the non-instructional services;
            (E) composite information about the criminal and
        	
disciplinary records, including alcohol or other substance abuse, Department of Children and Family Services complaints and investigations, traffic violations, and license revocations or any other licensure problems, of any employees who may perform the non-instructional services, provided that the individual names and other identifying information of employees need not be provided with the submission of the bid, but must be made available upon request of the school board; and
            (F) an affidavit, notarized by the president or
        	
chief executive officer of the third party, that each of its employees has completed a criminal background check as required by Section 10-21.9 of this Code within 3 months prior to submission of the bid, provided that the results of such background checks need not be provided with the submission of the bid, but must be made available upon request of the school board;
        (4) a contract must not be entered into unless the
    	
school board provides a cost comparison, using generally accepted accounting principles, of each and every expenditure category and account that the school board projects it would incur over the term of the contract if it continued to perform the non-instructional services using its own employees with each and every expenditure category and account that is projected a third party would incur if a third party performed the non-instructional services;
        (5) review and consideration of all bids by third
    	
parties to perform the non-instructional services shall take place in open session of a regularly scheduled school board meeting, unless the exclusive bargaining representative of the employees who perform the non-instructional services, if any such exclusive bargaining representative exists, agrees in writing that such review and consideration can take place in open session at a specially scheduled school board meeting;
        (6) a minimum of one public hearing, conducted by
    	
the school board prior to a regularly scheduled school board meeting, to discuss the school board's proposal to contract with a third party to perform the non-instructional services must be held before the school board may enter into such a contract; the school board must provide notice to the public of the date, time, and location of the first public hearing on or before the initial date that bids to provide the non-instructional services are solicited or a minimum of 30 days prior to entering into such a contract, whichever provides a greater period of notice;
        (7) a contract shall contain provisions requiring
    	
the contractor to offer available employee positions pursuant to the contract to qualified school district employees whose employment is terminated because of the contract; and
        (8) a contract shall contain provisions requiring
    	
the contractor to comply with a policy of nondiscrimination and equal employment opportunity for all persons and to take affirmative steps to provide equal opportunity for all persons.
    (b) Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this Section, a board of education may enter into a contract, of no longer than 3 months in duration, with a third party for non-instructional services currently performed by an employee or bargaining unit member for the purpose of augmenting the current workforce in an emergency situation that threatens the safety or health of the school district's students or staff, provided that the school board meets all of its obligations under the Illinois Educational Labor Relations Act.
    (c) The changes to this Section made by this amendatory Act of the 95th General Assembly are not applicable to non-instructional services of a school district that on the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 95th General Assembly are performed for the school district by a third party.
(Source: P.A. 95-241, eff. 8-17-07; 96-328, eff. 8-11-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.35) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.35)
    Sec. 10-22.35. Civil defense shelters. A school board shall make school buildings available for use as civil defense shelters for all persons; cooperate with the Illinois Emergency Management Agency, local organizations for civil defense, disaster relief organizations, including the American Red Cross, and federal agencies concerned with civil defense relative thereto, including, but not limited to, making space available for the stocking of shelters with food and other provisions; cooperate with such agencies and organizations in the use of other resources, equipment, and facilities; and cooperate with such agencies and organizations in the construction of new buildings to the end that the buildings be so designed that shelter facilities may be provided.
(Source: P.A. 96-57, eff. 7-23-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.35A) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.35A)
    Sec. 10-22.35A. School sites and office facilities. To buy sites for buildings for school purposes with necessary ground, including sites purchased under Section 10-22.31b, or to buy sites and facilities for school offices. The purchase of such sites or office facilities may be by contract for deed when the board deems such contract advantageous to the district, but any such contract or any transaction arising out of such contract may not exceed 10 years in length, and interest on the unpaid balance of such contract may at no time exceed 6% per annum.
    To take and purchase the site for a building for school purposes either with or without the owner's consent by condemnation or otherwise. To pay the amount of any award made by a jury in a condemnation proceeding. To select and purchase all such sites and office facilities desired without the submission of the question at any referendum, and to enter into an option to purchase with respect to any such site or sites and facilities for school offices.
(Source: P.A. 80-1044.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.35B)
    Sec. 10-22.35B. Title to school sites and buildings.
    (a) On January 1, 1994 (the effective date of Public Act 88-155): (i) the legal title to all school buildings and school sites used or occupied for school purposes by a school district located in a Class I county school unit or held for the use of any such school district by and in the name of the regional board of school trustees shall vest in the school board of the school district, and the legal title to those school buildings and school sites shall be deemed transferred by operation of law to the school board of the school district, to be used for school purposes and held, sold, leased, exchanged, or otherwise transferred in accordance with law; and (ii) the legal title to all school buildings and school sites used or occupied for school purposes by a school district that is located in a Class II county school unit and that has withdrawn from the jurisdiction and authority of the trustees of schools of a township and the township treasurer under subsection (b) of Section 5-1 of this Code or held for the use of any such school district by and in the name of the regional board of school trustees at the time that regional board of school trustees was abolished by Public Act 87-969 shall vest in the school board of the school district, and the legal title to those school buildings and school sites shall be deemed transferred by operation of law to the school district, to be used for school purposes and held, sold, leased, exchanged, or otherwise transferred in accordance with law.
    (b) The school board of each school district to which subsection (a) of this Section is applicable may receive any gift, grant, donation, or legacy made for the use of any school or for any school purpose within its jurisdiction and shall succeed to any gift, grant, donation, or legacy heretofore received by the regional board of school trustees, either from the township school trustees within their jurisdiction or from any other source, for the use of any school of the district served by the school board or for any other school purpose of that school district. All conveyances of real estate made to the school board of a school district under this Section shall be made to the school board in its corporate name and to its successors in office.
    (c) All school districts and high school districts may take and convey title to real estate to be improved by buildings or other structures for vocational or other educational training as provided in Section 10-23.3 of this Code.
    (d) Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to apply to any common school lands or lands granted or exchanged therefor or to the manner in which such lands are managed and controlled for the use and benefit of the school township and the schools of the township by the township land commissioners, the regional board of school trustees (acting as the township land commissioners), or the trustees of schools of the township, which hold legal title to those lands; and they may continue to receive gifts, grants, donations, or legacies made for the use of the school township and for the schools of the township generally in the same manner as such gifts, grants, donations, or legacies were made prior to January 1, 1994.
(Source: P.A. 100-374, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.36) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.36)
    Sec. 10-22.36. Buildings for school purposes.
    (a) To build or purchase a building for school classroom or instructional purposes upon the approval of a majority of the voters upon the proposition at a referendum held for such purpose or in accordance with Section 17-2.11, 19-3.5, or 19-3.10. The board may initiate such referendum by resolution. The board shall certify the resolution and proposition to the proper election authority for submission in accordance with the general election law.
    The questions of building one or more new buildings for school purposes or office facilities, and issuing bonds for the purpose of borrowing money to purchase one or more buildings or sites for such buildings or office sites, to build one or more new buildings for school purposes or office facilities or to make additions and improvements to existing school buildings, may be combined into one or more propositions on the ballot.
    Before erecting, or purchasing or remodeling such a building the board shall submit the plans and specifications respecting heating, ventilating, lighting, seating, water supply, toilets and safety against fire to the regional superintendent of schools having supervision and control over the district, for approval in accordance with Section 2-3.12.
    Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, no referendum shall be required if the purchase, construction, or building of any such building (1) occurs while the building is being leased by the school district or (2) is paid with (A) funds derived from the sale or disposition of other buildings, land, or structures of the school district or (B) funds received (i) as a grant under the School Construction Law or (ii) as gifts or donations, provided that no funds to purchase, construct, or build such building, other than lease payments, are derived from the district's bonded indebtedness or the tax levy of the district.
    Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, no referendum shall be required if the purchase, construction, or building of any such building is paid with funds received from the County School Facility and Resources Occupation Tax Law under Section 5-1006.7 of the Counties Code or from the proceeds of bonds or other debt obligations secured by revenues obtained from that Law.
    (b) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), for any school district: (i) that is a tier 1 school, (ii) that has a population of less than 50,000 inhabitants, (iii) whose student population is between 5,800 and 6,300, (iv) in which 57% to 62% of students are low-income, and (v) whose average district spending is between $10,000 to $12,000 per pupil, until July 1, 2025, no referendum shall be required if at least 70% of the cost of the purchase, construction, or building of any such building is paid, or will be paid, with funds received or expected to be received as part of, or otherwise derived from, the federal Consolidated Appropriations Act and the federal American Rescue Plan Act of 2021.
    For this subsection (b), the school board must hold at least 2 public hearings, the sole purpose of which shall be to discuss the decision to construct a school building and to receive input from the community. The notice of each public hearing that sets forth the time, date, place, and name or description of the school building that the school board is considering constructing must be provided at least 10 days prior to the hearing by publication on the school board's Internet website.
(Source: P.A. 101-455, eff. 8-23-19; 102-16, eff. 6-17-21.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.36A) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.36A)
    Sec. 10-22.36A. Access Roads.
    To lay out and construct any access road necessary to connect school grounds, on which a new school is being or is about to be constructed, with an improved road or highway. Such access road shall be considered a part of the general construction of the school and such construction shall be financed solely from funds derived from the sale of bonds.
(Source: P.A. 76-1499.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.37) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.37)
    Sec. 10-22.37. Agreements with Teacher Training Institutions.
    To enter into agreements with teacher training institutions to provide facilities for student teaching in the schools of the district.
(Source: P.A. 76-620.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.38) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.38)
    Sec. 10-22.38. Preschool children with disabilities. Establish and maintain, or to cooperate with other educational, governmental, social and volunteer agencies in the establishment and carrying out of programs designed to identify and ameliorate mental, emotional, physical and social cultural disabilities in preschool age children below the age of 3 that would prevent such children from taking full advantage of regular school programs.
    No school district is eligible for State reimbursement under Article 14 or Article 18 for programs provided to children with disabilities under this Section.
(Source: P.A. 89-397, eff. 8-20-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.38a)
    Sec. 10-22.38a. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 81-1508. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.39)
    Sec. 10-22.39. In-service training programs.
    (a) To conduct in-service training programs for teachers.
    (b) In addition to other topics at in-service training programs, at least once every 2 years, licensed school personnel and administrators who work with pupils in kindergarten through grade 12 shall be trained to identify the warning signs of mental illness and suicidal behavior in youth and shall be taught appropriate intervention and referral techniques. A school district may utilize the Illinois Mental Health First Aid training program, established under the Illinois Mental Health First Aid Training Act and administered by certified instructors trained by a national association recognized as an authority in behavioral health, to provide the training and meet the requirements under this subsection. If licensed school personnel or an administrator obtains mental health first aid training outside of an in-service training program, he or she may present a certificate of successful completion of the training to the school district to satisfy the requirements of this subsection.
    (c) School guidance counselors, nurses, teachers and other school personnel who work with pupils may be trained to have a basic knowledge of matters relating to acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), including the nature of the disease, its causes and effects, the means of detecting it and preventing its transmission, and the availability of appropriate sources of counseling and referral, and any other information that may be appropriate considering the age and grade level of such pupils. The School Board shall supervise such training. The State Board of Education and the Department of Public Health shall jointly develop standards for such training.
    (d) In this subsection (d):
    "Domestic violence" means abuse by a family or household member, as "abuse" and "family or household members" are defined in Section 103 of the Illinois Domestic Violence Act of 1986.
    "Sexual violence" means sexual assault, abuse, or stalking of an adult or minor child proscribed in the Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012 in Sections 11-1.20, 11-1.30, 11-1.40, 11-1.50, 11-1.60, 12-7.3, 12-7.4, 12-7.5, 12-12, 12-13, 12-14, 12-14.1, 12-15, and 12-16, including sexual violence committed by perpetrators who are strangers to the victim and sexual violence committed by perpetrators who are known or related by blood or marriage to the victim.
    At least once every 2 years, an in-service training program for school personnel who work with pupils, including, but not limited to, school and school district administrators, teachers, school guidance counselors, school social workers, school counselors, school psychologists, and school nurses, must be conducted by persons with expertise in domestic and sexual violence and the needs of expectant and parenting youth and shall include training concerning (i) communicating with and listening to youth victims of domestic or sexual violence and expectant and parenting youth, (ii) connecting youth victims of domestic or sexual violence and expectant and parenting youth to appropriate in-school services and other agencies, programs, and services as needed, and (iii) implementing the school district's policies, procedures, and protocols with regard to such youth, including confidentiality. At a minimum, school personnel must be trained to understand, provide information and referrals, and address issues pertaining to youth who are parents, expectant parents, or victims of domestic or sexual violence.
    (e) At least every 2 years, an in-service training program for school personnel who work with pupils must be conducted by persons with expertise in anaphylactic reactions and management.
    (f) At least once every 2 years, a school board shall conduct in-service training on educator ethics, teacher-student conduct, and school employee-student conduct for all personnel.
(Source: P.A. 100-903, eff. 1-1-19; 101-350, eff. 1-1-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.40) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.40)
    Sec. 10-22.40. Membership dues. To pay State and national association membership dues to school associations which benefit students by participation or accreditation. Any association subject to Article 23 of this Act must be in current compliance with the reporting requirements of Section 23-6 in order to qualify as a recipient of membership dues under this Section. No dues may be paid to any association which has as one of its purposes providing for athletic and other competition among schools and students unless that association:
    A. permits a post audit by the Auditor General under the Illinois State Auditing Act;
    B. submits an annual report to the State Board of Education dealing with trends in female participation in athletic competition, including the numbers of female and male participants from each member school and details on programs by the association to increase female participation; and
    C. is either subject to, or voluntarily complies with, the public access provisions set forth for State agencies in Sections 3 and 4 of The State Records Act.
(Source: P.A. 84-1308.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.40a) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.40a)
    Sec. 10-22.40a. Where a collective bargaining agreement is entered into with an employee representative organization, the school board may include in the agreement a provision requiring employees covered by the agreement who are not members of the representative organization to pay their proportionate share of the cost of the collective bargaining process and contract administration, measured by the amount of dues uniformly required by members. In such case, proportionate share payments shall be deducted by the board from the earnings of the non-member employees and paid to the representative organization.
(Source: P.A. 82-107.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.41) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.41)
    Sec. 10-22.41. Placement of eligible children into corrective curriculum. To place or by regulation to authorize the director of special education to place, pursuant to procedures required in Article 14 of this Act and rules and regulations promulgated by the State Board of Education, eligible children into special education programs designed to benefit the types of children defined in Sections 14-1.02 through 14-1.07; provided that children with disabilities who are recommended to be placed into regular education classrooms are provided with supplementary services to assist the children with disabilities to benefit from the regular education classroom instruction and are included on the teacher's regular education class register.
(Source: P.A. 89-397, eff. 8-20-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.42) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.42)
    Sec. 10-22.42. To contract with the corporate authorities of any municipality or the county board of any county, as the case may be, to provide for the regulation of traffic in parking areas of property used for school purposes in such manner as is provided by Section 11-209 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
(Source: P.A. 77-1849.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.43) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.43)
    Sec. 10-22.43. Credit for Proficiency in Foreign Language. To grant one year of high school foreign language credit to any student who has graduated from an accredited elementary school and who can demonstrate proficiency in a language other than English. For purposes of this Section, proficiency in American Sign Language shall be deemed proficiency in a foreign language for which one year of high school foreign language credit may be granted. Proficiency shall be determined by academic criteria acceptable to local school boards.
(Source: P.A. 86-623.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.43a) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.43a)
    Sec. 10-22.43a. Foreign language credit. To award or provide for the awarding of high school credit to high school students who have studied a foreign language in an approved ethnic school program. The amount of credit awarded shall be roughly equivalent to the amount of credit the student would have received if he or she had reached the same level of foreign language proficiency at a public high school as he or she achieved at the ethnic school. The school board may require a student seeking foreign language credit under this Section to successfully complete a foreign language proficiency examination.
(Source: P.A. 83-794.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.44) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.44)
    Sec. 10-22.44. To transfer the interest earned from any moneys of the district in the respective fund of the district that is most in need of such interest income, as determined by the board. This Section does not apply to any interest earned which has been earmarked or restricted by the board for a designated purpose. This Section does not apply to any interest earned on any funds for purposes of Illinois Municipal Retirement under the Pension Code, Tort Immunity under the Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act, Fire Prevention, Safety, Energy Conservation and School Security Purposes under Section 17-2.11, and Capital Improvements under Section 17-2.3. Interest earned on these exempted funds shall be used only for the purposes authorized for the respective exempted funds from which the interest earnings were derived.
    Any high school district whose territory is in 2 counties and that is eligible for Section 8002 Federal Impact Aid may make a one-time declaration as to interest income (earnings on investments) not previously declared as such from 1998 through 2011 in the debt service fund, declaring said moneys as interest earnings on or before June 30, 2016. Any such earnings income so declared shall thereafter, for purposes of this Code, be considered interest earnings and shall be subject to all provisions of this Code related thereto.
(Source: P.A. 99-404, eff. 8-19-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-22.45) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-22.45)
    Sec. 10-22.45. To establish an audit committee, and to appoint members of the board or other appropriate officers to the committee, to review audit reports and any other financial reports and documents, including management letters prepared by or on behalf of the board.
(Source: P.A. 82-644.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-23) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-23)
    Sec. 10-23. Additional powers of board. Boards of education have the additional powers enumerated in Sections 10-23.1 through 10-23.12.
(Source: P.A. 84-1308.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-23.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-23.1)
    Sec. 10-23.1. Residence for superintendent, principal or teachers. To purchase a site, with or without a building or buildings thereon, to build a house or houses on such site or to build a house or houses on the school site of the school district, for residential purposes of the superintendent, principal, or teachers of the school district, if authorized by a majority of all votes cast on the proposition or propositions at a regular scheduled election held for the purpose in pursuance of a petition signed by not fewer than 300 voters or by 1/5 of all the voters of the district, whichever is lesser. Such referendum shall be certified to the proper election authorities and submitted in accordance with the general election law. When any of such property is not needed for residential purposes by the superintendent, principal, or teachers, the board of education may rent it to some other person or persons.
(Source: P.A. 81-1489.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-23.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-23.2)
    Sec. 10-23.2. Nursery schools.
    In all districts maintaining grades 1 to 8 or 1 to 12, to establish nursery schools for the instruction of children between the ages of 2 and 6 years, if, in its judgment public interest requires them and sufficient funds obtained from local and federal sources other than local district taxes are available to pay the necessary expenses thereof; provided, that the school board shall at all times have complete jurisdiction and control over such schools, including the employment of teachers, attendants and any other employees, and shall have complete control of the expenditure of such funds in connection with the establishment and maintenance of such schools.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-23.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-23.3)
    Sec. 10-23.3. Real estate for vocational and other training. After provision has been made for the payment of all school expenses, to appropriate from the educational fund school funds or to borrow funds for the purchase of real estate and for the improvement by construction of buildings or other structures, or improved real estate in a deteriorated or uninhabitable condition, for vocational and other educational training of pupils, and as incident thereto and when authorized or requested by resolution adopted by the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the members of the school board, to acquire title to the real estate in the name of the school district and sell and convey it; provided: that no such property shall be so bought or used as a schoolhouse or for permanent use as school property; that such property so purchased and improved shall be sold or otherwise disposed of within 5 years from the date of its acquisition; that not more than one piece of real estate to be improved and one piece of improved real state in a deteriorated or uninhabitable condition may be so purchased for each secondary school or area vocational center which offers vocational training within the school district for any such purpose in any one calendar year, unless additional properties are examined and approved by the Superintendent of the Educational Service Region in the county in which the district is located, for larger training programs necessitating more property to accommodate larger student enrollments; and that no such real estate may be acquired for any such purpose by means of eminent domain proceedings. If the school board does not hold legal title to the school site or other school property that is to be used for any purpose authorized by this Section, then upon the adoption of the resolution by 2/3 of the board members of the district requesting the conveyance of a school site or other school property or a portion thereof the trustees of schools or other school official having legal title to such property shall convey such property to such school district as provided in Section 5-21.
(Source: P.A. 88-155.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-23.3a) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-23.3a)
    Sec. 10-23.3a. Conduct of business for vocational training.
    To independently operate or cooperate with existing companies in the operation of a business or businesses for the sole purpose of providing training for students in vocational education programs. Any proceeds from said operation shall be applied towards the costs of establishing and maintaining these businesses. Regarding businesses with which the school board cooperates in operating for vocational training purposes, the school board shall receive a semi-annual account from each cooperating company of all costs and proceeds attributable to the student business-training program. Should the proceeds ever exceed the establishment and maintenance costs, then that excess shall only be directed toward expanding business-operation training in vocational education programs.
(Source: P.A. 77-664.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-23.4) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-23.4)
    Sec. 10-23.4. Purchase of school bus.
    To purchase, maintain, repair and operate school buses and by resolution of the board to enter into a contract for the purchase of buses to be paid for within three years of the date of the resolution or over such longer period of time as does not exceed the depreciable life of the vehicle.
(Source: P.A. 85-1389.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-23.4a) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-23.4a)
    Sec. 10-23.4a. To enter into a lease for a period of not to exceed 5 years for such equipment and machinery as may be required for corporate purposes when authorized by the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the members of the board of education.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 2890.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-23.5) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-23.5)
    Sec. 10-23.5. Educational support personnel employees.
    (a) To employ such educational support personnel employees as it deems advisable and to define their employment duties; provided that residency within any school district shall not be considered in determining the employment or the compensation of any such employee, or whether to retain, promote, assign or transfer such employee. If an educational support personnel employee is removed or dismissed or the hours he or she works are reduced as a result of a decision of the school board (i) to decrease the number of educational support personnel employees employed by the board or (ii) to discontinue some particular type of educational support service, written notice shall be mailed to the employee and also given to the employee either by certified mail, return receipt requested, or personal delivery with receipt, at least 30 days before the employee is removed or dismissed or the hours he or she works are reduced, together with a statement of honorable dismissal and the reason therefor if applicable. However, if a reduction in hours is due to an unforeseen reduction in the student population, then the written notice must be mailed and given to the employee at least 5 days before the hours are reduced. The employee with the shorter length of continuing service with the district, within the respective category of position, shall be dismissed first unless an alternative method of determining the sequence of dismissal is established in a collective bargaining agreement or contract between the board and any exclusive bargaining agent and except that this provision shall not impair the operation of any affirmative action program in the district, regardless of whether it exists by operation of law or is conducted on a voluntary basis by the board. If the board has any vacancies for the following school term or within one calendar year from the beginning of the following school term, the positions thereby becoming available within a specific category of position shall be tendered to the employees so removed or dismissed from that category or any other category of position, so far as they are qualified to hold such positions. Each board shall, in consultation with any exclusive employee representative or bargaining agent, each year establish a list, categorized by positions, showing the length of continuing service of each full time educational support personnel employee who is qualified to hold any such positions, unless an alternative method of determining a sequence of dismissal is established as provided for in this Section, in which case a list shall be made in accordance with the alternative method. Copies of the list shall be distributed to the exclusive employee representative or bargaining agent on or before February 1 of each year.
    If an educational support personnel employee is removed or dismissed as a result of a decision of the board to decrease the number of educational support personnel employed by the board or to discontinue some particular type of educational support service and he or she accepts the tender of a vacancy within one calendar year from the beginning of the following school term, then that employee shall maintain any rights accrued during his or her previous service with the school district.
    Where an educational support personnel employee is dismissed by the board as a result of a decrease in the number of employees or the discontinuance of the employee's job, the employee shall be paid all earned compensation on or before the next regular pay date following his or her last day of employment.
    The provisions of this amendatory Act of 1986 relating to residency within any school district shall not apply to cities having a population exceeding 500,000 inhabitants.
    (b) In the case of a new school district or districts formed in accordance with Article 11E of this Code, a school district or districts that annex all of the territory of one or more entire other school districts in accordance with Article 7 of this Code, or a school district receiving students from a deactivated school facility in accordance with Section 10-22.22b of this Code, the employment of educational support personnel in the new, annexing, or receiving school district immediately following the reorganization shall be governed by this subsection (b). Lists of the educational support personnel employed in the individual districts for the school year immediately prior to the effective date of the new district or districts, annexation, or deactivation shall be combined for the districts forming the new district or districts, for the annexed and annexing districts, or for the deactivating and receiving districts, as the case may be. The combined list shall be categorized by positions, showing the length of continuing service of each full-time educational support personnel employee who is qualified to hold any such position. If there are more full-time educational support personnel employees on the combined list than there are available positions in the new, annexing, or receiving school district, then the employing school board shall first remove or dismiss those educational support personnel employees with the shorter length of continuing service within the respective category of position, following the procedures outlined in subsection (a) of this Section. The employment and position of each educational support personnel employee on the combined list not so removed or dismissed shall be transferred to the new, annexing, or receiving school board, and the new, annexing, or receiving school board is subject to this Code with respect to any educational support personnel employee so transferred as if the educational support personnel employee had been the new, annexing, or receiving board's employee during the time the educational support personnel employee was actually employed by the school board of the district from which the employment and position were transferred.
    The changes made by Public Act 95-148 shall not apply to the formation of a new district or districts in accordance with Article 11E of this Code, the annexation of one or more entire districts in accordance with Article 7 of this Code, or the deactivation of a school facility in accordance with Section 10-22.22b of this Code effective on or before July 1, 2007.
(Source: P.A. 101-46, eff. 7-12-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-23.6) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-23.6)
    Sec. 10-23.6. Sites out of district.
    A school district, including any special charter school district, having 100,000 or more inhabitants and maintaining grades 1 through 12 may acquire a school site in any other school district which does not maintain a recognized public high school, provided that such site lies within two miles of the boundaries of such school district, and may build, operate and maintain a school maintaining grades 9 through 12 upon any site so acquired, and for these purposes may borrow money and issue bonds as otherwise provided by law and charge and receive tuition for students attending said school from any other school district, to the same effect as if said school had been constructed within the boundaries of said school district.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-23.7) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-23.7)
    Sec. 10-23.7. Special Charter district - Adoption of Article 10. This Article may be adopted by the electors of any special charter school district, in the following manner:
    The board of such district may, and upon petition of 10% of the voters residing in such district, shall order submitted to the voters of such district the question whether Article 10 of the School Code shall be adopted at a regular scheduled election to be held in accordance with the general election law. The board shall certify the proposition to the proper election authorities for submission to the electors.
    If the vote is favorable to the adoption of this Article, the transitional provisions of Section 10 of this Article shall apply as though the effective date of this Act were the day of such referendum.
    If the adoption of this Article is rejected, the proposition shall not be resubmitted within 22 months.
(Source: P.A. 81-1489.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-23.8) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-23.8)
    Sec. 10-23.8. Superintendent contracts. After the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1997 and the expiration of contracts in effect on the effective date of this amendatory Act, school districts may only employ a superintendent or, if authorized by law, a chief executive officer under either a contract for a period not exceeding one year or a performance-based contract for a period not exceeding 5 years.
    Performance-based contracts shall be linked to student performance and academic improvement within the schools of the districts. No performance-based contract shall be extended or rolled-over prior to its scheduled expiration unless all the performance and improvement goals contained in the contract have been met. Each performance-based contract shall include the goals and indicators of student performance and academic improvement determined and used by the local school board to measure the performance and effectiveness of the superintendent and such other information as the local school board may determine.
    By accepting the terms of a multi-year contract, the superintendent or chief executive officer waives all rights granted him or her under Sections 24-11 through 24-16 of this Act only for the term of the multi-year contract. Upon acceptance of a multi-year contract, the superintendent or chief executive officer shall not lose any previously acquired tenure credit with the district.
(Source: P.A. 99-846, eff. 6-1-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-23.8a) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-23.8a)
    Sec. 10-23.8a. Principal, assistant principal, and other administrator contracts. After the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1997 and the expiration of contracts in effect on the effective date of this amendatory Act, school districts may only employ principals, assistant principals, and other school administrators under either a contract for a period not to exceed one year or a performance-based contract for a period not to exceed 5 years, unless the provisions of Section 10-23.8b of this Code or subsection (e) of Section 24A-15 of this Code otherwise apply.
    Performance-based contracts shall be linked to student performance and academic improvement attributable to the responsibilities and duties of the principal, assistant principal, or administrator. No performance-based contract shall be extended or rolled-over prior to its scheduled expiration unless all the performance and improvement goals contained in the contract have been met. Each performance-based contract shall include the goals and indicators of student performance and academic improvement determined and used by the local school board to measure the performance and effectiveness of the principal, assistant principal, or other administrator and such other information as the local school board may determine.
    By accepting the terms of a multi-year contract, the principal, assistant principal, or administrator waives all rights granted him or her under Sections 24-11 through 24-16 of this Act only for the term of the multi-year contract. Upon acceptance of a multi-year contract, the principal, assistant principal, or administrator shall not lose any previously acquired tenure credit with the district.
(Source: P.A. 97-217, eff. 7-28-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-23.8b) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-23.8b)
    Sec. 10-23.8b. Reclassification of principals and assistant principals. Upon non-renewal of a principal's or assistant principal's administrative contract, the principal or assistant principal shall be reclassified pursuant to this Section. No principal or assistant principal may be reclassified by demotion or reduction in rank from one position within a school district to another for which a lower salary is paid without written notice from the board of the proposed reclassification by April 1 of the year in which the contract expires.
    Within 10 days of the principal's or assistant principal's receipt of this notice, the school board shall provide the principal or assistant principal with a written statement of the facts regarding reclassification, and the principal or assistant principal may request and receive a private hearing with the board to discuss the reasons for the reclassification. If the principal or assistant principal is not satisfied with the results of the private hearing, he or she may, within 5 days thereafter, request and receive a public hearing on the reclassification. Any principal or assistant principal may be represented by counsel at a private or public hearing conducted under this Section.
    If the board decides to proceed with the reclassification, it shall give the principal or assistant principal written notice of its decision within 15 days of the private hearing or within 15 days of the public hearing held under this Section whichever is later. The decision of the board thereupon becomes final.
    Nothing in this Section prohibits a board from ordering lateral transfers of principals or assistant principals to positions of similar rank and equal salary.
    The changes made by Public Act 94-201 are declaratory of existing law.
(Source: P.A. 97-217, eff. 7-28-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-23.9)
    Sec. 10-23.9. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 81-1508. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-23.10) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-23.10)
    Sec. 10-23.10. (a) To sell or market any computer program developed by an employee of the school district, provided that such employee developed the computer program as a direct result of his or her duties with the school district or through the utilization of the school district resources or facilities. The employee who developed the computer program shall be entitled to share in the proceeds of such sale or marketing of the computer program. The distribution of such proceeds between the employee and the school district shall be as agreed upon by the employee and the school district, except that neither the employee nor the school district may receive more than 90% of such proceeds. The negotiation for an employee who is represented by an exclusive bargaining representative under Section 3-14.24 may be conducted by such bargaining representative at the employee's request.
    (b) For the purposes of this Section:
    (1) "Computer" means an internally programmed, general purpose digital device capable of automatically accepting data, processing data and supplying the results of the operation.
    (2) "Computer program" means a series of coded instructions or statements in a form acceptable to a computer, which causes the computer to process data in order to achieve a certain result.
    (3) "Proceeds" means profits derived from marketing or sale of a product after deducting the expenses of developing and marketing such product.
(Source: P.A. 83-797.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-23.11) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-23.11)
    Sec. 10-23.11. To accept payment for student fees and expenses through the use of credit cards and to negotiate and execute such contracts as may be necessary to accept such credit card payments.
    In this context, "credit card" means any instrument or device, whether known as a credit card, credit plate, charge plate or any other name, issued with or without fee by an issuer for the use of the cardholder in obtaining money, goods, services or anything else of value on credit or in consideration of an undertaking or guaranty by the issuer of the payment of a check drawn by the cardholder.
(Source: P.A. 84-388.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-23.12) (from Ch. 122, par. 10-23.12)
    Sec. 10-23.12. Child abuse and neglect; detection, reporting, and prevention; willful or negligent failure to report.
    (a) To provide staff development for local school site personnel who work with pupils in grades kindergarten through 8 in the detection, reporting, and prevention of child abuse and neglect.
    (b) The Department of Children and Family Services may, in cooperation with school officials, distribute appropriate materials in school buildings listing the toll-free telephone number established in Section 7.6 of the Abused and Neglected Child Reporting Act, including methods of making a report under Section 7 of the Abused and Neglected Child Reporting Act, to be displayed in a clearly visible location in each school building.
    (c) Except for an employee licensed under Article 21B of this Code, if a school board determines that any school district employee has willfully or negligently failed to report an instance of suspected child abuse or neglect, as required by the Abused and Neglected Child Reporting Act, then the school board may dismiss that employee immediately upon that determination. For purposes of this subsection (c), negligent failure to report an instance of suspected child abuse or neglect occurs when a school district employee personally observes an instance of suspected child abuse or neglect and reasonably believes, in his or her professional or official capacity, that the instance constitutes an act of child abuse or neglect under the Abused and Neglected Child Reporting Act, and he or she, without willful intent, fails to immediately report or cause a report to be made of the suspected abuse or neglect to the Department of Children and Family Services, as required by the Abused and Neglected Child Reporting Act.
(Source: P.A. 100-413, eff. 1-1-18; 100-468, eff. 6-1-18; 101-531, eff. 8-23-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-23.13)
    Sec. 10-23.13. Policies addressing sexual abuse. To adopt and implement a policy addressing sexual abuse of children that may include age-appropriate curriculum for students in pre-K through 5th grade; training for school personnel on child sexual abuse; educational information to parents or guardians provided in the school handbook on the warning signs of a child being abused, along with any needed assistance, referral, or resource information; available counseling and resources for students affected by sexual abuse; and emotional and educational support for a child of abuse to continue to be successful in school.
    Any policy adopted may address without limitation:
        (1) methods for increasing teacher, student, and
    	
parent awareness of issues regarding sexual abuse of children, including knowledge of likely warning signs indicating that a child may be a victim of sexual abuse;
        (2) actions that a child who is a victim of sexual
    	
abuse should take to obtain assistance and intervention; and
        (3) available counseling options for students
    	
affected by sexual abuse.
    This Section may be referred to as Erin's Law.
(Source: P.A. 96-1524, eff. 2-14-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-27.1A)
    Sec. 10-27.1A. Firearms in schools.
    (a) All school officials, including teachers, guidance counselors, and support staff, shall immediately notify the office of the principal in the event that they observe any person in possession of a firearm on school grounds; provided that taking such immediate action to notify the office of the principal would not immediately endanger the health, safety, or welfare of students who are under the direct supervision of the school official or the school official. If the health, safety, or welfare of students under the direct supervision of the school official or of the school official is immediately endangered, the school official shall notify the office of the principal as soon as the students under his or her supervision and he or she are no longer under immediate danger. A report is not required by this Section when the school official knows that the person in possession of the firearm is a law enforcement official engaged in the conduct of his or her official duties. Any school official acting in good faith who makes such a report under this Section shall have immunity from any civil or criminal liability that might otherwise be incurred as a result of making the report. The identity of the school official making such report shall not be disclosed except as expressly and specifically authorized by law. Knowingly and willfully failing to comply with this Section is a petty offense. A second or subsequent offense is a Class C misdemeanor.
    (b) Upon receiving a report from any school official pursuant to this Section, or from any other person, the principal or his or her designee shall immediately notify a local law enforcement agency. If the person found to be in possession of a firearm on school grounds is a student, the principal or his or her designee shall also immediately notify that student's parent or guardian. Any principal or his or her designee acting in good faith who makes such reports under this Section shall have immunity from any civil or criminal liability that might otherwise be incurred or imposed as a result of making the reports. Knowingly and willfully failing to comply with this Section is a petty offense. A second or subsequent offense is a Class C misdemeanor. If the person found to be in possession of the firearm on school grounds is a minor, the law enforcement agency shall detain that minor until such time as the agency makes a determination pursuant to clause (a) of subsection (1) of Section 5-401 of the Juvenile Court Act of 1987, as to whether the agency reasonably believes that the minor is delinquent. If the law enforcement agency determines that probable cause exists to believe that the minor committed a violation of item (4) of subsection (a) of Section 24-1 of the Criminal Code of 2012 while on school grounds, the agency shall detain the minor for processing pursuant to Section 5-407 of the Juvenile Court Act of 1987.
    (c) On or after January 1, 1997, upon receipt of any written, electronic, or verbal report from any school personnel regarding a verified incident involving a firearm in a school or on school owned or leased property, including any conveyance owned, leased, or used by the school for the transport of students or school personnel, the superintendent or his or her designee shall report all such firearm-related incidents occurring in a school or on school property to the local law enforcement authorities immediately and to the Department of State Police in a form, manner, and frequency as prescribed by the Department of State Police.
    The State Board of Education shall receive an annual statistical compilation and related data associated with incidents involving firearms in schools from the Department of State Police. The State Board of Education shall compile this information by school district and make it available to the public.
    (d) As used in this Section, the term "firearm" shall have the meaning ascribed to it in Section 1.1 of the Firearm Owners Identification Card Act.
    As used in this Section, the term "school" means any public or private elementary or secondary school.
    As used in this Section, the term "school grounds" includes the real property comprising any school, any conveyance owned, leased, or contracted by a school to transport students to or from school or a school-related activity, or any public way within 1,000 feet of the real property comprising any school.
(Source: P.A. 97-1150, eff. 1-25-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-27.1B)
    Sec. 10-27.1B. Reporting drug-related incidents in schools.
    (a) In this Section:
    "Drug" means "cannabis" as defined under subsection (a) of Section 3 of the Cannabis Control Act, "narcotic drug" as defined under subsection (aa) of Section 102 of the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, or "methamphetamine" as defined under Section 10 of the Methamphetamine Control and Community Protection Act.
    "School" means any public or private elementary or secondary school.
    (b) Upon receipt of any written, electronic, or verbal report from any school personnel regarding a verified incident involving drugs in a school or on school owned or leased property, including any conveyance owned, leased, or used by the school for the transport of students or school personnel, the superintendent or his or her designee, or other appropriate administrative officer for a private school, shall report all such drug-related incidents occurring in a school or on school property to the local law enforcement authorities immediately and to the Department of State Police in a form, manner, and frequency as prescribed by the Department of State Police.
    (c) The State Board of Education shall receive an annual statistical compilation and related data associated with drug-related incidents in schools from the Department of State Police. The State Board of Education shall compile this information by school district and make it available to the public.
(Source: P.A. 94-556, eff. 9-11-05.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-28)
    Sec. 10-28. Sharing information on school lunch applicants. A school board shall, whenever requested by the Department of Healthcare and Family Services (formerly Department of Public Aid), agree in writing with the Department of Healthcare and Family Services (as the State agency that administers the State Medical Assistance Program as provided in Title XIX of the federal Social Security Act and the State Children's Health Insurance Program as provided in Title XXI of the federal Social Security Act) to share with the Department of Healthcare and Family Services information on applicants for free or reduced-price lunches. A school board shall, whenever requested by the Department of Healthcare and Family Services (formerly Department of Public Aid), require each of its schools to agree in writing with the Department of Healthcare and Family Services to share with the Department of Healthcare and Family Services information on applicants for free or reduced-price lunches. This sharing of information shall be for the sole purpose of helping the Department of Healthcare and Family Services identify and enroll children in the State Medical Assistance Program or the State Children's Health Insurance Program or both as allowed under 42 U.S.C. Sec. 1758(b)(2)(C)(iii)(IV) and under the restrictions set forth in 42 U.S.C. Sec. 1758(b)(2)(C)(vi) and (vii).
(Source: P.A. 95-331, eff. 8-21-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-29)
    Sec. 10-29. Remote educational programs.
    (a) For purposes of this Section, "remote educational program" means an educational program delivered to students in the home or other location outside of a school building that meets all of the following criteria:
        (1) A student may participate in the program only
    	
after the school district, pursuant to adopted school board policy, and a person authorized to enroll the student under Section 10-20.12b of this Code determine that a remote educational program will best serve the student's individual learning needs. The adopted school board policy shall include, but not be limited to, all of the following:
            (A) Criteria for determining that a remote
        	
educational program will best serve a student's individual learning needs. The criteria must include consideration of, at a minimum, a student's prior attendance, disciplinary record, and academic history.
            (B) Any limitations on the number of students or
        	
grade levels that may participate in a remote educational program.
            (C) A description of the process that the school
        	
district will use to approve participation in the remote educational program. The process must include without limitation a requirement that, for any student who qualifies to receive services pursuant to the federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act of 2004, the student's participation in a remote educational program receive prior approval from the student's individualized education program team.
            (D) A description of the process the school
        	
district will use to develop and approve a written remote educational plan that meets the requirements of subdivision (5) of this subsection (a).
            (E) A description of the system the school
        	
district will establish to determine student participation in instruction in accordance with the remote educational program.
            (F) A description of the process for renewing a
        	
remote educational program at the expiration of its term.
            (G) Such other terms and provisions as the
        	
school district deems necessary to provide for the establishment and delivery of a remote educational program.
        (2) The school district has determined that the
    	
remote educational program's curriculum is aligned to State learning standards and that the program offers instruction and educational experiences consistent with those given to students at the same grade level in the district.
        (3) The remote educational program is delivered by
    	
instructors that meet the following qualifications:
            (A) they are certificated under Article 21 of
        	
this Code;
            (B) (blank); and
            (C) they have responsibility for all of the
        	
following elements of the program: planning instruction, diagnosing learning needs, prescribing content delivery through class activities, assessing learning, reporting outcomes to administrators and parents and guardians, and evaluating the effects of instruction.
        (4) During the period of time from and including the
    	
opening date to the closing date of the regular school term of the school district established pursuant to Section 10-19 of this Code, participation in a remote educational program may be claimed for evidence-based funding purposes under Section 18-8.15 of this Code on any calendar day, notwithstanding whether the day is a day of pupil attendance or institute day on the school district's calendar or any other provision of law restricting instruction on that day. If the district holds year-round classes in some buildings, the district shall classify each student's participation in a remote educational program as either on a year-round or a non-year-round schedule for purposes of claiming evidence-based funding. Outside of the regular school term of the district, the remote educational program may be offered as part of any summer school program authorized by this Code.
        (5) Each student participating in a remote
    	
educational program must have a written remote educational plan that has been approved by the school district and a person authorized to enroll the student under Section 10-20.12b of this Code. The school district and a person authorized to enroll the student under Section 10-20.12b of this Code must approve any amendment to a remote educational plan. The remote educational plan must include, but is not limited to, all of the following:
            (A) Specific achievement goals for the student
        	
aligned to State learning standards.
            (B) A description of all assessments that will be
        	
used to measure student progress, which description shall indicate the assessments that will be administered at an attendance center within the school district.
            (C) A description of the progress reports that
        	
will be provided to the school district and the person or persons authorized to enroll the student under Section 10-20.12b of this Code.
            (D) Expectations, processes, and schedules for
        	
interaction between a teacher and student.
            (E) A description of the specific
        	
responsibilities of the student's family and the school district with respect to equipment, materials, phone and Internet service, and any other requirements applicable to the home or other location outside of a school building necessary for the delivery of the remote educational program.
            (F) If applicable, a description of how the
        	
remote educational program will be delivered in a manner consistent with the student's individualized education program required by Section 614(d) of the federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act of 2004 or plan to ensure compliance with Section 504 of the federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973.
            (G) A description of the procedures and
        	
opportunities for participation in academic and extracurricular activities and programs within the school district.
            (H) The identification of a parent, guardian, or
        	
other responsible adult who will provide direct supervision of the program. The plan must include an acknowledgment by the parent, guardian, or other responsible adult that he or she may engage only in non-teaching duties not requiring instructional judgment or the evaluation of a student. The plan shall designate the parent, guardian, or other responsible adult as non-teaching personnel or volunteer personnel under subsection (a) of Section 10-22.34 of this Code.
            (I) The identification of a school district
        	
administrator who will oversee the remote educational program on behalf of the school district and who may be contacted by the student's parents with respect to any issues or concerns with the program.
            (J) The term of the student's participation in
        	
the remote educational program, which may not extend for longer than 12 months, unless the term is renewed by the district in accordance with subdivision (7) of this subsection (a).
            (K) A description of the specific location or
        	
locations in which the program will be delivered. If the remote educational program is to be delivered to a student in any location other than the student's home, the plan must include a written determination by the school district that the location will provide a learning environment appropriate for the delivery of the program. The location or locations in which the program will be delivered shall be deemed a long distance teaching reception area under subsection (a) of Section 10-22.34 of this Code.
            (L) Certification by the school district that the
        	
plan meets all other requirements of this Section.
        (6) Students participating in a remote educational
    	
program must be enrolled in a school district attendance center pursuant to the school district's enrollment policy or policies. A student participating in a remote educational program must be tested as part of all assessments administered by the school district pursuant to Section 2-3.64a-5 of this Code at the attendance center in which the student is enrolled and in accordance with the attendance center's assessment policies and schedule. The student must be included within all accountability determinations for the school district and attendance center under State and federal law.
        (7) The term of a student's participation in a
    	
remote educational program may not extend for longer than 12 months, unless the term is renewed by the school district. The district may only renew a student's participation in a remote educational program following an evaluation of the student's progress in the program, a determination that the student's continuation in the program will best serve the student's individual learning needs, and an amendment to the student's written remote educational plan addressing any changes for the upcoming term of the program.
    For purposes of this Section, a remote educational program does not include instruction delivered to students through an e-learning program approved under Section 10-20.56 of this Code.
    (b) A school district may, by resolution of its school board, establish a remote educational program.
    (c) (Blank).
    (d) The impact of remote educational programs on wages, hours, and terms and conditions of employment of educational employees within the school district shall be subject to local collective bargaining agreements.
    (e) The use of a home or other location outside of a school building for a remote educational program shall not cause the home or other location to be deemed a public school facility.
    (f) A remote educational program may be used, but is not required, for instruction delivered to a student in the home or other location outside of a school building that is not claimed for evidence-based funding purposes under Section 18-8.15 of this Code.
    (g) School districts that, pursuant to this Section, adopt a policy for a remote educational program must submit to the State Board of Education a copy of the policy and any amendments thereto, as well as data on student participation in a format specified by the State Board of Education. The State Board of Education may perform or contract with an outside entity to perform an evaluation of remote educational programs in this State.
    (h) The State Board of Education may adopt any rules necessary to ensure compliance by remote educational programs with the requirements of this Section and other applicable legal requirements.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17; 100-1046, eff. 8-23-18; 101-81, eff. 7-12-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/10-30)
    Sec. 10-30. Remote and blended remote learning. This Section applies if the Governor has declared a disaster due to a public health emergency pursuant to Section 7 of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act.
        (1) If the Governor has declared a disaster due to a
    	
public health emergency pursuant to Section 7 of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, the State Superintendent of Education may declare a requirement to use remote learning days or blended remote learning days for a school district, multiple school districts, a region, or the entire State. During remote learning days, schools shall conduct instruction remotely. During blended remote learning days, schools may utilize hybrid models of in-person and remote instruction. Once declared, remote learning days or blended remote learning days shall be implemented in grades pre-kindergarten through 12 as days of attendance and shall be deemed pupil attendance days for calculation of the length of a school term under Section 10-19.
        (2) For purposes of this Section, a remote learning
    	
day or blended remote learning day may be met through a district's implementation of an e-learning program under Section 10-20.56.
        (3) For any district that does not implement an
    	
e-learning program under Section 10-20.56, the district shall adopt a remote and blended remote learning day plan approved by the district superintendent. Each district may utilize remote and blended remote learning planning days, consecutively or in separate increments, to develop, review, or amend its remote and blended remote learning day plan or provide professional development to staff regarding remote education. Up to 5 remote and blended remote learning planning days may be deemed pupil attendance days for calculation of the length of a school term under Section 10-19.
        (4) Each remote and blended remote learning day plan
    	
shall address the following:
            (i) accessibility of the remote instruction to
        	
all students enrolled in the district;
            (ii) if applicable, a requirement that the remote
        	
learning day and blended remote learning day activities reflect State learning standards;
            (iii) a means for students to confer with an
        	
educator, as necessary;
            (iv) the unique needs of students in special
        	
populations, including, but not limited to, students eligible for special education under Article 14, students who are English learners as defined in Section 14C-2, and students experiencing homelessness under the Education for Homeless Children Act, or vulnerable student populations;
            (v) how the district will take attendance and
        	
monitor and verify each student's remote participation; and
            (vi) transitions from remote learning to on-site
        	
learning upon the State Superintendent's declaration that remote learning days or blended remote learning days are no longer deemed necessary.
        (5) The district superintendent shall periodically
    	
review and amend the district's remote and blended remote learning day plan, as needed, to ensure the plan meets the needs of all students.
        (6) Each remote and blended remote learning day plan
    	
shall be posted on the district's Internet website where other policies, rules, and standards of conduct are posted and shall be provided to students and faculty.
        (7) This Section does not create any additional
    	
employee bargaining rights and does not remove any employee bargaining rights.
        (8) Statutory and regulatory curricular mandates and
    	
offerings may be administered via a district's remote and blended remote learning day plan, except that a district may not offer individual behind-the-wheel instruction required by Section 27-24.2 via a district's remote and blended remote learning day plan. This Section does not relieve schools and districts from completing all statutory and regulatory curricular mandates and offerings.
(Source: P.A. 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 11A heading)
ARTICLE 11A. UNIT SCHOOL DISTRICT FORMATION
(Repealed)
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 11B heading)
ARTICLE 11B. SCHOOL DISTRICT COMBINATION
(Repealed)
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 11C heading)
ARTICLE 11C. ACCOUNTING PROCEDURES

    (105 ILCS 5/11C-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 11C-1)
    Sec. 11C-1. Appraisers. The regional superintendent shall appoint one or more appraisers to appraise all the tangible school property in the district from which territory has been taken and the tangible school property in such territory transferred. An appraiser or appraisers may be appointed to appraise all such school property or one or more appraisers may be appointed to appraise the different kinds of property as the regional superintendent may direct. No appraiser shall be a resident of any district which is a party to the accounting. The costs of the appraisal shall be borne by the districts in the ratio in which they share in the assets appraised.
(Source: P.A. 83-686.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11C-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 11C-2)
    Sec. 11C-2. Appraisal guide. In making such appraisal land shall be appraised at its fair market value; other property shall be appraised at its reproduction or replacement cost less depreciation and an allowance for obsolescence, if any, but in no event shall any property be appraised at more than its value for school purposes in the district in which it lies after the change in boundaries or its resale value whichever is the higher.
(Source: P.A. 83-686.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11C-3) (from Ch. 122, par. 11C-3)
    Sec. 11C-3. Time for filing appraisals - Contest - Administrative review. Within 30 days after their appointment the appraisers shall file their appraisal or appraisals with the regional superintendent. Within 10 days thereafter the regional superintendent shall send copies of such appraisals by registered mail to the secretary or clerk of the board of each district which is a party to the accounting. If the board of any district desires to contest any appraisal it shall file a statement of its objections with the regional superintendent within 20 days after the receipt of a copy of such appraisal. The regional superintendent shall then fix a date for a hearing on such objections and give notice thereof to each district which is a party to the accounting. Each such district may offer evidence at the hearing and the appraisal shall be considered by the regional superintendent as evidence of the value of the property appraised. The regional superintendent shall then consider the evidence and enter an order determining the value of the property in question. Such order shall be deemed an "administrative decision" as defined in the "Administrative Review Law" and any board which is a party to the accounting may apply for a review of such decision in accordance with the "Administrative Review Law" and all amendments and modifications thereof and the rules adopted pursuant thereto.
(Source: P.A. 83-686.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11C-4) (from Ch. 122, par. 11C-4)
    Sec. 11C-4. Debited school property. Each district from which territory is taken shall be debited with the value of the school property remaining in such district as above determined and each district which is created so as to include a part of a district shall be debited with the value of the school property lying within such part of a district.
(Source: P.A. 83-686.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11C-5) (from Ch. 122, par. 11C-5)
    Sec. 11C-5. Debited school funds. Each district from which territory is taken shall be debited with all funds in the possession of its treasurer and of all other funds to which the district may be entitled, including taxes in process of collection.
(Source: P.A. 83-686.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11C-6) (from Ch. 122, par. 11C-6)
    Sec. 11C-6. Credited unfunded indebtedness. Each district from which territory is taken shall be credited with all unfunded indebtedness of such district and with the estimated cost of operating the schools of the district for the balance of the school year if the district from which territory is taken continues to administer the schools until the succeeding July 1.
(Source: P.A. 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11C-7) (from Ch. 122, par. 11C-7)
    Sec. 11C-7. Credited appraised value of property and funds. Each district which is created so as to include a part of another district shall be credited with the appraised value of the property and of the funds described in Sections 11C-4 and 11C-5 of this Act, less the unfunded indebtedness described in Section 11C-6 of this Act, in the proportion which the number of children in average daily attendance for the last full school year preceding the filing of the petition from the part of the district so included bears to the total number of children in average daily attendance from such district for such period, and the balance shall be credited to the district from which territory is taken.
(Source: P.A. 83-686.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11C-8) (from Ch. 122, par. 11C-8)
    Sec. 11C-8. Reports. The regional superintendent is hereby given the power to require reports from the treasurer or any other officer of the district from which territory is taken to give it any information necessary for it to perform its functions hereunder and to require from time to time transfers of funds from one treasurer to another, or if the districts have a common treasurer from the funds held by such treasurer for one district to the funds held by such treasurer for the other district as may be necessary to give effect to the accounting herein provided for.
(Source: P.A. 83-686.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11C-9) (from Ch. 122, par. 11C-9)
    Sec. 11C-9. Accounting waived. If the stipulation is refused by the regional superintendent the boards of the districts affected by the change in boundaries in the creation of a new district may waive accounting or stipulate as to the valuation of any kind or parcel of property or as to a basis for apportionment by concurrent resolution filed with the regional superintendent prior to or within 30 days after the election of the school board for the newly created district. Such resolution shall be subject to the approval of the regional superintendent and if approved, the accounting shall be dispensed with or modified as the resolution may provide.
(Source: P.A. 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 11D heading)
ARTICLE 11D. SCHOOL DISTRICT CONVERSION
(Repealed)
Source: Repealed by P.A. 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 11E heading)
ARTICLE 11E. CONVERSION AND FORMATION OF SCHOOL DISTRICTS
(Source: P.A. 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11E-5)
    Sec. 11E-5. Purpose and applicability. The purpose of this Article is to permit greater flexibility and efficiency in the reorganization and formation of school districts for the improvement of the administration and quality of educational services and for the best interests of pupils. This Article applies only to school districts with under 500,000 inhabitants.
(Source: P.A. 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11E-10)
    Sec. 11E-10. Definitions. In this Article:
    "Affected district" means any school district with territory included in a petition for reorganization under this Article that encompasses (i) 25% or more of the total land area of the district, (ii) more than 8% of the student enrollment of the district, or (iii) more than 8% of the equalized assessed valuation of the district.
    "Combined high school - unit district" means a school district resulting from the combination of a high school district and a unit district.
    "Combined school district" means any district resulting from the combination of 2 or more entire elementary districts, 2 or more entire high school districts, or 2 or more entire unit districts.
    "Dual district" means a high school district and all of its feeder elementary districts collectively.
    "Elementary district" means a school district organized and established for purposes of providing instruction up to and including grade 8. "Elementary district" includes common elementary school districts, consolidated elementary school districts, community consolidated school districts, combined elementary districts, and charter elementary districts.
    "Elementary purposes" means the purposes of providing instruction up to and including grade 8.
    "High school district" means a school district organized and established for purposes of providing instruction in grades 9 through 12. "High school district" includes charter high school districts, township high school districts, consolidated high school districts, community high school districts, and non-high school districts.
    "High school purposes" means the purposes of providing instruction in grades nine through 12.
    "High school - unit conversion" means a school district conversion authorized under subsection (a) of Section 11E-15 of this Code.
    "K through 12 purposes" means the purposes of providing instruction up to and including grade 12.
    "Multi-unit conversion" means the formation of a combined high school - unit district and one or more new elementary districts as authorized under subsection (b) of Section 11E-30 of this Code.
    "Optional elementary unit district" means a unit district resulting from the combination of a high school district and the combination of any one or more elementary districts electing to organize as an optional elementary unit district.
    "Partial elementary unit district" means either a combined high school - unit district or an optional elementary unit district.
    "School board" means either a board of education or a board of school directors.
    "School district conversion" means a high school - unit conversion or a unit to dual conversion.
    "School needs" means the needs of the proposed school district and any districts in the area adjacent thereto in relation to, without limitation, providing a full range of high quality educational and extracurricular programs, maintaining a full complement of professional staff to deliver optimal educational services, meeting the program and staff needs of all students, including students with disabilities and students in career and technical education courses, maximizing community involvement in school governance, operating on an economically efficient basis, and maintaining a sufficient local tax base.
    "Substantially coterminous" means that a high school district and one or more elementary districts share the same boundaries or share the same boundaries except for territory encompassing, for a particular district, (i) less than 25% of the land area of the district, (ii) less than 8% of the student enrollment of the district, and (iii) less than 8% of the equalized assessed valuation of the district.
    "Unit district" means a school district organized and established for purposes of providing instruction up to and including grade 12. "Unit district" includes charter (K through 12) districts, community unit districts, community consolidated unit districts, other districts that, prior to the adoption of the community consolidated unit district and community unit district, authorizing legislation had expanded to provide instruction through the 12th grade (commonly referred to as "Old Type" unit districts), and partial elementary unit districts organized pursuant to the provisions of this Article.
    "Unit to dual conversion" means a school district conversion authorized under subsection (b) of Section 11E-15 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11E-15)
    Sec. 11E-15. School district conversion.
    (a) One or more unit districts and one or more high school districts, all of which are contiguous, may, under the provisions of this Article, be converted into a dual district through the dissolution of the unit district or districts and the high school district or districts if the following apply:
        (1) each elementary district to be created includes
    	
all of the territory within a unit district to be dissolved; and
        (2) the high school district to be created includes
    	
all of the territory within the unit districts and high school districts to be dissolved.
    (b) Two or more contiguous unit districts may, under the provisions of this Article, dissolve and form a single new high school district and new elementary districts that are based upon the boundaries of the dissolved unit districts.
(Source: P.A. 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11E-20)
    Sec. 11E-20. Combined school district formation.
    (a)(1) The territory of 2 or more entire contiguous elementary districts may be organized into a combined elementary district under the provisions of this Article.
    (2) Any 2 or more entire elementary districts that collectively are within or substantially coterminous with the boundaries of a high school district, regardless of whether the districts are compact and contiguous with each other, may be organized into a combined school district in accordance with this Article.
    (3) Any 2 or more entire elementary districts that are not contiguous may be organized into a combined school district in accordance with this Article if the following requirements are met and documented within 2 calendar years prior to the petition filing date:
        (A) the distance between each district administrative
    	
office is documented as no more than 30 miles; and
        (B) every district contiguous to a district wishing
    	
to organize into a combined school district under the provisions of this paragraph (3) determines that it is not interested in participating in a petition for a combined school district filed in accordance with this Article, through a vote of its school board, and documents that non-interest in a letter to the regional superintendent of schools containing approved minutes that record the school board vote.
    (b)(1) The territory of 2 or more entire contiguous high school districts may be organized into a combined high school district under the provisions of this Article.
    (2) Any 2 or more entire high school districts that are not contiguous may be organized into a combined school district in accordance with this Article if the following requirements are met and documented within 2 calendar years prior to the petition filing date:
        (A) the distance between each district administrative
    	
office is documented as no more than 30 miles; and
        (B) every district contiguous to a district wishing
    	
to organize into a combined school district under the provisions of this paragraph (2) determines that it is not interested in participating in a petition for a combined school district filed in accordance with this Article, through a vote of its school board, and documents that non-interest in a letter to the regional superintendent of schools containing approved minutes that record the school board vote.
    (c)(1) The territory of 2 or more entire contiguous unit districts may be organized into a combined unit district under the provisions of this Article.
    (2) Any 2 or more entire unit districts that are not contiguous may be organized into a combined school district in accordance with this Article if the following requirements are met and documented within 2 calendar years prior to the petition filing date:
        (A) the distance between each district administrative
    	
office is documented as no more than 30 miles; and
        (B) every district contiguous to the district wishing
    	
to organize into a combined school district under the provisions of this paragraph (2) determines that it is not interested in participating in a petition for a combined school district filed in accordance with this Article, through a vote of its school board, and documents that non-interest in a letter to the regional superintendent of schools containing approved minutes that record the school board vote.
(Source: P.A. 98-125, eff. 8-2-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11E-25)
    Sec. 11E-25. Unit district formation.
    (a) Any contiguous and compact territory, no part of which is included within any unit district, may be organized into a unit district as provided in this Article.
    (b) The territory of one or more entire unit districts that are contiguous to each other, plus any contiguous and compact territory no part of which is included within any unit district, and the territory of which taken as a whole is compact may be organized into a unit district as provided in this Article.
(Source: P.A. 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11E-30)
    Sec. 11E-30. Partial elementary unit district formation.
    (a) One or more entire high school districts and one or more entire unit districts, all of which are contiguous, may be organized into a combined high school - unit district as provided in this Article. The combined high school - unit district shall serve all residents of the district for high school purposes and those residents residing in the portion of the territory included within the boundaries of the dissolved unit district or districts for elementary purposes.
    (b) One or more contiguous unit districts may, as provided in this Article, dissolve and form a single new combined high school - unit district and one or more new elementary districts. The boundaries of the new elementary district or districts shall be based upon the boundaries of the dissolved unit district or districts electing to join the combined high school - unit district only for high school purposes. Territory included within the boundaries of the new elementary district or districts shall be served by the new combined high school - unit district only for high school purposes. All other territory within the combined high school - unit district shall be served by the combined high school - unit district for both high school and elementary purposes.
    (c) A high school district and 2 or more elementary districts that collectively are substantially coterminous may seek to organize into an optional elementary unit district as provided in this Article, provided that territory comprising at least 51% of the equalized assessed valuation of the high school district is subject to a combined high school and elementary maximum annual authorized tax rate for educational purposes of 4.0% or less. The optional elementary unit district shall serve all residents of the district for high school purposes. The optional elementary unit district shall serve residents of only those elementary districts electing to join the optional elementary unit district, as determined in accordance with subsection (b) of Section 11E-65 of this Code, for elementary purposes. The corporate existence of any elementary district electing not to join the optional elementary unit district in accordance with subsection (b) of Section 11E-65 of this Code shall not be affected by the formation of an optional elementary unit district, and an elementary district electing not to join the optional elementary unit district shall continue to serve residents of the district for elementary purposes.
    (d)(1) For 5 years following the formation of an optional elementary unit district, any elementary district that elected not to join an optional elementary unit district for elementary purposes may elect to dissolve and combine with the optional elementary unit district by filing a petition that requests the submission of the proposition at a regularly scheduled election for the purpose of voting for or against joining the optional elementary unit district and that complies with the other provisions of this Article.
        (2) After an election in which an elementary district
    	
votes to join an optional elementary unit district in accordance with paragraph (1) of this subsection (d), but prior to the dissolution of the elementary district, the elementary district must first issue funding bonds pursuant to Sections 19-8 and 19-9 of this Code to liquidate any operational deficit or debt incurred or accumulated since the date of the election in which the proposition to form the optional elementary unit district passed. The elementary district shall not be required to comply with the backdoor referenda provisions of Section 19-9 of this Code as a condition of issuing the funding bonds. If applicable, the tax levy to pay the debt service on the funding bonds shall not be included in the district's aggregate extension base under Section 18-210 of the Property Tax Code. Taxes levied to repay principal and interest on any long term debt incurred or accumulated between the date of the election in which the proposition to form the optional elementary unit district passed and the date of the elementary district's dissolution and joining the optional elementary unit district in accordance with paragraph (1) of this subsection (d) shall be levied and extended only against the territory of the elementary district as it existed prior to dissolution.
        (3) If all eligible elementary districts elect to
    	
join an optional elementary unit district in accordance with this subsection (d), the optional elementary unit district shall thereafter be deemed a unit district for all purposes of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11E-35)
    Sec. 11E-35. Petition filing.
    (a) A petition shall be filed with the regional superintendent of schools of the educational service region in which the territory described in the petition or that part of the territory with the greater percentage of equalized assessed valuation is situated. The petition must do the following:
        (1) be signed by at least 50 legal resident voters or
    	
10% of the legal resident voters, whichever is less, residing within each affected district; or
        (2) be approved by the school board in each affected
    	
district.
    (b) The petition shall contain all of the following:
        (1) A request to submit the proposition at a regular
    	
scheduled election for the purpose of voting:
            (A) for or against a high school - unit
        	
conversion;
            (B) for or against a unit to dual conversion;
            (C) for or against the establishment of a
        	
combined elementary district;
            (D) for or against the establishment of a
        	
combined high school district;
            (E) for or against the establishment of a
        	
combined unit district;
            (F) for or against the establishment of a unit
        	
district from dual district territory exclusively;
            (G) for or against the establishment of a unit
        	
district from both dual district and unit district territory;
            (H) for or against the establishment of a
        	
combined high school - unit district from a combination of one or more high school districts and one or more unit districts;
            (I) for or against the establishment of a
        	
combined high school - unit district and one or more new elementary districts through a multi-unit conversion;
            (J) for or against the establishment of an
        	
optional elementary unit district from a combination of a substantially coterminous dual district; or
            (K) for or against dissolving and becoming part
        	
of an optional elementary unit district.
        (2) A description of the territory comprising the
    	
districts proposed to be dissolved and those to be created, which, for an entire district, may be a general reference to all of the territory included within that district.
        (3) A specification of the maximum tax rates for
    	
various purposes the proposed district or districts shall be authorized to levy for various purposes and, if applicable, the specifications related to the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law, in accordance with Section 11E-80 of this Code.
        (4) A description of how supplementary State deficit
    	
difference payments made under subsection (c) of Section 11E-135 of this Code will be allocated among the new districts proposed to be formed.
        (5) Where applicable, a division of assets and
    	
liabilities to be allocated to the proposed new or annexing school district or districts in the manner provided in Section 11E-105 of this Code.
        (6) If desired, a request that at that same election
    	
as the reorganization proposition a school board or boards be elected on a separate ballot or ballots to serve as the school board or boards of the proposed new district or districts. Any election of board members at the same election at which the proposition to create the district or districts to be served by the board or boards is submitted to the voters shall proceed under the supervision of the regional superintendent of schools as provided in Section 11E-55 of this Code.
        (7) If desired, a request that the referendum at
    	
which the proposition is submitted for the purpose of voting for or against the establishment of a unit district (other than a partial elementary unit district) include as part of the proposition the election of board members by school board district rather than at large. Any petition requesting the election of board members by district shall divide the proposed school district into 7 school board districts, each of which must be compact and contiguous and substantially equal in population to each other school board district. Any election of board members by school board district shall proceed under the supervision of the regional superintendent of schools as provided in Section 11E-55 of this Code.
        (8) If desired, a request that the referendum at
    	
which the proposition is submitted for the purpose of voting for or against the establishment of a unit to dual conversion include as part of the proposition the election of board members for the new high school district (i) on an at large basis, (ii) with board members representing each of the forming elementary school districts, or (iii) a combination of both. The format for the election of the new high school board must be defined in the petition. When 4 or more unit school districts and a combination of board members representing each of the forming elementary school districts are involved and at large formats are used, one member must be elected from each of the forming elementary school districts. The remaining members may be elected on an at large basis, provided that none of the underlying elementary school districts have a majority on the resulting high school board. When 3 unit school districts and a combination of board members representing each of the forming elementary school districts are involved and at large formats are used, 2 members must be elected from each of the forming elementary school districts. The remaining member must be elected at large.
        (9) If desired, a request that the referendum at
    	
which the proposition shall be submitted include a proposition on a separate ballot authorizing the issuance of bonds by the district or districts when organized in accordance with this Article. However, if the petition is submitted for the purpose of voting for or against the establishment of an optional elementary unit district, the petition may request only that the referendum at which the proposition is submitted include a proposition on a separate ballot authorizing the issuance of bonds for high school purposes (and not elementary purposes) by the district when organized in accordance with this Article. The principal amount of the bonds and the purposes of issuance, including a specification of elementary or high school purposes if the proposed issuance is to be made by a combined high school - unit district, shall be stated in the petition and in all notices and propositions submitted thereunder. Only residents in the territory of the district proposing the bond issuance may vote on the bond issuance.
        (10) A designation of a committee of ten of the
    	
petitioners as attorney in fact for all petitioners, any 7 of whom may at any time, prior to the final decision of the regional superintendent of schools, amend the petition in all respects (except that, for a unit district formation, there may not be an increase or decrease of more than 25% of the territory to be included in the proposed district) and make binding stipulations on behalf of all petitioners as to any question with respect to the petition, including the power to stipulate to accountings or the waiver thereof between school districts.
    (c) The regional superintendent of schools shall not accept for filing under the authority of this Section any petition that includes any territory already included as part of the territory described in another pending petition filed under the authority of this Section.
    (d)(1) Those designated as the Committee of Ten shall serve in that capacity until such time as the regional superintendent of schools determines that, because of death, resignation, transfer of residency from the territory, failure to qualify, or any other reason, the office of a particular member of the Committee of Ten is vacant. Upon determination by the regional superintendent of schools that these vacancies exist, he or she shall declare the vacancies and shall notify the remaining members to appoint a petitioner or petitioners, as the case may be, to fill the vacancies in the Committee of Ten so designated. An appointment by the Committee of Ten to fill a vacancy shall be made by a simple majority vote of the designated remaining members.
    (2) Failure of a person designated as a member of the Committee of Ten to sign the petition shall not disqualify that person as a member of the Committee of Ten, and that person may sign the petition at any time prior to final disposition of the petition and the conclusion of the proceedings to form a new school district or districts, including all litigation pertaining to the petition or proceedings.
    (3) Except as stated in item (10) of subsection (b) of this Section, the Committee of Ten shall act by majority vote of the membership.
    (4) The regional superintendent of schools may accept a stipulation made by the Committee of Ten instead of evidence or proof of the matter stipulated or may refuse to accept the stipulation, provided that the regional superintendent sets forth the basis for the refusal.
    (5) The Committee of Ten may voluntarily dismiss its petition at any time before a final decision is issued by the State Superintendent of Education.
(Source: P.A. 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06; 95-903, eff. 8-25-08.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11E-40)
    Sec. 11E-40. Notice and petition amendments.
    (a) Upon the filing of a petition with the regional superintendent of schools as provided in Section 11E-35 of this Code, the regional superintendent shall do all of the following:
        (1) Cause a copy of the petition to be given to each
    	
school board of the affected districts and the regional superintendent of schools of any other educational service region in which territory described in the petition is situated.
        (2) Cause a notice thereof to be published at least
    	
once each week for 3 successive weeks in at least one newspaper having general circulation within the area of all of the territory of the proposed district or districts. The expense of publishing the notice shall be borne by the petitioners and paid on behalf of the petitioners by the Committee of Ten.
    (b) The notice shall state all of the following:
        (1) When and to whom the petition was presented.
        (2) The prayer of the petition.
        (3) A description of the territory comprising the
    	
districts proposed to be dissolved and those to be created, which, for an entire district, may be a general reference to all of the territory included within that district.
        (4) If applicable, the proposition to elect, by
    	
separate ballot, school board members at the same election, indicating whether the board members are to be elected at large or by school board district.
        (5) If requested in the petition, the proposition to
    	
issue bonds, indicating the amount and purpose thereof.
        (6) The day, time, and location on which the hearing
    	
on the action proposed in the petition shall be held.
    (c) The requirements of subsection (g) of Section 28-2 of the Election Code do not apply to any petition filed under this Article. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary contained in the Election Code, the regional superintendent of schools shall make all determinations regarding the validity of the petition, including without limitation signatures on the petition, subject to State Superintendent and administrative review in accordance with Section 11E-50 of this Code.
    (d) Prior to the hearing described in Section 11E-45 of this Code, the regional superintendent of schools shall inform the Committee of Ten as to whether the petition, as amended or filed, is proper and in compliance with all applicable petition requirements set forth in the Election Code. If the regional superintendent determines that the petition is not in proper order or not in compliance with any applicable petition requirements set forth in the Election Code, the regional superintendent must identify the specific alleged defects in the petition and include specific recommendations to cure the alleged defects. The Committee of Ten may amend the petition to cure the alleged defects at any time prior to the receipt of the regional superintendent's written order made in accordance with subsection (a) of Section 11E-50 of this Code or may elect not to amend the petition, in which case the Committee of Ten may appeal a denial by the regional superintendent following the hearing in accordance with Section 11E-50 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06; 95-903, eff. 8-25-08.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11E-45)
    Sec. 11E-45. Hearing.
    (a) No more than 15 days after the last date on which the required notice under Section 11E-40 of this Code is published, the regional superintendent of schools with whom the petition is required to be filed shall hold a hearing on the petition. Prior to the hearing, the Committee of Ten shall submit to the regional superintendent maps showing the districts involved and any other information deemed pertinent by the Committee of Ten to the proposed action. The regional superintendent of schools may adjourn the hearing from time to time or may continue the matter for want of sufficient notice or other good cause.
    (b) At the hearing, the regional superintendent of schools shall allow public testimony on the action proposed in the petition. The Committee of Ten shall present, or arrange for the presentation of all of the following:
        (1) Evidence as to the school needs and conditions in
    	
the territory described in the petition and the area adjacent thereto.
        (2) Evidence with respect to the ability of the
    	
proposed district or districts to meet standards of recognition as prescribed by the State Board of Education.
        (3) A consideration of the division of funds and
    	
assets that will occur if the petition is approved.
        (4) A description of the maximum tax rates the
    	
proposed district or districts is authorized to levy for various purposes and, if applicable, the specifications related to the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law, in accordance with Section 11E-80 of this Code.
        (5) For a non-contiguous combined school district, as
    	
specified in paragraph (3) of subsection (a), paragraph (2) of subsection (b), or paragraph (2) of subsection (c) of Section 11E-20 of this Code, evidence that the action proposed in the petition meets the requirements of the respective paragraph.
    (c) Any regional superintendent of schools entitled under the provisions of this Article to be given a copy of the petition and any resident or representative of a school district in which any territory described in the petition is situated may appear in person or by an attorney at law to provide oral or written testimony or both in relation to the action proposed in the petition.
    (d) The regional superintendent of schools shall arrange for a written transcript of the hearing. The expense of the written transcript shall be borne by the petitioners and paid on behalf of the petitioners by the Committee of Ten.
(Source: P.A. 98-125, eff. 8-2-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11E-50)
    Sec. 11E-50. Approval or denial of the petition; administrative review.
    (a) Within 14 days after the conclusion of the hearing under Section 11E-45 of this Code, the regional superintendent of schools shall take into consideration the school needs and conditions of the affected districts and in the area adjacent thereto, the division of funds and assets that will result from the action described in the petition, the best interests of the schools of the area, and the best interests and the educational welfare of the pupils residing therein and, through a written order, either approve or deny the petition. If the regional superintendent fails to act upon a petition within 14 days after the conclusion of the hearing, the regional superintendent shall be deemed to have denied the petition.
    (b) Upon approving or denying the petition, the regional superintendent of schools shall submit the petition and all evidence to the State Superintendent of Education. The State Superintendent shall review the petition, the record of the hearing, and the written order of the regional superintendent, if any. Within 21 days after the receipt of the regional superintendent's decision, the State Superintendent shall take into consideration the school needs and conditions of the affected districts and in the area adjacent thereto, the division of funds and assets that will result from the action described in the petition, the best interests of the schools of the area, and the best interests and the educational welfare of the pupils residing therein and, through a written order, either approve or deny the petition. If the State Superintendent denies the petition, the State Superintendent shall set forth in writing the specific basis for the denial. The decision of the State Superintendent shall be deemed an administrative decision as defined in Section 3-101 of the Code of Civil Procedure. The State Superintendent shall provide a copy of the decision by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the Committee of Ten, any person appearing in support or opposition of the petition at the hearing, each school board of a district in which territory described in the petition is situated, the regional superintendent with whom the petition was filed, and the regional superintendent of schools of any other educational service region in which territory described in the petition is situated.
    (c) Any resident of any territory described in the petition who appears in support of or opposition to the petition at the hearing or any petitioner or school board of any district in which territory described in the petition is situated may, within 35 days after a copy of the decision sought to be reviewed was served by certified mail, return receipt requested, upon the party affected thereby or upon the attorney of record for the party, apply for a review of an administrative decision of the State Superintendent of Education in accordance with the Administrative Review Law and any rules adopted pursuant to the Administrative Review Law. The commencement of any action for review shall operate as a supersedeas, and no further proceedings shall be had until final disposition of the review. The circuit court of the county in which the petition is filed with the regional superintendent of schools shall have sole jurisdiction to entertain a complaint for the review.
(Source: P.A. 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06; 95-903, eff. 8-25-08.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11E-55)
    Sec. 11E-55. Holding of elections.
    (a) Elections provided by this Article shall be conducted in accordance with the general election law. The regional superintendent of schools shall perform the election duties assigned by law to the secretary of a school board for the election and shall certify the officers and candidates therefore pursuant to the general election law.
    (b) Nomination papers filed under this Article are not valid unless the candidate named therein files with the regional superintendent of schools a receipt from the county clerk showing that the candidate has filed a statement of economic interests as required by the Illinois Governmental Ethics Act. This receipt shall be so filed either previously during the calendar year in which his or her nomination papers were filed or within the period for the filing of nomination papers in accordance with the general election law.
    (c)(1) If the petition requests the election of school board members of the school district proposed to be created at the same election at which the proposition to establish that district is to be submitted to voters or if the regional superintendent of schools finds it to be in the best interest of the districts involved to elect school board members of the school district proposed to be created at a consolidated election or general primary election, then that fact shall be included in the notice of referendum.
    (2) If the members of the school board of the school district proposed to be created are not to be elected at the same election at which the proposition to establish that district is to be submitted to the voters, then the regional superintendent of schools shall order an election to be held on the next regularly scheduled election date for the purpose of electing a school board for that district.
    (3) In either event, the school board elected for a new school district or districts created under this Article shall consist of 7 members who shall have the terms and the powers and duties of school boards as provided by statute.
    (d) All notices regarding propositions for reorganization or creation of new school districts under this Article shall be given in accordance with the general election law in substantially the following form:
        (1) Notice in high school - unit conversion or unit
    	
to dual conversion:

 
NOTICE OF REFERENDUM TO DISSOLVE
CERTAIN SCHOOL DISTRICTS AND
ESTABLISH CERTAIN NEW SCHOOL DISTRICTS

        NOTICE is hereby given that on (insert date), a
    	
referendum will be held in part(s) of ....... county (counties) for the purpose of voting for or against the proposition to dissolve (here identify the school districts to be dissolved by name and number) and to establish new school districts for the following described territory: A new (here specify elementary, high school, or unit) district shall be formed from (here describe the territory, which, for territory currently included in an entire school district, may be a general reference to all of the territory included within that particular school district). (Here repeat the territory information for each new school district.)
        The election is called and will be held pursuant to
    	
an order of the Regional Superintendent dated on (insert date), which order states that if a majority of the voters in each of the affected districts voting on the proposition at the referendum vote in favor thereof, the tax rates for various purposes of the new districts shall be as follows: For the new (here specify elementary, high school, or unit) district formed from the territory of (here describe territory, which, for territory currently included in an entire school district, may be a general reference to all of the territory included within that particular district), the tax rates for various purposes shall be (here specify the maximum tax rates for various purposes the proposed school district is authorized to levy and, if applicable, the specifications related to the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law, in accordance with Section 11E-80 of this Code). (Here repeat the tax rate information for each new school district.)
    Dated (insert date).
    Regional Superintendent of Schools ..................
 
        (2) Notice for combined school district formation:
 
NOTICE OF REFERENDUM
TO ESTABLISH COMBINED SCHOOL DISTRICT

        NOTICE is hereby given that on (insert date), a
    	
referendum will be held in part(s) of ....... county (counties) for the purpose of voting for or against the proposition to establish a combined (here insert elementary, high school, or unit) school district for the following described territory: (here describe the territory, which, for territory currently included in an entire school district, may be a general reference to all of the territory included within that particular school district). The election is called and will be held pursuant to an order of the Regional Superintendent dated on (insert date), which order states that if a majority of the voters in each of the affected school districts voting on the proposition at the referendum vote in favor thereof, the tax rates for various purposes of the proposed combined school district shall be (here specify the maximum tax rates for various purposes the proposed combined school district is authorized to levy and, if applicable, the specifications related to the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law, in accordance with Section 11E-80 of this Code).
    Dated (insert date).
    Regional Superintendent of Schools ..................
 
        (3) Notice for unit district formation (other than a
    	
partial elementary unit district):

 
NOTICE OF REFERENDUM TO ESTABLISH
A COMMUNITY UNIT DISTRICT

        NOTICE is hereby given that on (insert date), a
    	
referendum will be held in part(s) of ....... county (counties) for the purpose of voting for or against the proposition to establish a unit district for the following described territory: (here describe the territory, which, for territory currently included in an entire school district, may be a general reference to all of the territory included within that particular school district). The election is called and will be held pursuant to an order of the Regional Superintendent dated on (insert date), which order states that if a majority of the voters in each of the affected school districts voting on the proposition at the referendum vote in favor thereof, the tax rates for various purposes for the proposed unit district shall be (here specify the maximum tax rates for various purposes the proposed unit district shall be authorized to levy and, if applicable, the specifications related to the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law, in accordance with Section 11E-80 of this Code).
    Dated (insert date).
    Regional Superintendent of Schools ..................
 
        (4) Notice for combined high school - unit district
    	
formation:

 
NOTICE OF REFERENDUM
TO ESTABLISH COMBINED HIGH SCHOOL - UNIT DISTRICT

        NOTICE is hereby given that on (insert date), a
    	
referendum will be held in part(s) of ....... county (counties) for the purpose of voting for or against the proposition to establish a combined high school - unit district for the following described territory: (here describe the territory, which, for territory currently included in an entire school district, may be a general reference to all of the territory included within that particular school district). The following described territory shall be included in the combined high school - unit district for high school purposes only: (here describe the territory that will be included only for high school purposes, which, for territory currently included in an entire school district, may be a general reference to all of the territory included within that particular school district). The election is called and will be held pursuant to an order of the Regional Superintendent dated on (insert date), which order states that if a majority of the voters in each of the affected school districts voting on the proposition at the referendum vote in favor thereof, the tax rates for various purposes for the proposed combined high school - unit district shall be (here specify the maximum tax rates for various purposes the proposed combined high school - unit district shall be authorized to levy and, if applicable, the specifications related to the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law, in accordance with Sections 11E-80 and 11E-90 of this Code).
    Dated (insert date).
    Regional Superintendent of Schools ..................
 
         (5) Notice for multi-unit conversion:
 
NOTICE OF REFERENDUM TO DISSOLVE CERTAIN
UNIT SCHOOL DISTRICTS AND ESTABLISH CERTAIN
NEW SCHOOL DISTRICTS

        NOTICE is hereby given that on (insert date), a
    	
referendum will be held in part(s) of ....... county (counties) for the purpose of voting for or against the proposition to dissolve (here identify the districts to be dissolved by name and number) and to establish new school districts for the following described territory: A new (here specify elementary or combined high school - unit) district shall be formed from (here describe the territory, which, for territory currently included in an entire school district, may be a general reference to all of the territory included within that particular school district). (Here repeat the territory information for each new school district.) The following described territory shall be included in the proposed combined high school - unit district only for high school purposes: (here describe the territory that will only be included for high school purposes, which, for territory currently included in an entire school district, may be a general reference to all of the territory included within that particular school district).
        The election is called and will be held pursuant to
    	
an order of the Regional Superintendent dated on (insert date), which order states that if a majority of the voters in each of the affected districts voting on the proposition at the referendum vote in favor thereof, the tax rates for various purposes of the new districts shall be as follows: For the new elementary district formed from the territory of (here identify the unit district by name and number) the tax rates for various purposes shall be (here specify the maximum tax rates for various purposes the proposed elementary district is authorized to levy and, if applicable, the specifications related to the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law, in accordance with Section 11E-80 of this Code). (Here repeat the tax rate and Property Tax Extension Limitation Law information for each new elementary district.) For the new combined high school - unit district, the tax rates for various purposes shall be (here specify the maximum tax rates for various purposes the proposed combined high school - unit district shall be authorized to levy and, if applicable, the specifications related to the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law, in accordance with Sections 11E-80 and 11E-90 of this Code).
    Dated (insert date).
    Regional Superintendent of Schools ..................
 
        (6) Notice for optional elementary unit district
    	
formation:

 
NOTICE OF REFERENDUM TO ESTABLISH
AN OPTIONAL ELEMENTARY UNIT DISTRICT

        NOTICE is hereby given that on (insert date), a
    	
referendum will be held in part(s) of ....... county (counties) for the purpose of voting for or against the proposition to establish an optional elementary unit district for the following described territory: (here describe the elementary and high school district territory by name and number). If a majority of the voters in one or more of the affected elementary districts and in the affected high school district voting on the proposition at the referendum vote in favor thereof, all of the territory included within the affected high school district shall be included in the optional elementary unit district for high school purposes. However, only the territory of elementary districts in which a majority of the voters voting in the proposition at the referendum vote in favor thereof shall be included in the optional elementary unit district for elementary purposes. The election is called and will be held pursuant to an order of the Regional Superintendent dated on (insert date), which order states that if a majority of the voters in one or more of the affected elementary districts and in the affected high school district voting on the proposition at the referendum vote in favor thereof, the tax rates for various purposes for the proposed optional elementary unit district shall be (here list the maximum tax rates for various purposes the proposed optional elementary unit district is authorized to levy and, if applicable, the specifications related to the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law, in accordance with Sections 11E-80 and 11E-95 of this Code).
    Dated (insert date).
    Regional Superintendent of Schools ..................
 
        (7) Notice for an elementary district to opt into a
    	
partial elementary unit district:

 
NOTICE OF REFERENDUM TO JOIN
AN OPTIONAL ELEMENTARY UNIT DISTRICT

        NOTICE is hereby given that on (insert date), a
    	
referendum will be held in part(s) of ....... county (counties) for the purpose of voting for or against the proposition to dissolve an elementary district and join an optional elementary unit district for kindergarten through 12 grade-level purposes for all of the territory included within (here identify the elementary district by name and number). The election is called and will be held pursuant to an order of the Regional Superintendent dated on (insert date), which order states that if a majority of the voters in the elementary school district voting on the proposition at the referendum vote in favor thereof, the tax rates for various purposes for the optional elementary unit district shall be (here list the maximum tax rates for various purposes the optional elementary unit district is authorized to levy and, if applicable, the specifications related to the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law, in accordance with Sections 11E-80 and 11E-95 of this Code) and the elementary district, prior to dissolution, shall issue funding bonds pursuant to Sections 19-8 and 19-9 of the School Code to liquidate any operational deficit or debt incurred or accumulated since the date of the election in which the proposition to form the optional elementary unit district passed.
    Dated (insert date).
    Regional Superintendent of Schools ....................
(Source: P.A. 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11E-60)
    Sec. 11E-60. Ballots.
    (a) Separate ballots shall be used for the election in each affected district. If the petition requests the submission of a proposition for the issuance of bonds, then that question shall be submitted to the voters at the referendum on a separate ballot.
    (b) Ballots for all reorganization propositions submitted under the provisions of this Article must be in substantially the following form:
        (1) Ballot for high school - unit conversion or unit
    	
to dual conversion:

 
        OFFICIAL BALLOT
 
        Shall (here identify the districts to be dissolved by
    	
name and number) be dissolved and new school districts be established as follows: a new (here specify elementary, high school, or unit) district formed from all of the territory included within (here identify the existing school district by name and number), with the authority to levy taxes for various purposes as follows: (here specify the maximum tax rates for various purposes the new school district is authorized to levy and, if applicable, the specifications related to the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law, in accordance with Section 11E-80 of this Code), each upon all of the taxable property of the school district at the value thereof, as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue, and a new (here repeat the information for each new school district)?

 
        The election authority must record the votes "Yes" or
    	
"No".

 
        (2) Ballot for combined school district formation:
 
        OFFICIAL BALLOT
 
        Shall a combined (here insert elementary, high, or
    	
unit) school district, with the authority to levy taxes at the rate of (here specify the maximum tax rates for various purposes the new unit district is authorized to levy and, if applicable, the specifications related to the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law, in accordance with Section 11E-80 of this Code), each upon all of the taxable property of the district at the value thereof, as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue, be established?

 
        The election authority must record the votes "Yes" or
    	
"No".

 
        (3) Ballot for unit district formation (other than a
    	
partial elementary unit district formation):

 
        OFFICIAL BALLOT
 
        Shall a unit district, with the authority to levy
    	
taxes at the rate of (here specify the maximum tax rates for various purposes the new unit district is authorized to levy and, if applicable, the specifications related to the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law, in accordance with Section 11E-80 of this Code), each upon all of the taxable property of the district at the value thereof, as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue, be established?

 
        The election authority must record the votes "Yes" or
    	
"No".

 
        (4) Ballot for a combined high school - unit district
    	
formation:

 
        OFFICIAL BALLOT
 
        Shall a combined high school - unit district formed
    	
from all of the territory included within (here identify existing school districts by name and number), serving the territory included within (here identify existing school district by name and number) only for high school purposes, with the authority to levy taxes for various purposes as follows: (here specify the maximum tax rates for various purposes the new combined high school - unit district is authorized to levy and, if applicable, the specifications related to the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law, in accordance with Sections 11E-80 and 11E-90 of this Code), each upon all of the taxable property of the district at the value thereof, as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue, be established?

 
        The election authority must record the votes "Yes" or
    	
"No".

 
        (5) Ballot for an optional elementary unit district
    	
formation:

 
        OFFICIAL BALLOT
 
        Shall an optional elementary unit district, with the
    	
authority to levy taxes at the rate of (here specify the maximum tax rates for various purposes the new optional elementary unit district is authorized to levy and, if applicable, the specifications related to the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law, in accordance with Sections 11E-80 and 11E-95 of this Code), each upon all of the taxable property of the district at the value thereof, as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue, be established?

 
        The election authority must record the votes "Yes" or
    	
"No".

 
        (6) Ballot for multi-unit conversion:
 
        OFFICIAL BALLOT
 
        Shall (here identify the districts to be dissolved by
    	
name and number) be dissolved and new school districts established as follows: a new elementary district formed from all of the territory included within (here identify the existing school district by name and number), with the authority to levy taxes for various purposes as follows: (here specify the maximum tax rates for various purposes the new school district is authorized to levy and, if applicable, the specifications related to the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law, in accordance with Section 11E-80 of this Code), each upon all of the taxable property of the school district at the value thereof, as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue, (here repeat the information for each new elementary school district), and a new combined high school - unit district formed from all of the territory included within (here identify the existing school district by name and number), with the authority to levy taxes for various purposes as follows: (here specify the maximum tax rates for various purposes the new combined high school - unit district is authorized to levy and, if applicable, the specifications related to the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law, in accordance with Sections 11E-80 and 11E-90 of this Code), each upon all of the taxable property of the school district at the value thereof, as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue?

 
        The election authority must record the votes "Yes" or
    	
"No".

 
        (7) Ballot for an elementary school district to
    	
dissolve and join an optional elementary unit district:

 
        OFFICIAL BALLOT
 
        Shall (here identify the elementary district by name
    	
and number) be dissolved and join (here identify the optional elementary unit district by name and number), with the authority to levy taxes at the rate of (here specify the maximum tax rates for various purposes the optional elementary unit district is authorized to levy and, if applicable, the specifications related to the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law, in accordance with Sections 11E-80 and 11E-95 of this Code), each upon all of the taxable property of the district at the value thereof, as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue and shall (here identify the elementary district by name and number), prior to dissolution, issue funding bonds pursuant to Sections 19-8 and 19-9 of the School Code to liquidate any operational deficit or debt incurred or accumulated since the date of the election in which the proposition to form (here identify the optional elementary unit district by name and number) passed?

 
        The election authority must record the votes "Yes" or
    	
"No".
(Source: P.A. 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06; 95-903, eff. 8-25-08.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11E-65)
    Sec. 11E-65. Passage requirements.
    (a) Except as otherwise provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this Section, if a majority of the electors voting at the election in each affected district vote in favor of the proposition submitted to them, then the proposition shall be deemed to have passed.
    (b) In the case of an optional elementary unit district to be created as provided in subsection (c) of Section 11E-30 of this Code, if a majority of the electors voting in the high school district and a majority of the voters voting in at least one affected elementary district vote in favor of the proposition submitted to them, then the proposition shall be deemed to have passed and an optional elementary unit district shall be created for all of the territory included in the petition for high school purposes, and for the territory included in the affected elementary districts voting in favor of the proposition for elementary purposes.
    (c) In the case of an elementary district electing to join an optional elementary unit district in accordance with subsection (d) of Section 11E-30 of this Code, a majority of the electors voting in that elementary district only must vote in favor of the proposition at a regularly scheduled election.
    (d)(1) If a majority of the voters in at least 2 unit districts have voted in favor of a proposition to create a new unit district, but the proposition was not approved under the standards set forth in subsection (a) of this Section, then the members of the Committee of Ten shall submit an amended petition for consolidation to the school boards of those districts, as long as the territory involved is compact and contiguous. The petition submitted to the school boards shall be identical in form and substance to the petition previously approved by the regional superintendent of schools, with the sole exception that the territory comprising the proposed district shall be amended to include the compact and contiguous territory of those unit districts in which a majority of the voters voted in favor of the proposal.
    (2) Each school board to which the petition is submitted shall meet and vote to approve or not approve the amended petition no more than 30 days after it has been filed with the school board. The regional superintendent of schools shall make available to each school board with which a petition has been filed all transcripts and records of the previous petition hearing. The school boards shall, by appropriate resolution, approve or disapprove the amended petition. No school board may approve an amended petition unless it first finds that the territory described in the petition is compact and contiguous.
    (3) If a majority of the members of each school board to whom a petition is submitted votes in favor of the amended petition, then the approved petition shall be transmitted by the secretary of each school board to the State Superintendent of Education, who shall, within 21 days after receipt, approve or deny the amended petition based on the criteria stated in subsection (b) of Section 11E-50 of this Code. If approved by the State Superintendent of Education, the petition shall be placed on the ballot at the next regularly scheduled election.
(Source: P.A. 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06; 95-903, eff. 8-25-08.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11E-70)
    Sec. 11E-70. Effective date of change.
    (a) Except as provided in subsections (a-5) and (a-10) of this Section, if a petition is filed under the authority of this Article, the change is granted and approved at election, and no appeal is taken, then the change shall become effective after the time for appeal has run for the purpose of all elections; however, the change shall not affect the administration of the schools until July 1 following the date that the school board election is held for the new district or districts and the school boards of the districts as they existed prior to the change shall exercise the same power and authority over the territory until that date.
    (a-5) If a petition is filed under the authority of this Article for the consolidation of Christopher Unit School District 99 and Zeigler-Royalton Community Unit School District 188, the change is granted and approved at election, and no appeal is taken, then the change shall become effective after one or both of the school districts have been awarded school construction grants under the School Construction Law.
    (a-10) If (i) a petition is filed under the authority of this Article for the reorganization of 2 or more school districts that requires a new school building to effectively educate students, (ii) the change is granted and approved at an election, and (iii) no appeal is taken, then, with the approval of the regional superintendent of schools, the change may become effective after one or more of the school districts have been awarded school construction grants, in accordance with the School Construction Law. The intent to postpone the reorganization's effective date must be documented in the petition, and the petition is void if it does not take effect within 5 years after being filed. After the referendum approval and before the effective date of the reorganization, the petition becomes void if the following requirements are met:
        (1) the board of each affected district, by proper
    	
resolution, causes the proposition to void the petition to be submitted to the voters of each affected district at a regularly scheduled election; and
        (2) a majority of the electors voting at the
    	
election in each affected district votes in favor of voiding the petition.
    (b) If any school district is dissolved in accordance with this Article, upon the close of the then current school year, the terms of office of the school board of the dissolved district shall terminate.
    (c) New districts shall be permitted to organize and elect officers within the time prescribed by the general election law. Additionally, between the date of the organization and the election of officers and the date on which the new district takes effect for all purposes, the new district shall also be permitted, with the stipulation of the districts from which the new district is formed and the approval of the regional superintendent of schools, to take all action necessary or appropriate to do the following:
        (1) Establish the tax levy for the new district, in
    	
lieu of the levies by the districts from which the new district is formed, within the time generally provided by law and in accordance with this Article. The funds produced by the levy shall be transferred to the new district as generally provided by law at such time as they are received by the county collector.
        (2) Enter into agreements with depositories and
    	
direct the deposit and investment of any funds received from the county collector or any other source, all as generally provided by law.
        (3) Conduct a search for the superintendent of the
    	
new district and enter into a contract with the person selected to serve as the superintendent of the new district in accordance with the provisions of this Code generally applicable to the employment of a superintendent.
        (4) Conduct a search for other administrators and
    	
staff of the new district and enter into a contract with these persons in accordance with the provisions of this Code generally applicable to the employment of administrators and other staff.
        (5) Engage the services of accountants, architects,
    	
attorneys, and other consultants, including but not limited to consultants to assist in the search for the superintendent.
        (6) Plan for the transition from the administration
    	
of the schools by the districts from which the new district is formed.
        (7) Bargain collectively, pursuant to the Illinois
    	
Educational Labor Relations Act, with the certified exclusive bargaining representative or certified exclusive bargaining representatives of the new district's employees.
        (8) Expend the funds received from the levy and any
    	
funds received from the districts from which the new district is formed to meet payroll and other essential operating expenses or otherwise in the exercise of the foregoing powers until the new district takes effect for all purposes.
        (9) Issue bonds authorized in the proposition to form
    	
the new district or bonds pursuant to and in accordance with all of the requirements of Section 17-2.11 of this Code, levy taxes upon all of the taxable property within the new district to pay the principal of and interest on those bonds as provided by statute, expend the proceeds of the bonds and enter into any necessary contracts for the work financed therewith as authorized by statute, and avail itself of the provisions of other applicable law, including the Omnibus Bond Acts, in connection with the issuance of those bonds.
    (d) After the granting of a petition has become final and approved at election, the date when the change becomes effective for purposes of administration and attendance may be accelerated or postponed by stipulation of the school board of each district affected and approval by the regional superintendent of schools with which the original petition is required to be filed.
(Source: P.A. 97-925, eff. 8-10-12; 98-125, eff. 8-2-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11E-75)
    Sec. 11E-75. Map showing change. Within 30 days after a new school district has been created or the boundaries of an existing district have been changed under the provisions of this Article, the regional superintendent of schools of any county involved shall make and file with the county clerk of his or her county a map of any districts changed by the action, whereupon the county clerk or county clerks, as the case may be, shall extend taxes against the territory in accordance therewith.
(Source: P.A. 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11E-80)
    Sec. 11E-80. Specification of taxing purposes and rates. Whenever taxing purposes and rates are required to be specified or described under this Article for petition, hearing, notice, or ballot requirements, the purposes and rates shall be specified or described in accordance with this Section and, where applicable, shall also include a specification of the aggregate extension base and debt service extension base in accordance with the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law.
        (1) For the formation of a district not subject to
    	
the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law, other than a partial elementary unit district, all of the following must be done:
            (A) List the maximum rate at which the district
        	
will be authorized to levy a tax for educational purposes, operations and maintenance purposes, and pupil transportation purposes (such as .....% for educational purposes, .....% for operations and maintenance purposes, and .....% for pupil transportation purposes), subject to the rate limitations specified in Sections 17-2 and 17-3 of this Code.
            (B) If it is desired to secure authority to levy
        	
other taxes above the statutory permissive rate, then list the maximum rate at which the district will be authorized to levy a tax for each such purpose (such as .....% for special educational purposes, .....% for leasing educational facilities or computer technology purposes, .....% for capital improvement purposes, and .....% for fire prevention and safety purposes), subject to all applicable statutory rate limitations.
        (2) For the formation of a district that is subject
    	
to the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law, other than a partial elementary unit district, all of the following must be done:
            (A) List the purpose for each and every tax that
        	
the new district will be authorized to levy (such as educational purposes and operations and maintenance purposes).
            (B) For each tax purpose listed, specify the
        	
maximum rate at which the district will be authorized to levy each tax (such as .....% for educational purposes and .....% for operations and maintenance purposes), subject to all applicable statutory rate limitations.
            (C) Specify the aggregate extension base the
        	
district will seek to establish in conformity with the provisions of Section 18-210 of the Property Tax Code. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary contained in the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law, no notice and referendum requirements other than those set forth in this Article shall be required to establish an aggregate extension base for a new district formed in accordance with this Article.
            (D) If desired, specify the debt service
        	
extension base the district will seek to establish in accordance with Section 18-212 of the Property Tax Code. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary contained in the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law, no notice and referendum requirements other than those set forth in this Article shall be required to establish a debt service extension base for a new district formed in accordance with this Article.
        (3) For the formation of a partial elementary unit
    	
district not subject to the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law, the purposes and tax rate information required by subsection (b) of Section 11E-90 or subsection (b) of Section 11E-95 of this Code, as applicable, must be specified.
        (4) For the formation of a partial elementary unit
    	
district that is subject to the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law, all of the following must be done:
            (A) List the purpose for each and every tax that
        	
the new district will be authorized to levy, including an indication of whether the tax is for grade K through 8 or grade 9 through 12 purposes, to the extent required by Section 11E-90 or 11E-95 of this Code.
            (B) For each tax purpose listed, list the maximum
        	
rate at which the district will be authorized to levy each tax, subject to the rate limitations specified in subsection (b) of Section 11E-90 or subsection (b) of Section 11E-95 of this Code, as applicable, and elsewhere in statute.
            (C) Specify the aggregate extension base the
        	
district will seek to establish in conformity with the provisions of Section 18-210 of the Property Tax Code. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary contained in the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law, no notice and referendum requirements other than those set forth in this Article shall be required to establish an aggregate extension base for a new district formed in accordance with this Article.
            (D) If desired, specify the debt service
        	
extension base the district will seek to establish in accordance with Section 18-212 of the Property Tax Code. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary contained in the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law, no notice and referendum requirements other than those set forth in this Article shall be required to establish a debt service extension base for a new district formed in accordance with this Article.
(Source: P.A. 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11E-85)
    Sec. 11E-85. Tax levy and borrowing authority, bonds, and working cash funds; districts other than partial elementary unit districts. The school board of any district involved in a school district conversion or the school board of any new district created under the provisions of this Article other than a partial elementary unit district may do any of the following:
        (1) Levy for the purposes and at not exceeding the
    	
rates specified in the petition with respect to each district, which rates thereafter may be increased or decreased in accordance with Sections 17-2 through 17-7 of this Code, and further levy taxes for other purposes as generally permitted by law.
        (2) Borrow money and issue bonds as authorized in
    	
Articles 10 and 19 of this Code and as otherwise permitted by law.
        (3) Establish, maintain, or re-create a working cash
    	
fund as authorized by Article 20 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11E-90)
    Sec. 11E-90. Classification of property, taxes, bonds, and funds for combined high school - unit districts.
    (a) All real property included within the boundaries of a combined high school - unit district created in accordance with this Article shall be classified into either a high school only classification or elementary and high school classification as follows:
        (1) Real property included within the high school
    	
only classification shall include all of the real property included within both the boundaries of the combined high school - unit district and the boundaries of a separate school district organized and established for purposes of providing instruction up to and including grade 8.
        (2) Real property included within the elementary and
    	
high school classification shall include all of the real property of the combined high school - unit district not included in the high school only classification.
    (b) The petition to establish a combined high school - unit district shall set forth the maximum annual authorized tax rates for the proposed district as follows:
        (1) The petition to establish a combined high school
    	
- unit district must include a maximum annual authorized tax rate for both grade K through 8 educational purposes and grade 9 through 12 educational purposes. The rate for grade K through 8 educational purposes shall not exceed 3.5%. The rate for grade 9 through 12 educational purposes shall not exceed 3.5%. The combined rate for both grade K through 8 and grade 9 through 12 educational purposes shall not exceed 4.0%.
        (2) The petition to establish a combined high school
    	
- unit district must include a maximum annual authorized tax rate for both grade K through 8 operations and maintenance purposes and grade 9 through 12 operations and maintenance purposes. The rate for grade K through 8 operations and maintenance purposes shall not exceed 0.55%. The rate for grade 9 through 12 operations and maintenance purposes shall not exceed 0.55%. The combined rate for both grade K through 8 and grade 9 through 12 operations and maintenance purposes shall not exceed 0.75%.
        (3) The petition to establish a combined high school
    	
- unit district must include a maximum annual authorized tax rate for both grade K through 8 special education purposes and grade 9 through 12 special education purposes. The rate for grade K through 8 special education purposes shall not exceed 0.40%. The rate for grade 9 through 12 special education purposes shall not exceed 0.40%.
        (4) The petition to establish a combined high school
    	
- unit district must include a maximum annual authorized tax rate for transportation purposes.
        (5) If it is desired to secure authority to levy
    	
other taxes above the permissive rate applicable to unit districts as specified elsewhere in statute, the petition must include the maximum annual authorized tax rate at which the district will be authorized to levy a tax for each such purpose, not to exceed the maximum rate applicable to unit districts as specified elsewhere in statute.
    (c) The school board of any new combined high school - unit district created under the provisions of this Article may levy a tax annually upon all of the taxable property of the district at the value as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue, as follows:
        (1) For all real property within the district, rates
    	
not to exceed the maximum annual authorized grade 9 through 12 educational purposes rate established in accordance with subdivision (1) of subsection (b) of this Section, the maximum annual authorized grade 9 through 12 operation and maintenance purposes rate established in accordance with subdivision (2) of subsection (b) of this Section, the maximum annual authorized grade 9 through 12 special education purposes rate established in accordance with subdivision (3) of subsection (b) of this Section, the maximum annual authorized transportation purposes rate established in accordance with subdivision (4) of subsection (b) of this Section, and for all other purposes, the statutory permissive rate for unit districts or the maximum annual authorized rate for that purpose established in accordance with subdivision (5) of subsection (b) of this Section.
        (2) For all real property in the district included
    	
within the elementary and high school classification, in addition to the rates authorized by subdivision (1) of this subsection (c), rates not to exceed the maximum annual authorized grade K through 8 educational purposes rate established in accordance with subdivision (1) of subsection (b) of this Section, the maximum annual authorized grade K through 8 operation and maintenance purposes rate established in accordance with subdivision (2) of subsection (b) of this Section, and the maximum annual authorized grade K through 8 special education purposes rate established in accordance with subdivision (3) of subsection (b) of this Section.
    (d) The school board may, subsequent to the formation of the district and in accordance with Sections 17-2 through 17-7 of this Code, seek to increase the maximum annual authorized tax rates for any statutorily authorized purpose up to the maximum rate set forth in subsection (b) of this Section or otherwise applicable to unit districts as specified elsewhere in statute, whichever is less, subject to the following approval requirements:
        (1) The school board may increase the following
    	
rates only after submitting a proper resolution to the voters of the district at any regular scheduled election and obtaining approval by both a majority of voters living in the portion of the territory included within the high school only classification voting on the proposition and a majority of voters living in the portion of the territory included within the elementary and high school classification voting on the proposition:
            (A) The maximum annual authorized grade 9
        	
through 12 educational purposes rate established in accordance with subdivision (1) of subsection (b) of this Section, as may be increased thereafter in accordance with this subsection (d).
            (B) The maximum annual authorized grade 9
        	
through 12 operation and maintenance purposes rate established in accordance with subdivision (2) of subsection (b) of this Section, as may be increased thereafter in accordance with this subsection (d).
            (C) The maximum annual authorized grade 9
        	
through 12 special education purposes rate established in accordance with subdivision (3) of subsection (b) of this Section, as may be increased thereafter in accordance with this Section.
            (D) The maximum annual authorized transportation
        	
purposes rate established in accordance with subdivision (4) of subsection (b) of this Section, as may be increased thereafter in accordance with this subsection (d).
            (E) For all other statutorily authorized
        	
purposes, any rate exceeding the statutory permissive rate for unit districts established in accordance with subdivision (5) of subsection (b) of this Section, as may be increased thereafter in accordance with this Section.
        (2) The school board may increase the following rates
    	
only after submitting a proper resolution to the voters of the district living in the portion of the territory included within the elementary and high school classification at any regular scheduled election and obtaining approval by a majority of voters living in the portion of the territory included within the elementary and high school classification voting on the proposition:
            (A) The maximum annual authorized grade K
        	
through 8 educational purposes rate established in accordance with subdivision (1) of subsection (b) of this Section, as may be increased thereafter in accordance with this subsection (d).
            (B) The maximum annual authorized grade K
        	
through 8 operation and maintenance purposes rate established in accordance with subdivision (2) of subsection (b) of this Section, as may be increased thereafter in accordance with this subsection (d).
            (C) The maximum annual authorized grade K
        	
through 8 special education purposes rate established in accordance with subdivision (3) of subsection (b) of this Section, as may be increased thereafter in accordance with this Section.
    (e) The school board may, after submitting a proper resolution to the voters of the district at any regular scheduled election, seek to do either of the following:
        (1) Increase or decrease the maximum authorized
    	
annual tax rate for grade K through 8 educational purposes with an equal corresponding increase or decrease of the maximum authorized annual tax rate for grade 9 through 12 educational purposes, such that there is no change in the total combined maximum authorized annual tax rate for both purposes.
        (2) Increase or decrease the maximum authorized
    	
annual tax rate for grade K through 8 operations and maintenance purposes with an equal corresponding increase or decrease of the maximum authorized annual tax rate for grade 9 through 12 operations and maintenance purposes, such that there is no change in the total combined maximum authorized annual tax rate for both purposes.
    Any modification to maximum authorized annual tax rates pursuant to this subsection (e) must be approved by both a majority of voters living in the portion of the territory included within the high school only classification voting on the proposition and a majority of voters living in the portion of the territory included within the elementary and high school classification voting on the proposition. No maximum tax rate secured hereunder may exceed the maximum tax rate for a particular purpose specified elsewhere in statute.
    (f) The school board may seek to do either of the following:
        (1) Increase the maximum authorized annual tax rate
    	
for either grade K through 8 educational purposes or grade K through 8 operations and maintenance purposes with an equal corresponding decrease being effected to the maximum authorized tax rate for the other fund.
        (2) Increase the maximum authorized annual tax rate
    	
for either grade 9 through 12 educational purposes or grade 9 through 12 operations and maintenance purposes with an equal corresponding decrease being effected to the maximum authorized tax rate for the other fund.
    A proper resolution to increase and concurrently decrease the maximum authorized annual tax rates for grade K through 8 purposes in accordance with this subsection (f) shall be submitted to the voters of the district residing in the elementary and high school classification at any regular scheduled election and must be approved by a majority of voters living in the portion of the territory included within the elementary and high school classification voting on the proposition. A proper resolution to increase and concurrently decrease the maximum authorized annual tax rates for grade 9 through 12 purposes in accordance with this subsection (f) shall be submitted to all of the voters of the district at any regular scheduled election and must be approved by a majority of voters voting on the proposition. No maximum tax rate secured hereunder may exceed the maximum tax rate for a particular purpose specified elsewhere in statute. The terms and provisions of this subsection (f) shall apply instead of the terms and provisions of Section 17-6.1 of this Code to any concurrent equal increase and decrease in the maximum authorized rates for educational and operations and maintenance purposes by a combined high school - unit district.
    (g) The school board may borrow money and issue bonds for elementary or high school purposes (but not K through 12 purposes) as authorized by Articles 10 and 19 and Section 17-2.11 of this Code and as otherwise permitted by law. All notices, resolutions, and ballots related to borrowing money and issuing bonds in accordance with this subsection (g) shall indicate whether the proposed action is for elementary or high school purposes. Taxes to pay the principal of, interest on, and premium, if any, on bonds issued for high school purposes shall be extended against the entire district, and taxes to pay the principal of, interest on, and premium, if any, on bonds issued for elementary purposes shall be extended only against property within the elementary and high school classification. The proposition to issue bonds for high school purposes must be submitted to and approved by a majority of voters of the district voting on the proposition. The proposition to issue bonds for elementary purposes must only be submitted to and approved by a majority of voters living in the portion of the territory proposed to be included or included within the elementary and high school classification voting on the proposition. Notwithstanding the terms and provisions of Section 19-4 of this Code, the board of a combined high school - unit district may not seek to designate any bonds issued for high school purposes as bonds issued for elementary purposes or designate any bonds issued for elementary purposes as bonds issued for high school purposes. Any petition filed in accordance with Section 19-9 of this Code requesting that the proposition to issue bonds for the payment of orders or claims for elementary purposes be submitted to the voters must be signed by 10% or more of the registered voters of the elementary and high school classification. If required pursuant to Section 19-9 of this Code, the proposition to issue bonds for the payment of orders or claims for elementary purposes must only be submitted to and approved by a majority of voters living in the portion of the territory included within the elementary and high school classification voting on the proposition. Taxes to pay the principal of, interest on, and premium, if any, on any refunding bonds issued in accordance with Article 19 of this Code to refund bonds, coupons, or other evidences of indebtedness for bonds issued by the combined high school - unit district for high school purposes or issued by a district that dissolved to form the combined high school - unit district shall be extended against the entire district. Taxes to pay the principal of, interest on, and premium, if any, on any refunding bonds issued in accordance with Article 19 of this Code to refund bonds, coupons, or other evidences of indebtedness for bonds issued by the combined high school - unit district for elementary purposes shall only be extended against the property within the elementary and high school classification.
    (h) The school board may establish, maintain, or re-create a working cash fund for elementary or high school purposes (but not K through 12 purposes) as authorized by Article 20 of this Code. All notices, resolutions, and ballots related to the establishment of a working cash fund shall indicate whether the working cash fund shall be for elementary or high school purposes. For purposes of Section 20-2 of this Code, taxes to pay the principal of, interest on, and premium, if any, on bonds issued to create a working cash fund for high school purposes shall be extended against the entire district, and taxes to pay the principal of, interest on, and premium, if any, on bonds issued to create a working cash fund for elementary purposes shall be extended only against property within the elementary and high school classification. Any petition filed in accordance with Section 20-7 of this Code requesting that the proposition to issue bonds to establish a working cash fund for elementary purposes be submitted to the voters must be signed by 10% or more of the registered voters of the elementary and high school classification. If required pursuant to Section 20-7 of this Code, the proposition to issue bonds for a working cash fund for elementary purposes must only be submitted to and approved by a majority of voters living in the portion of the territory included within the elementary and high school classification voting on the proposition. Upon the abolishment of the working cash fund for elementary purposes in accordance with Section 20-8 of this Code, the balance shall be transferred to the fund established for the receipt of proceeds from levies specified for grade K through 8 educational purposes. Upon the abolishment of the working cash fund for high school purposes in accordance with Section 20-8 of this Code, the balance shall be transferred to the fund established for the receipt of proceeds from levies specified for grade 9 through 12 educational purposes.
    (i) The school board shall establish separate funds for the receipt of tax proceeds from levies specified for grade K through 8 purposes and grade 9 through 12 purposes in accordance with subdivisions (1) through (3) of subsection (b) of this Section and the receipt of tax and other proceeds from bond issuances for grade K through 8 purposes and grade 9 through 12 purposes in accordance with subsection (g) of this Section. Proceeds received from any levy or bond issuance specified for grade K through 8 purposes shall not be used to pay for any staff, equipment, materials, facilities, buildings, land, or services solely related to instruction in grades 9 through 12. Proceeds received from any levy or bond issuance specified for grade 9 through 12 purposes shall not be used to pay for any staff, equipment, materials, facilities, buildings, land, or services solely related to instruction in grades K through 8. Expenses related to staff, equipment, materials, facilities, buildings, land, or services related to instruction in both grades K through 8 and grades 9 through 12 may be paid from proceeds received from a levy or bond issuance specified for either grade K through 8 purposes or grade 9 through 12 purposes.
    (j) The school board of a combined high school - unit district may abate or abolish any fund in accordance with this Code, provided that no funds may be transferred from an abated or abolished fund specified for grade K through 8 purposes to a fund specified for grade 9 through 12 purposes, and no funds may be transferred from an abated or abolished fund specified for grade 9 through 12 purposes to a fund specified for grade K through 8 purposes.
    (k) To the extent the specific requirements for borrowing money, levying taxes, issuing bonds, establishing, maintaining, or re-creating a working cash fund, and transferring funds by a combined high school - unit district set forth in this Section conflicts with any general requirements for school districts set forth in Article 10, 17, 19, or 20 of this Code, the requirements set forth in this Section shall control over any such general requirements.
(Source: P.A. 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11E-95)
    Sec. 11E-95. Classification of property, taxes, bonds, and funds for optional elementary unit districts.
    (a) All real property included within the boundaries of an optional elementary unit district created in accordance with this Article shall be classified into either a high school only classification or an elementary and high school classification as follows:
        (1) Real property included within the high school
    	
only classification shall include all of the real property included within both the boundaries of the optional elementary unit district and the boundaries of a separate school district organized and established for purposes of providing instruction up to and including grade 8 that did not elect to join the optional elementary unit district in accordance with this Article.
        (2) Real property included within the elementary and
    	
high school classification shall include all real property of the optional elementary unit district not included in the high school only classification.
    (b) The petition to establish an optional elementary unit district shall set forth the maximum annual authorized tax rates for the proposed district as follows:
        (1) The petition must specify a maximum annual
    	
authorized tax rate for both grade K through 8 educational purposes and grade 9 through 12 educational purposes. The rate for grade K through 8 educational purposes shall not exceed 3.5%. The rate for grade 9 through 12 educational purposes shall not exceed 3.5%. The combined rate for both grade K through 8 and grade 9 through 12 educational purposes shall not exceed 4.0%.
        (2) The petition must specify a maximum annual
    	
authorized tax rate for both grade K through 8 operations and maintenance purposes and grade 9 through 12 operations and maintenance purposes. The rate for grade K through 8 operations and maintenance purposes shall not exceed 0.55%. The rate for grade 9 through 12 operations and maintenance purposes shall not exceed 0.55%. The combined rate for both grade K through 8 and grade 9 through 12 operations and maintenance purposes shall not exceed 0.75%.
        (3) The petition must specify a maximum annual
    	
authorized tax rate for both grade K through 8 special education purposes and grade 9 through 12 special education purposes. The rate for grade K through 8 special education purposes shall not exceed 0.40%. The rate for grade 9 through 12 special education purposes shall not exceed 0.40%.
        (4) The petition must specify a maximum annual
    	
authorized tax rate for transportation purposes.
        (5) If it is desired to secure authority to levy
    	
other taxes above the permissive rate applicable to unit districts as specified elsewhere in statute, the petition must specify the maximum annual authorized tax rate at which the district will be authorized to levy a tax for each such purpose, not to exceed the maximum annual authorized tax rate applicable to unit districts as specified elsewhere in statute.
        (6) The aggregate of all rates specified in
    	
accordance with this subsection (b) shall not exceed the highest dual district rate, excluding rates for bond and interest levies, applicable to any territory within the high school district included in the petition in the year immediately preceding the creation of the new district.
    (c) The school board of any new optional elementary unit district created under the provisions of this Article may levy a tax annually upon all of the taxable property of the district at the value as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue as follows:
        (1) For all real property within the district, rates
    	
not to exceed the maximum annual authorized grade 9 through 12 educational purposes rate established in accordance with subdivision (1) of subsection (b) of this Section, the maximum annual authorized grade 9 through 12 operation and maintenance purposes rate established in accordance with subdivision (2) of subsection (b) of this Section, the maximum annual authorized grade 9 through 12 special education purposes rate established in accordance with subdivision (3) of subsection (b) of this Section, the maximum annual authorized transportation purposes rate established in accordance with subdivision (4) of subsection (b) of this Section, and, for all other purposes, the statutory permissive rate for unit districts or the maximum annual authorized rate for that purpose established in accordance with subdivision (5) of subsection (b) of this Section.
        (2) For all real property in the district included
    	
within the elementary and high school classification, in addition to the rates authorized by subdivision (1) of this subsection (c), rates not to exceed the maximum annual authorized grade K through 8 educational purposes rate established in accordance with subdivision (1) of subsection (b) of this Section, the maximum annual authorized grade K through 8 operation and maintenance purposes rate established in accordance with subdivision (2) of subsection (b) of this Section, and the maximum annual authorized grade K through 8 special education purposes rate established in accordance with subdivision (3) of subsection (b) of this Section.
    (d) The school board may, subsequent to the formation of the district and in accordance with Sections 17-2 through 17-7 of this Code, seek to increase the maximum annual authorized tax rates for any statutorily authorized purpose up to the maximum rate set forth in subsection (b) of this Section or otherwise applicable to unit school districts as specified elsewhere in statute, whichever is less, subject to the following approval requirements:
        (1) The school board may increase the following
    	
rates only after submitting a proper resolution to the voters of the district at any regular scheduled election and obtaining approval by both a majority of voters living in the portion of the territory included within the high school only classification voting on the proposition and a majority of voters living in the portion of the territory included within the elementary and high school classification voting on the proposition:
            (A) The maximum annual authorized grade 9
        	
through 12 educational purposes rate established in accordance with subdivision (1) of subsection (b) of this Section, as may be increased thereafter in accordance with this subsection (d).
            (B) The maximum annual authorized grade 9
        	
through 12 operation and maintenance purposes rate established in accordance with subdivision (2) of subsection (b) of this Section, as may be increased thereafter in accordance with this subsection (d).
            (C) The maximum annual authorized grade 9
        	
through 12 special education purposes rate established in accordance with subdivision (3) of subsection (b) of this Section, as may be increased thereafter in accordance with this subsection (d).
            (D) The maximum annual authorized transportation
        	
purposes rate established in accordance with subdivision (4) of subsection (b) of this Section, as may be increased thereafter in accordance with this subsection (d).
            (E) For all other statutorily authorized
        	
purposes, any rate exceeding the statutory permissive rate for unit districts established in accordance with subdivision (5) of subsection (b) of this Section, as may be increased thereafter in accordance with this subsection (d).
        (2) The school board may increase the following
    	
rates only after submitting a proper resolution to the voters of the district living in the portion of the territory included within the elementary and high school classification at any regular scheduled election and obtaining approval by a majority of voters living in the portion of the territory included within the elementary and high school classification voting on the proposition:
            (A) The maximum annual authorized grade K
        	
through 8 educational purposes rate established in accordance with subdivision (1) of subsection (b) of this Section, as may be increased thereafter in accordance with this subsection (d).
            (B) The maximum annual authorized grade K through
        	
8 operation and maintenance purposes rate established in accordance with subdivision (2) of subsection (b) of this Section, as may be increased thereafter in accordance with this subsection (d).
            (C) The maximum annual authorized grade K
        	
through 8 special education purposes rate established in accordance with subdivision (3) of subsection (b) of this Section, as may be increased thereafter in accordance with this subsection (d).
    (e) The school board may, after submitting a proper resolution to the voters of the district at any regular scheduled election, seek to do either of the following:
        (1) Increase or decrease the maximum authorized
    	
annual tax rate for grade K through 8 educational purposes with an equal corresponding increase or decrease of the maximum authorized annual tax rate for grade 9 through 12 educational purposes, such that there is no change in the total combined maximum authorized annual tax rate for both purposes.
        (2) Increase or decrease the maximum authorized
    	
annual tax rate for grade K through 8 operations and maintenance purposes with an equal corresponding increase or decrease of the maximum authorized annual tax rate for grade 9 through 12 operations and maintenance purposes, such that there is no change in the total combined maximum authorized annual tax rate for both purposes.
    Any modification to maximum authorized annual tax rates pursuant to this subsection (e) must be approved by both a majority of voters living in the portion of the territory included within the high school only classification voting on the proposition and a majority of voters living in the portion of the territory included within the elementary and high school classification voting on the proposition. No maximum tax rate secured hereunder may exceed the maximum tax rate for a particular purpose specified elsewhere in statute.
    (f) The school board may seek to do either of the following:
        (1) Increase the maximum authorized annual tax rate
    	
for either grade K through 8 educational purposes or grade K through 8 operations and maintenance purposes with an equal corresponding decrease being effected to the maximum authorized tax rate for the other fund.
        (2) Increase the maximum authorized annual tax rate
    	
for either grade 9 through 12 educational purposes or grade 9 through 12 operations and maintenance purposes with an equal corresponding decrease being effected to the maximum authorized tax rate for the other fund.
    A proper resolution to increase and concurrently decrease the maximum authorized annual tax rates for grade K through 8 purposes in accordance with this subsection (f) shall be submitted to the voters of the district residing in the elementary and high school classification at any regular scheduled election and must be approved by a majority of voters living in the portion of the territory included within the elementary and high school classification voting on the proposition. A proper resolution to increase and concurrently decrease the maximum authorized annual tax rates for grade 9 through 12 purposes in accordance with this subsection (f) shall be submitted to all of the voters of the district at any regular scheduled election and must be approved by a majority of voters voting on the proposition. No maximum tax rate secured hereunder may exceed the maximum tax rate for a particular purpose specified elsewhere in statute. The terms and provisions of this subsection (f) shall apply instead of the terms and provisions of Section 17-6.1 of this Code to any concurrent equal increase and decrease in the maximum authorized rates for educational and operations and maintenance purposes by an optional elementary unit district.
    (g) The school board may borrow money and issue bonds for elementary or high school purposes (but not grade K through 12 purposes) as authorized by Articles 10 and 19 and Section 17-2.11 of this Code and as otherwise permitted by law. All notices, resolutions, and ballots related to borrowing money and issuing bonds in accordance with this subsection (g) shall indicate whether the proposed action is for elementary or high school purposes. Taxes to pay the principal of, interest on, and premium, if any, on bonds issued for high school purposes shall be extended against the entire district, and taxes to pay the principal of, interest on, and premium, if any, on bonds issued for elementary purposes shall be extended only against property within the elementary and high school classification. The proposition to issue bonds for high school purposes must be submitted to and approved by a majority of voters of the district voting on the proposition. The proposition to issue bonds for elementary purposes must only be submitted to and approved by a majority of voters living in the portion of the territory included within the elementary and high school classification voting on the proposition. Notwithstanding the terms and provisions of Section 19-4 of this Code, the board of an optional elementary unit district may not seek to designate any bonds issued for high school purposes as bonds issued for elementary purposes or designate any bonds issued for elementary purposes as bonds issued for high school purposes. Any petition filed in accordance with Section 19-9 of this Code requesting that the proposition to issue bonds for the payment of orders or claims for elementary purposes be submitted to the voters must be signed by 10% or more of the registered voters of the elementary and high school classification. If required pursuant to Section 19-9 of this Code, the proposition to issue bonds for the payment of orders or claims for elementary purposes must only be submitted to and approved by a majority of voters living in the portion of the territory included within the elementary and high school classification voting on the proposition. Taxes to pay the principal of, interest on, and premium, if any, on any refunding bonds issued in accordance with Article 19 of this Code to refund bonds, coupons, or other evidences of indebtedness for bonds issued by the optional elementary unit district for high school purposes or issued by a district that dissolved to form the optional elementary unit district shall be extended against the entire district. Taxes to pay the principal of, interest on, and premium, if any, on any refunding bonds issued in accordance with Article 19 of this Code to refund bonds, coupons, or other evidences of indebtedness for bonds issued by the optional elementary unit district for elementary purposes shall only be extended against the property within the elementary and high school classification.
    (h) The school board may establish, maintain, or re-create a working cash fund for elementary or high school purposes (but not grade K through 12 purposes) as authorized by Article 20 of this Code. All notices, resolutions, and ballots related to the establishment of a working cash fund shall indicate whether the working cash fund shall be for elementary or high school purposes. For purposes of Section 20-2 of this Code, taxes to pay the principal of, interest on, and premium, if any, on bonds issued to create a working cash fund for high school purposes shall be extended against the entire district, and taxes to pay the principal of, interest on, and premium, if any, on bonds issued to create a working cash fund for elementary purposes shall be extended only against property within the elementary and high school classification. Any petition filed in accordance with Section 20-7 of this Code requesting that the proposition to issue bonds to establish a working cash fund for elementary purposes be submitted to the voters must be signed by 10% or more of the registered voters of the elementary and high school classification. If required pursuant to Section 20-7 of this Code, the proposition to issue bonds for a working cash fund for elementary purposes must only be submitted to and approved by a majority of voters living in the portion of the territory included within the elementary and high school classification voting on the proposition. Upon the abolishment of the working cash fund for elementary purposes in accordance with Section 20-8 of this Code, the balance shall be transferred to the fund established for the receipt of proceeds from levies specified for grade K through 8 educational purposes. Upon the abolishment of the working cash fund for high school purposes in accordance with Section 20-8 of this Code, the balance shall be transferred to the fund established for the receipt of proceeds from levies specified for grade 9 through 12 educational purposes.
    (i) The school board shall establish separate funds for the receipt of tax proceeds from levies specified for grade K through 8 purposes and grade 9 through 12 purposes in accordance with subdivisions (1) through (3) of subsection (b) of this Section and the receipt of tax and other proceeds from bond issuances for grade K through 8 purposes and grade 9 through 12 purposes in accordance with subsection (g) of this Section. Proceeds received from any levy or bond issuance specified for grade K through 8 purposes shall not be used to pay for any staff, equipment, materials, facilities, buildings, land, or services solely related to instruction in grades 9 through 12. Proceeds received from any levy or bond issuance specified for grade 9 through 12 purposes shall not be used to pay for any staff, equipment, materials, facilities, buildings, land, or services solely related to instruction in grades K through 8. Expenses related to staff, equipment, materials, facilities, buildings, land, or services related to instruction in both grades K through 8 and grades 9 through 12 may be paid from proceeds received from a levy or bond issuance specified for either grade K through 8 purposes or grade 9 through 12 purposes.
    (j) The school board of an optional elementary unit district may abate or abolish any fund in accordance with this Code, provided that no funds may be transferred from an abated or abolished fund specified for grade K through 8 purposes to a fund specified for grade 9 through 12 purposes, and no funds may be transferred from an abated or abolished fund specified for grade 9 through 12 purposes to a fund specified for grade K through 8 purposes.
    (k) To the extent that the specific requirements for borrowing money, levying taxes, issuing bonds, establishing, maintaining, or re-creating a working cash fund, and transferring funds by an optional elementary unit district set forth in this Section conflicts with any general requirements for school districts set forth in Article 10, 17, 19, or 20 of this Code, the requirements set forth in this Section shall control over any such general requirements.
(Source: P.A. 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11E-100)
    Sec. 11E-100. Timing of extension of tax levies.
    (a) If the election of the school board of the new district occurs at a regular election and the board of education makes its initial levy or levies in that same year, the county clerk shall extend the levy or levies, notwithstanding any other law that requires the adoption of a budget before the clerk may extend the levy. In addition, the districts from which the new district is formed, by joint agreement and with the approval of the regional superintendent of schools, shall be permitted to amend outstanding levies in the same calendar year in which the creation of the new district is approved at the rates specified in the petition.
    (b) If the election of the board of education of the new district does not occur in the same calendar year that the proposition to create the new district is approved, the districts from which the new district or districts are formed, by joint agreement and with the approval of the regional superintendent of schools, shall be permitted to levy in the same calendar year in which the creation of the new district is approved at the rates specified in the petition. The county clerks shall extend any such levy notwithstanding any law that requires adoption of a budget before extension of the levy.
(Source: P.A. 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11E-105)
    Sec. 11E-105. Assets, liabilities and bonded indebtedness; tax rate.
    (a) Subject to the terms and provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of this Section, whenever a new district is created under any of the provisions of this Article, the outstanding bonded indebtedness shall be treated as provided in this subsection (a) and in Section 19-29 of this Code. The tax rate for bonded indebtedness shall be determined in the manner provided in Section 19-7 of this Code, and, notwithstanding the creation of any such district, the county clerk or clerks shall annually extend taxes, for each outstanding bond issue against all of the taxable property that was situated within the boundaries of the district, as those boundaries existed at the time of the issuance of the bond issue, regardless of whether the property is still contained in that same district at the time of the extension of the taxes by the county clerk or clerks; provided that, notwithstanding the provisions of Section 19-18 of this Code, upon resolution of the school board, the county clerk must extend taxes to pay the principal of and interest on any general obligation bonds issued by the new district exclusively to refund any bonded indebtedness of a district organized into the new district against all of the taxable property that was situated within the boundaries of the previously existing district as the boundaries existed at the time of the issuance of the bonded indebtedness being refunded; however, (i) the net interest rate on the refunding bonds may not exceed the net interest rate on the refunded bonds, (ii) the final maturity date of the refunding bonds may not extend beyond the final maturity date of the refunded bonds, and (iii) the tax levy to pay the refunding bonds in any levy year may not exceed the tax levy that would have been required to pay the refunded bonds for that levy year. The terms of the proviso are applicable to districts that were created pursuant to a referendum held in November of 2008. The terms of the proviso, other than this sentence, are inoperative after June 30, 2016.
    (b) For a unit district formation, whenever a part of a district is included within the boundaries of a newly created unit district, the regional superintendent of schools shall cause an accounting to be had between the districts affected by the change in boundaries as provided for in Article 11C of this Code. Whenever the entire territory of 2 or more school districts is organized into a unit district pursuant to a petition filed under this Article, the petition may provide that the entire territory of the new unit district shall assume the bonded indebtedness of the previously existing school districts. In that case, the tax rate for bonded indebtedness shall be determined in the manner provided in Section 19-7 of this Code, except that the county clerk shall annually extend taxes for each outstanding bond issue against all the taxable property situated in the new unit district as it exists after the organization.
    (c)(1) For a high school-unit conversion, unit to dual conversion, or multi-unit conversion, upon the effective date of the change as provided in Section 11E-70 of this Code and subject to the provisions of paragraph (2) of this subsection (c), each newly created elementary district shall receive all of the assets and assume all of the liabilities and obligations of the dissolved unit district forming the boundary of the newly created elementary district.
    (2) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (1) of this subsection (c), upon the stipulation of the school board of the school district serving a newly created elementary district for high school purposes and either (i) the school board of the unit district prior to the effective date of its dissolution or (ii) thereafter the school board of the newly created elementary district and with the approval in either case of the regional superintendent of schools of the educational service region in which the territory described in the petition filed under this Article or the greater percentage of equalized assessed valuation of the territory is situated, the assets, liabilities, and obligations of the dissolved unit district may be divided and assumed between and by the newly created elementary district and the school district serving the newly created elementary district for high school purposes, in accordance with the terms and provisions of the stipulation and approval. In this event, the provisions of Section 19-29 shall be applied to determine the debt incurring power of the newly created elementary district and of the school district serving the newly created elementary district for high school purposes.
    (3) Without regard to whether the receipt of assets and the assumption of liabilities and obligations of the dissolved unit district is determined pursuant to paragraph (1) or (2) of this subsection (c), the tax rate for bonded indebtedness shall be determined in the manner provided in Section 19-7, and, notwithstanding the creation of this new elementary district, the county clerk or clerks shall annually extend taxes for each outstanding bond issue against all of the taxable property that was situated within the boundaries of the dissolved unit district as those boundaries existed at the time of the issuance of the bond issue, regardless of whether the property was still contained in that unit district at the time of its dissolution and regardless of whether the property is contained in the newly created elementary district at the time of the extension of the taxes by the county clerk or clerks.
(Source: P.A. 98-1112, eff. 1-1-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11E-110)
    Sec. 11E-110. Teachers in contractual continued service; educational support personnel employees.
    (a) When a school district conversion or multi-unit conversion becomes effective for purposes of administration and attendance, as determined pursuant to Section 11E-70 of this Code, the provisions of subsection (h) of Section 24-11 of this Code relative to the contractual continued service status of teachers having contractual continued service whose positions are transferred from one school board to the control of a new or different school board shall apply, and the positions held by teachers, as that term is defined in subsection (a) of Section 24-11 of this Code, having contractual continued service with the unit district at the time of its dissolution shall be transferred on the following basis:
        (1) positions of teachers in contractual continued
    	
service that, during the 5 school years immediately preceding the effective date of the change, as determined under Section 11E-70 of this Code, were full-time positions in which all of the time required of the position was spent in one or more of grades 9 through 12 shall be transferred to the control of the school board of the new high school district or combined high school - unit district, as the case may be;
        (2) positions of teachers in contractual continued
    	
service that, during the 5 school years immediately preceding the effective date of the change, as determined under Section 11E-70 of this Code, were full-time positions in which all of the time required of the position was spent in one or more of grades kindergarten through 8 shall be transferred to the control of the school board of the newly created successor elementary district; and
        (3) positions of teachers in contractual continued
    	
service that were full-time positions not required to be transferred to the control of the school board of the new high school district or combined high school - unit district, as the case may be, or the school board of the newly created successor elementary district under the provisions of subdivision (1) or (2) of this subsection (a) shall be transferred to the control of whichever of the boards the teacher shall request.
    With respect to each position to be transferred under the provisions of this subsection (a), the amount of time required of each position to be spent in one or more of grades kindergarten through 8 and 9 through 12 shall be determined with reference to the applicable records of the unit district being dissolved pursuant to stipulation of the school board of the unit district prior to the effective date of its dissolution or thereafter of the school board of the newly created districts and with the approval in either case of the regional superintendent of schools of the educational service region in which the territory described in the petition filed under this Article or the greater percentage of equalized assessed evaluation of the territory is situated; however, if no such stipulation can be agreed upon, the regional superintendent of schools, after hearing any additional relevant and material evidence that any school board desires to submit, shall make the determination.
    (a-5) When a school district conversion or multi-unit conversion becomes effective for purposes of administration and attendance, as determined pursuant to Section 11E-70 of this Code, the provisions of subsection (b) of Section 10-23.5 of this Code relative to the transfer of educational support personnel employees shall apply, and the positions held by educational support personnel employees shall be transferred on the following basis:
        (1) positions of educational support personnel
    	
employees that, during the 5 school years immediately preceding the effective date of the change, as determined under Section 11E-70 of this Code, were full-time positions in which all of the time required of the position was spent in one or more of grades 9 through 12 shall be transferred to the control of the school board of the new high school district or combined high school - unit district, as the case may be;
        (2) positions of educational support personnel
    	
employees that, during the 5 school years immediately preceding the effective date of the change, as determined under Section 11E-70 of this Code, were full-time positions in which all of the time required of the position was spent in one or more of grades kindergarten through 8 shall be transferred to the control of the school board of the newly created successor elementary district; and
        (3) positions of educational support personnel
    	
employees that were full-time positions not required to be transferred to the control of the school board of the new high school district or combined high school - unit district, as the case may be, or the school board of the newly created successor elementary district under subdivision (1) or (2) of this subsection (a-5) shall be transferred to the control of whichever of the boards the educational support personnel employee requests.
    With respect to each position to be transferred under this subsection (a-5), the amount of time required of each position to be spent in one or more of grades kindergarten through 8 and 9 through 12 shall be determined with reference to the applicable records of the unit district being dissolved pursuant to stipulation of the school board of the unit district prior to the effective date of its dissolution or thereafter of the school board of the newly created districts and with the approval in either case of the regional superintendent of schools of the educational service region in which the territory described in the petition filed under this Article or the greater percentage of equalized assessed evaluation of the territory is situated; however, if no such stipulation can be agreed upon, the regional superintendent of schools, after hearing any additional relevant and material evidence that any school board desires to submit, shall make the determination.
    (b) When the creation of a unit district or a combined school district becomes effective for purposes of administration and attendance, as determined pursuant to Section 11E-70 of this Code, the positions of teachers in contractual continued service in the districts involved in the creation of the new district are transferred to the newly created district pursuant to the provisions of subsection (h) of Section 24-11 of this Code relative to teachers having contractual continued service status whose positions are transferred from one board to the control of a different board, and those provisions of subsection (h) of Section 24-11 of this Code shall apply to these transferred teachers. The contractual continued service status of any teacher thereby transferred to the newly created district is not lost and the new school board is subject to this Code with respect to the transferred teacher in the same manner as if the teacher was that district's employee and had been its employee during the time the teacher was actually employed by the school board of the district from which the position was transferred.
    (c) When the creation of a unit district or a combined school district becomes effective for purposes of administration and attendance, as determined pursuant to Section 11E-70 of this Code, the positions of educational support personnel employees in the districts involved in the creation of the new district shall be transferred to the newly created district pursuant to subsection (b) of Section 10-23.5 of this Code. The length of continuing service of any educational support personnel employee thereby transferred to the newly created district is not lost and the new school board is subject to this Code with respect to the transferred educational support personnel employee in the same manner as if the educational support personnel employee had been that district's employee during the time the educational support personnel employee was actually employed by the school board of the district from which the position was transferred.
(Source: P.A. 99-657, eff. 7-28-16.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11E-115)
    Sec. 11E-115. Limitations on contesting boundary change. Neither the People of the State of Illinois, any person or corporation, private or public, nor any association of persons shall commence an action contesting either directly or indirectly the dissolution, division, annexation, or creation of any new school district under the provisions of this Article, unless the action is commenced within one year after the date of the election provided for in this Article if no proceedings to contest the election are duly instituted within the time permitted by law, or within one year after the final disposition of any proceedings that may be so instituted to contest the election; however, where a limitation of a shorter period is prescribed by statute, the shorter limitation shall apply, and the limitation set forth in this Section shall not apply to any order where the judge, body, or officer entering the order being challenged did not at the time of the entry of the order have jurisdiction of the subject matter.
(Source: P.A. 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11E-120)
    Sec. 11E-120. Limitation on successive petitions.
    (a) No affected district shall be again involved in proceedings under this Article for at least 2 years after a final non-procedural determination of the first proceeding, unless during that 2-year period a petition filed is substantially different than any other previously filed petition during the previous 2 years or if an affected district is identified as a priority district under Section 2-3.25d-5 of this Code, is placed on the financial watch list by the State Board of Education, or is certified as being in financial difficulty during that 2-year period.
    (b) Nothing contained in this Section shall be deemed to limit or restrict the ability of an elementary district to join an optional elementary unit district in accordance with the terms and provisions of subsection (d) of Section 11E-30 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 99-193, eff. 7-30-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11E-125)
    Sec. 11E-125. Districts not penalized for nonrecognition. Any school district included in a petition for reorganization as authorized under this Article shall not suffer loss of State aid as a result of being placed on nonrecognition status if the district continues to operate and the petition is granted.
(Source: P.A. 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11E-130)
    Sec. 11E-130. Unit district formation and joint agreement vocational education program.
    (a) If a unit district is established under the provisions of this Article and more than 50% of the territory of the unit district is territory that immediately prior to its inclusion in the unit district was included in a high school district or districts that were signatories under the same joint agreement vocational education program, pursuant to the provisions of this Code, then the unit district shall upon its establishment be deemed to be a member and signatory to the joint agreement and shall also have the right to continue to extend taxes under any previous authority to levy a tax under Section 17-2.4 of this Code.
    (b) In those instances, however, when more than 50% of the territory of any unit district was not, immediately prior to its establishment, included within the territory of a high school district that was a signatory to the same joint agreement vocational education program, then the unit district shall not be deemed upon its establishment to be a signatory to the joint agreement nor shall the unit district be deemed to have the special tax levy rights under Section 17-2.4 of this Code.
    (c) Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to forbid the unit district from subsequently joining a joint agreement vocational education program and to thereafter levy a tax under Section 17-2.4 of this Code by following the provisions of Section 17-2.4. In the event that any such unit district should subsequently join any such joint agreement vocational education program, it shall be entitled to a fair credit, as computed by the State Board of Education, for any capital contributions previously made to the joint agreement vocational education program from taxes levied against the assessed valuation of property situated in any part of the territory included within the unit district.
(Source: P.A. 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11E-135)
    Sec. 11E-135. Incentives. For districts reorganizing under this Article and for a district or districts that annex all of the territory of one or more entire other school districts in accordance with Article 7 of this Code, the following payments shall be made from appropriations made for these purposes:
    (a)(1) For a combined school district, as defined in Section 11E-20 of this Code, or for a unit district, as defined in Section 11E-25 of this Code, for its first year of existence, the general State aid and supplemental general State aid calculated under Section 18-8.05 of this Code or the evidence-based funding calculated under Section 18-8.15 of this Code, as applicable, shall be computed for the new district and for the previously existing districts for which property is totally included within the new district. If the computation on the basis of the previously existing districts is greater, a supplementary payment equal to the difference shall be made for the first 4 years of existence of the new district.
    (2) For a school district that annexes all of the territory of one or more entire other school districts as defined in Article 7 of this Code, for the first year during which the change of boundaries attributable to the annexation becomes effective for all purposes, as determined under Section 7-9 of this Code, the general State aid and supplemental general State aid calculated under Section 18-8.05 of this Code or the evidence-based funding calculated under Section 18-8.15 of this Code, as applicable, shall be computed for the annexing district as constituted after the annexation and for the annexing and each annexed district as constituted prior to the annexation; and if the computation on the basis of the annexing and annexed districts as constituted prior to the annexation is greater, then a supplementary payment equal to the difference shall be made for the first 4 years of existence of the annexing school district as constituted upon the annexation.
    (3) For 2 or more school districts that annex all of the territory of one or more entire other school districts, as defined in Article 7 of this Code, for the first year during which the change of boundaries attributable to the annexation becomes effective for all purposes, as determined under Section 7-9 of this Code, the general State aid and supplemental general State aid calculated under Section 18-8.05 of this Code or the evidence-based funding calculated under Section 18-8.15 of this Code, as applicable, shall be computed for each annexing district as constituted after the annexation and for each annexing and annexed district as constituted prior to the annexation; and if the aggregate of the general State aid and supplemental general State aid or evidence-based funding, as applicable, as so computed for the annexing districts as constituted after the annexation is less than the aggregate of the general State aid and supplemental general State aid or evidence-based funding, as applicable, as so computed for the annexing and annexed districts, as constituted prior to the annexation, then a supplementary payment equal to the difference shall be made and allocated between or among the annexing districts, as constituted upon the annexation, for the first 4 years of their existence. The total difference payment shall be allocated between or among the annexing districts in the same ratio as the pupil enrollment from that portion of the annexed district or districts that is annexed to each annexing district bears to the total pupil enrollment from the entire annexed district or districts, as such pupil enrollment is determined for the school year last ending prior to the date when the change of boundaries attributable to the annexation becomes effective for all purposes. The amount of the total difference payment and the amount thereof to be allocated to the annexing districts shall be computed by the State Board of Education on the basis of pupil enrollment and other data that shall be certified to the State Board of Education, on forms that it shall provide for that purpose, by the regional superintendent of schools for each educational service region in which the annexing and annexed districts are located.
    (4) For a school district conversion, as defined in Section 11E-15 of this Code, or a multi-unit conversion, as defined in subsection (b) of Section 11E-30 of this Code, if in their first year of existence the newly created elementary districts and the newly created high school district, from a school district conversion, or the newly created elementary district or districts and newly created combined high school - unit district, from a multi-unit conversion, qualify for less general State aid under Section 18-8.05 of this Code or evidence-based funding under Section 18-8.15 of this Code than would have been payable under Section 18-8.05 or 18-8.15, as applicable, for that same year to the previously existing districts, then a supplementary payment equal to that difference shall be made for the first 4 years of existence of the newly created districts. The aggregate amount of each supplementary payment shall be allocated among the newly created districts in the proportion that the deemed pupil enrollment in each district during its first year of existence bears to the actual aggregate pupil enrollment in all of the districts during their first year of existence. For purposes of each allocation:
        (A) the deemed pupil enrollment of the newly created
    	
high school district from a school district conversion shall be an amount equal to its actual pupil enrollment for its first year of existence multiplied by 1.25;
        (B) the deemed pupil enrollment of each newly created
    	
elementary district from a school district conversion shall be an amount equal to its actual pupil enrollment for its first year of existence reduced by an amount equal to the product obtained when the amount by which the newly created high school district's deemed pupil enrollment exceeds its actual pupil enrollment for its first year of existence is multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the actual pupil enrollment of the newly created elementary district for its first year of existence and the denominator of which is the actual aggregate pupil enrollment of all of the newly created elementary districts for their first year of existence;
        (C) the deemed high school pupil enrollment of the
    	
newly created combined high school - unit district from a multi-unit conversion shall be an amount equal to its actual grades 9 through 12 pupil enrollment for its first year of existence multiplied by 1.25; and
        (D) the deemed elementary pupil enrollment of each
    	
newly created district from a multi-unit conversion shall be an amount equal to each district's actual grade K through 8 pupil enrollment for its first year of existence, reduced by an amount equal to the product obtained when the amount by which the newly created combined high school - unit district's deemed high school pupil enrollment exceeds its actual grade 9 through 12 pupil enrollment for its first year of existence is multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the actual grade K through 8 pupil enrollment of each newly created district for its first year of existence and the denominator of which is the actual aggregate grade K through 8 pupil enrollment of all such newly created districts for their first year of existence.
    The aggregate amount of each supplementary payment under this subdivision (4) and the amount thereof to be allocated to the newly created districts shall be computed by the State Board of Education on the basis of pupil enrollment and other data, which shall be certified to the State Board of Education, on forms that it shall provide for that purpose, by the regional superintendent of schools for each educational service region in which the newly created districts are located.
    (5) For a partial elementary unit district, as defined in subsection (a) or (c) of Section 11E-30 of this Code, if, in the first year of existence, the newly created partial elementary unit district qualifies for less general State aid and supplemental general State aid under Section 18-8.05 of this Code or less evidence-based funding under Section 18-8.15 of this Code, as applicable, than would have been payable under those Sections for that same year to the previously existing districts that formed the partial elementary unit district, then a supplementary payment equal to that difference shall be made to the partial elementary unit district for the first 4 years of existence of that newly created district.
    (6) For an elementary opt-in, as described in subsection (d) of Section 11E-30 of this Code, the general State aid or evidence-based funding difference shall be computed in accordance with paragraph (5) of this subsection (a) as if the elementary opt-in was included in an optional elementary unit district at the optional elementary unit district's original effective date. If the calculation in this paragraph (6) is less than that calculated in paragraph (5) of this subsection (a) at the optional elementary unit district's original effective date, then no adjustments may be made. If the calculation in this paragraph (6) is more than that calculated in paragraph (5) of this subsection (a) at the optional elementary unit district's original effective date, then the excess must be paid as follows:
        (A) If the effective date for the elementary opt-in
    	
is one year after the effective date for the optional elementary unit district, 100% of the calculated excess shall be paid to the optional elementary unit district in each of the first 4 years after the effective date of the elementary opt-in.
        (B) If the effective date for the elementary opt-in
    	
is 2 years after the effective date for the optional elementary unit district, 75% of the calculated excess shall be paid to the optional elementary unit district in each of the first 4 years after the effective date of the elementary opt-in.
        (C) If the effective date for the elementary opt-in
    	
is 3 years after the effective date for the optional elementary unit district, 50% of the calculated excess shall be paid to the optional elementary unit district in each of the first 4 years after the effective date of the elementary opt-in.
        (D) If the effective date for the elementary opt-in
    	
is 4 years after the effective date for the optional elementary unit district, 25% of the calculated excess shall be paid to the optional elementary unit district in each of the first 4 years after the effective date of the elementary opt-in.
        (E) If the effective date for the elementary opt-in
    	
is 5 years after the effective date for the optional elementary unit district, the optional elementary unit district is not eligible for any additional incentives due to the elementary opt-in.
    (6.5) For a school district that annexes territory detached from another school district whereby the enrollment of the annexing district increases by 90% or more as a result of the annexation, for the first year during which the change of boundaries attributable to the annexation becomes effective for all purposes as determined under Section 7-9 of this Code, the general State aid and supplemental general State aid or evidence-based funding, as applicable, calculated under this Section shall be computed for the district gaining territory and the district losing territory as constituted after the annexation and for the same districts as constituted prior to the annexation; and if the aggregate of the general State aid and supplemental general State aid or evidence-based funding, as applicable, as so computed for the district gaining territory and the district losing territory as constituted after the annexation is less than the aggregate of the general State aid and supplemental general State aid or evidence-based funding, as applicable, as so computed for the district gaining territory and the district losing territory as constituted prior to the annexation, then a supplementary payment shall be made to the annexing district for the first 4 years of existence after the annexation, equal to the difference multiplied by the ratio of student enrollment in the territory detached to the total student enrollment in the district losing territory for the year prior to the effective date of the annexation. The amount of the total difference and the proportion paid to the annexing district shall be computed by the State Board of Education on the basis of pupil enrollment and other data that must be submitted to the State Board of Education in accordance with Section 7-14A of this Code. The changes to this Section made by Public Act 95-707 are intended to be retroactive and applicable to any annexation taking effect on or after July 1, 2004. For annexations that are eligible for payments under this paragraph (6.5) and that are effective on or after July 1, 2004, but before January 11, 2008 (the effective date of Public Act 95-707), the first required yearly payment under this paragraph (6.5) shall be paid in the fiscal year of January 11, 2008 (the effective date of Public Act 95-707). Subsequent required yearly payments shall be paid in subsequent fiscal years until the payment obligation under this paragraph (6.5) is complete.
    (7) Claims for financial assistance under this subsection (a) may not be recomputed except as expressly provided under Section 18-8.05 or 18-8.15 of this Code.
    (8) Any supplementary payment made under this subsection (a) must be treated as separate from all other payments made pursuant to Section 18-8.05 or 18-8.15 of this Code.
    (b)(1) After the formation of a combined school district, as defined in Section 11E-20 of this Code, or a unit district, as defined in Section 11E-25 of this Code, a computation shall be made to determine the difference between the salaries effective in each of the previously existing districts on June 30, prior to the creation of the new district. For the first 4 years after the formation of the new district, a supplementary State aid reimbursement shall be paid to the new district equal to the difference between the sum of the salaries earned by each of the certificated members of the new district, while employed in one of the previously existing districts during the year immediately preceding the formation of the new district, and the sum of the salaries those certificated members would have been paid during the year immediately prior to the formation of the new district if placed on the salary schedule of the previously existing district with the highest salary schedule.
    (2) After the territory of one or more school districts is annexed by one or more other school districts as defined in Article 7 of this Code, a computation shall be made to determine the difference between the salaries effective in each annexed district and in the annexing district or districts as they were each constituted on June 30 preceding the date when the change of boundaries attributable to the annexation became effective for all purposes, as determined under Section 7-9 of this Code. For the first 4 years after the annexation, a supplementary State aid reimbursement shall be paid to each annexing district as constituted after the annexation equal to the difference between the sum of the salaries earned by each of the certificated members of the annexing district as constituted after the annexation, while employed in an annexed or annexing district during the year immediately preceding the annexation, and the sum of the salaries those certificated members would have been paid during the immediately preceding year if placed on the salary schedule of whichever of the annexing or annexed districts had the highest salary schedule during the immediately preceding year.
    (3) For each new high school district formed under a school district conversion, as defined in Section 11E-15 of this Code, the State shall make a supplementary payment for 4 years equal to the difference between the sum of the salaries earned by each certified member of the new high school district, while employed in one of the previously existing districts, and the sum of the salaries those certified members would have been paid if placed on the salary schedule of the previously existing district with the highest salary schedule.
    (4) For each newly created partial elementary unit district, the State shall make a supplementary payment for 4 years equal to the difference between the sum of the salaries earned by each certified member of the newly created partial elementary unit district, while employed in one of the previously existing districts that formed the partial elementary unit district, and the sum of the salaries those certified members would have been paid if placed on the salary schedule of the previously existing district with the highest salary schedule. The salary schedules used in the calculation shall be those in effect in the previously existing districts for the school year prior to the creation of the new partial elementary unit district.
    (5) For an elementary district opt-in, as described in subsection (d) of Section 11E-30 of this Code, the salary difference incentive shall be computed in accordance with paragraph (4) of this subsection (b) as if the opted-in elementary district was included in the optional elementary unit district at the optional elementary unit district's original effective date. If the calculation in this paragraph (5) is less than that calculated in paragraph (4) of this subsection (b) at the optional elementary unit district's original effective date, then no adjustments may be made. If the calculation in this paragraph (5) is more than that calculated in paragraph (4) of this subsection (b) at the optional elementary unit district's original effective date, then the excess must be paid as follows:
        (A) If the effective date for the elementary opt-in
    	
is one year after the effective date for the optional elementary unit district, 100% of the calculated excess shall be paid to the optional elementary unit district in each of the first 4 years after the effective date of the elementary opt-in.
        (B) If the effective date for the elementary opt-in
    	
is 2 years after the effective date for the optional elementary unit district, 75% of the calculated excess shall be paid to the optional elementary unit district in each of the first 4 years after the effective date of the elementary opt-in.
        (C) If the effective date for the elementary opt-in
    	
is 3 years after the effective date for the optional elementary unit district, 50% of the calculated excess shall be paid to the optional elementary unit district in each of the first 4 years after the effective date of the elementary opt-in.
        (D) If the effective date for the elementary opt-in
    	
is 4 years after the effective date for the partial elementary unit district, 25% of the calculated excess shall be paid to the optional elementary unit district in each of the first 4 years after the effective date of the elementary opt-in.
        (E) If the effective date for the elementary opt-in
    	
is 5 years after the effective date for the optional elementary unit district, the optional elementary unit district is not eligible for any additional incentives due to the elementary opt-in.
    (5.5) After the formation of a cooperative high school by 2 or more school districts under Section 10-22.22c of this Code, a computation shall be made to determine the difference between the salaries effective in each of the previously existing high schools on June 30 prior to the formation of the cooperative high school. For the first 4 years after the formation of the cooperative high school, a supplementary State aid reimbursement shall be paid to the cooperative high school equal to the difference between the sum of the salaries earned by each of the certificated members of the cooperative high school while employed in one of the previously existing high schools during the year immediately preceding the formation of the cooperative high school and the sum of the salaries those certificated members would have been paid during the year immediately prior to the formation of the cooperative high school if placed on the salary schedule of the previously existing high school with the highest salary schedule.
    (5.10) After the annexation of territory detached from another school district whereby the enrollment of the annexing district increases by 90% or more as a result of the annexation, a computation shall be made to determine the difference between the salaries effective in the district gaining territory and the district losing territory as they each were constituted on June 30 preceding the date when the change of boundaries attributable to the annexation became effective for all purposes as determined under Section 7-9 of this Code. For the first 4 years after the annexation, a supplementary State aid reimbursement shall be paid to the annexing district equal to the difference between the sum of the salaries earned by each of the certificated members of the annexing district as constituted after the annexation while employed in the district gaining territory or the district losing territory during the year immediately preceding the annexation and the sum of the salaries those certificated members would have been paid during such immediately preceding year if placed on the salary schedule of whichever of the district gaining territory or district losing territory had the highest salary schedule during the immediately preceding year. To be eligible for supplementary State aid reimbursement under this Section, the intergovernmental agreement to be submitted pursuant to Section 7-14A of this Code must show that staff members were transferred from the control of the district losing territory to the control of the district gaining territory in the annexation. The changes to this Section made by Public Act 95-707 are intended to be retroactive and applicable to any annexation taking effect on or after July 1, 2004. For annexations that are eligible for payments under this paragraph (5.10) and that are effective on or after July 1, 2004, but before January 11, 2008 (the effective date of Public Act 95-707), the first required yearly payment under this paragraph (5.10) shall be paid in the fiscal year of January 11, 2008 (the effective date of Public Act 95-707). Subsequent required yearly payments shall be paid in subsequent fiscal years until the payment obligation under this paragraph (5.10) is complete.
    (5.15) After the deactivation of a school facility in accordance with Section 10-22.22b of this Code, a computation shall be made to determine the difference between the salaries effective in the sending school district and each receiving school district on June 30 prior to the deactivation of the school facility. For the lesser of the first 4 years after the deactivation of the school facility or the length of the deactivation agreement, including any renewals of the original deactivation agreement, a supplementary State aid reimbursement shall be paid to each receiving district equal to the difference between the sum of the salaries earned by each of the certificated members transferred to that receiving district as a result of the deactivation while employed in the sending district during the year immediately preceding the deactivation and the sum of the salaries those certificated members would have been paid during the year immediately preceding the deactivation if placed on the salary schedule of the sending or receiving district with the highest salary schedule.
    (6) The supplementary State aid reimbursement under this subsection (b) shall be treated as separate from all other payments made pursuant to Section 18-8.05 of this Code. In the case of the formation of a new district or cooperative high school or a deactivation, reimbursement shall begin during the first year of operation of the new district or cooperative high school or the first year of the deactivation, and in the case of an annexation of the territory of one or more school districts by one or more other school districts or the annexation of territory detached from a school district whereby the enrollment of the annexing district increases by 90% or more as a result of the annexation, reimbursement shall begin during the first year when the change in boundaries attributable to the annexation becomes effective for all purposes as determined pursuant to Section 7-9 of this Code, except that for an annexation of territory detached from a school district that is effective on or after July 1, 2004, but before January 11, 2008 (the effective date of Public Act 95-707), whereby the enrollment of the annexing district increases by 90% or more as a result of the annexation, reimbursement shall begin during the fiscal year of January 11, 2008 (the effective date of Public Act 95-707). Each year that the new, annexing, or receiving district or cooperative high school, as the case may be, is entitled to receive reimbursement, the number of eligible certified members who are employed on October 1 in the district or cooperative high school shall be certified to the State Board of Education on prescribed forms by October 15 and payment shall be made on or before November 15 of that year.
    (c)(1) For the first year after the formation of a combined school district, as defined in Section 11E-20 of this Code or a unit district, as defined in Section 11E-25 of this Code, a computation shall be made totaling each previously existing district's audited fund balances in the educational fund, working cash fund, operations and maintenance fund, and transportation fund for the year ending June 30 prior to the referendum for the creation of the new district. The new district shall be paid supplementary State aid equal to the sum of the differences between the deficit of the previously existing district with the smallest deficit and the deficits of each of the other previously existing districts.
    (2) For the first year after the annexation of all of the territory of one or more entire school districts by another school district, as defined in Article 7 of this Code, computations shall be made, for the year ending June 30 prior to the date that the change of boundaries attributable to the annexation is allowed by the affirmative decision issued by the regional board of school trustees under Section 7-6 of this Code, notwithstanding any effort to seek administrative review of the decision, totaling the annexing district's and totaling each annexed district's audited fund balances in their respective educational, working cash, operations and maintenance, and transportation funds. The annexing district as constituted after the annexation shall be paid supplementary State aid equal to the sum of the differences between the deficit of whichever of the annexing or annexed districts as constituted prior to the annexation had the smallest deficit and the deficits of each of the other districts as constituted prior to the annexation.
    (3) For the first year after the annexation of all of the territory of one or more entire school districts by 2 or more other school districts, as defined by Article 7 of this Code, computations shall be made, for the year ending June 30 prior to the date that the change of boundaries attributable to the annexation is allowed by the affirmative decision of the regional board of school trustees under Section 7-6 of this Code, notwithstanding any action for administrative review of the decision, totaling each annexing and annexed district's audited fund balances in their respective educational, working cash, operations and maintenance, and transportation funds. The annexing districts as constituted after the annexation shall be paid supplementary State aid, allocated as provided in this paragraph (3), in an aggregate amount equal to the sum of the differences between the deficit of whichever of the annexing or annexed districts as constituted prior to the annexation had the smallest deficit and the deficits of each of the other districts as constituted prior to the annexation. The aggregate amount of the supplementary State aid payable under this paragraph (3) shall be allocated between or among the annexing districts as follows:
        (A) the regional superintendent of schools for each
    	
educational service region in which an annexed district is located prior to the annexation shall certify to the State Board of Education, on forms that it shall provide for that purpose, the value of all taxable property in each annexed district, as last equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue prior to the annexation, and the equalized assessed value of each part of the annexed district that was annexed to or included as a part of an annexing district;
        (B) using equalized assessed values as certified by
    	
the regional superintendent of schools under clause (A) of this paragraph (3), the combined audited fund balance deficit of each annexed district as determined under this Section shall be apportioned between or among the annexing districts in the same ratio as the equalized assessed value of that part of the annexed district that was annexed to or included as a part of an annexing district bears to the total equalized assessed value of the annexed district; and
        (C) the aggregate supplementary State aid payment
    	
under this paragraph (3) shall be allocated between or among, and shall be paid to, the annexing districts in the same ratio as the sum of the combined audited fund balance deficit of each annexing district as constituted prior to the annexation, plus all combined audited fund balance deficit amounts apportioned to that annexing district under clause (B) of this subsection, bears to the aggregate of the combined audited fund balance deficits of all of the annexing and annexed districts as constituted prior to the annexation.
    (4) For the new elementary districts and new high school district formed through a school district conversion, as defined in Section 11E-15 of this Code or the new elementary district or districts and new combined high school - unit district formed through a multi-unit conversion, as defined in subsection (b) of Section 11E-30 of this Code, a computation shall be made totaling each previously existing district's audited fund balances in the educational fund, working cash fund, operations and maintenance fund, and transportation fund for the year ending June 30 prior to the referendum establishing the new districts. In the first year of the new districts, the State shall make a one-time supplementary payment equal to the sum of the differences between the deficit of the previously existing district with the smallest deficit and the deficits of each of the other previously existing districts. A district with a combined balance among the 4 funds that is positive shall be considered to have a deficit of zero. The supplementary payment shall be allocated among the newly formed high school and elementary districts in the manner provided by the petition for the formation of the districts, in the form in which the petition is approved by the regional superintendent of schools or State Superintendent of Education under Section 11E-50 of this Code.
    (5) For each newly created partial elementary unit district, as defined in subsection (a) or (c) of Section 11E-30 of this Code, a computation shall be made totaling the audited fund balances of each previously existing district that formed the new partial elementary unit district in the educational fund, working cash fund, operations and maintenance fund, and transportation fund for the year ending June 30 prior to the referendum for the formation of the partial elementary unit district. In the first year of the new partial elementary unit district, the State shall make a one-time supplementary payment to the new district equal to the sum of the differences between the deficit of the previously existing district with the smallest deficit and the deficits of each of the other previously existing districts. A district with a combined balance among the 4 funds that is positive shall be considered to have a deficit of zero.
    (6) For an elementary opt-in as defined in subsection (d) of Section 11E-30 of this Code, the deficit fund balance incentive shall be computed in accordance with paragraph (5) of this subsection (c) as if the opted-in elementary was included in the optional elementary unit district at the optional elementary unit district's original effective date. If the calculation in this paragraph (6) is less than that calculated in paragraph (5) of this subsection (c) at the optional elementary unit district's original effective date, then no adjustments may be made. If the calculation in this paragraph (6) is more than that calculated in paragraph (5) of this subsection (c) at the optional elementary unit district's original effective date, then the excess must be paid as follows:
        (A) If the effective date for the elementary opt-in
    	
is one year after the effective date for the optional elementary unit district, 100% of the calculated excess shall be paid to the optional elementary unit district in the first year after the effective date of the elementary opt-in.
        (B) If the effective date for the elementary opt-in
    	
is 2 years after the effective date for the optional elementary unit district, 75% of the calculated excess shall be paid to the optional elementary unit district in the first year after the effective date of the elementary opt-in.
        (C) If the effective date for the elementary opt-in
    	
is 3 years after the effective date for the optional elementary unit district, 50% of the calculated excess shall be paid to the optional elementary unit district in the first year after the effective date of the elementary opt-in.
        (D) If the effective date for the elementary opt-in
    	
is 4 years after the effective date for the optional elementary unit district, 25% of the calculated excess shall be paid to the optional elementary unit district in the first year after the effective date of the elementary opt-in.
        (E) If the effective date for the elementary opt-in
    	
is 5 years after the effective date for the optional elementary unit district, the optional elementary unit district is not eligible for any additional incentives due to the elementary opt-in.
    (6.5) For the first year after the annexation of territory detached from another school district whereby the enrollment of the annexing district increases by 90% or more as a result of the annexation, a computation shall be made totaling the audited fund balances of the district gaining territory and the audited fund balances of the district losing territory in the educational fund, working cash fund, operations and maintenance fund, and transportation fund for the year ending June 30 prior to the date that the change of boundaries attributable to the annexation is allowed by the affirmative decision of the regional board of school trustees under Section 7-6 of this Code, notwithstanding any action for administrative review of the decision. The annexing district as constituted after the annexation shall be paid supplementary State aid equal to the difference between the deficit of whichever district included in this calculation as constituted prior to the annexation had the smallest deficit and the deficit of each other district included in this calculation as constituted prior to the annexation, multiplied by the ratio of equalized assessed value of the territory detached to the total equalized assessed value of the district losing territory. The regional superintendent of schools for the educational service region in which a district losing territory is located prior to the annexation shall certify to the State Board of Education the value of all taxable property in the district losing territory and the value of all taxable property in the territory being detached, as last equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue prior to the annexation. To be eligible for supplementary State aid reimbursement under this Section, the intergovernmental agreement to be submitted pursuant to Section 7-14A of this Code must show that fund balances were transferred from the district losing territory to the district gaining territory in the annexation. The changes to this Section made by Public Act 95-707 are intended to be retroactive and applicable to any annexation taking effect on or after July 1, 2004. For annexations that are eligible for payments under this paragraph (6.5) and that are effective on or after July 1, 2004, but before January 11, 2008 (the effective date of Public Act 95-707), the required payment under this paragraph (6.5) shall be paid in the fiscal year of January 11, 2008 (the effective date of Public Act 95-707).
    (7) For purposes of any calculation required under paragraph (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), or (6.5) of this subsection (c), a district with a combined fund balance that is positive shall be considered to have a deficit of zero. For purposes of determining each district's audited fund balances in its educational fund, working cash fund, operations and maintenance fund, and transportation fund for the specified year ending June 30, as provided in paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), and (6.5) of this subsection (c), the balance of each fund shall be deemed decreased by an amount equal to the amount of the annual property tax theretofore levied in the fund by the district for collection and payment to the district during the calendar year in which the June 30 fell, but only to the extent that the tax so levied in the fund actually was received by the district on or before or comprised a part of the fund on such June 30. For purposes of determining each district's audited fund balances, a calculation shall be made for each fund to determine the average for the 3 years prior to the specified year ending June 30, as provided in paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), and (6.5) of this subsection (c), of the district's expenditures in the categories "purchased services", "supplies and materials", and "capital outlay", as those categories are defined in rules of the State Board of Education. If this 3-year average is less than the district's expenditures in these categories for the specified year ending June 30, as provided in paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), and (6.5) of this subsection (c), then the 3-year average shall be used in calculating the amounts payable under this Section in place of the amounts shown in these categories for the specified year ending June 30, as provided in paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), and (6.5) of this subsection (c). Any deficit because of State aid not yet received may not be considered in determining the June 30 deficits. The same basis of accounting shall be used by all previously existing districts and by all annexing or annexed districts, as constituted prior to the annexation, in making any computation required under paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), and (6.5) of this subsection (c).
    (8) The supplementary State aid payments under this subsection (c) shall be treated as separate from all other payments made pursuant to Section 18-8.05 of this Code.
    (d)(1) Following the formation of a combined school district, as defined in Section 11E-20 of this Code, a new unit district, as defined in Section 11E-25 of this Code, a new elementary district or districts and a new high school district formed through a school district conversion, as defined in Section 11E-15 of this Code, a new partial elementary unit district, as defined in Section 11E-30 of this Code, or a new elementary district or districts formed through a multi-unit conversion, as defined in subsection (b) of Section 11E-30 of this Code, or the annexation of all of the territory of one or more entire school districts by one or more other school districts, as defined in Article 7 of this Code, a supplementary State aid reimbursement shall be paid for the number of school years determined under the following table to each new or annexing district equal to the sum of $4,000 for each certified employee who is employed by the district on a full-time basis for the regular term of the school year:
 
Reorganized District's Rank	Reorganized District's Rank
by type of district (unit,	in Average Daily Attendance
high school, elementary)	By Quintile
in Equalized Assessed Value			
Per Pupil by Quintile			

3rd, 4th,

1st	2nd	or 5th

Quintile	Quintile	Quintile
    1st Quintile	1 year	1 year	1 year
    2nd Quintile	1 year	2 years	2 years
    3rd Quintile	2 years	3 years	3 years
    4th Quintile	2 years	3 years	3 years
    5th Quintile	2 years	3 years	3 years

 
The State Board of Education shall make a one-time calculation of a reorganized district's quintile ranks. The average daily attendance used in this calculation shall be the best 3 months' average daily attendance for the district's first year. The equalized assessed value per pupil shall be the district's real property equalized assessed value used in calculating the district's first-year general State aid claim, under Section 18-8.05 of this Code, or first-year evidence-based funding claim, under Section 18-8.15 of this Code, as applicable, divided by the best 3 months' average daily attendance.
    No annexing or resulting school district shall be entitled to supplementary State aid under this subsection (d) unless the district acquires at least 30% of the average daily attendance of the district from which the territory is being detached or divided.
    If a district results from multiple reorganizations that would otherwise qualify the district for multiple payments under this subsection (d) in any year, then the district shall receive a single payment only for that year based solely on the most recent reorganization.
    (2) For an elementary opt-in, as defined in subsection (d) of Section 11E-30 of this Code, the full-time certified staff incentive shall be computed in accordance with paragraph (1) of this subsection (d), equal to the sum of $4,000 for each certified employee of the elementary district that opts-in who is employed by the optional elementary unit district on a full-time basis for the regular term of the school year. The calculation from this paragraph (2) must be paid as follows:
        (A) If the effective date for the elementary opt-in
    	
is one year after the effective date for the optional elementary unit district, 100% of the amount calculated in this paragraph (2) shall be paid to the optional elementary unit district for the number of years calculated in paragraph (1) of this subsection (d) at the optional elementary unit district's original effective date, starting in the second year after the effective date of the elementary opt-in.
        (B) If the effective date for the elementary opt-in
    	
is 2 years after the effective date for the optional elementary unit district, 75% of the amount calculated in this paragraph (2) shall be paid to the optional elementary unit district for the number of years calculated in paragraph (1) of this subsection (d) at the optional elementary unit district's original effective date, starting in the second year after the effective date of the elementary opt-in.
        (C) If the effective date for the elementary opt-in
    	
is 3 years after the effective date for the optional elementary unit district, 50% of the amount calculated in this paragraph (2) shall be paid to the optional elementary unit district for the number of years calculated in paragraph (1) of this subsection (d) at the optional elementary unit district's original effective date, starting in the second year after the effective date of the elementary opt-in.
        (D) If the effective date for the elementary opt-in
    	
is 4 years after the effective date for the optional elementary unit district, 25% of the amount calculated in this paragraph (2) shall be paid to the optional elementary unit district for the number of years calculated in paragraph (1) of this subsection (d) at the optional elementary unit district's original effective date, starting in the second year after the effective date of the elementary opt-in.
        (E) If the effective date for the elementary opt-in
    	
is 5 years after the effective date for the optional elementary unit district, the optional elementary unit district is not eligible for any additional incentives due to the elementary opt-in.
    (2.5) Following the formation of a cooperative high school by 2 or more school districts under Section 10-22.22c of this Code, a supplementary State aid reimbursement shall be paid for 3 school years to the cooperative high school equal to the sum of $4,000 for each certified employee who is employed by the cooperative high school on a full-time basis for the regular term of any such school year. If a cooperative high school results from multiple agreements that would otherwise qualify the cooperative high school for multiple payments under this Section in any year, the cooperative high school shall receive a single payment for that year based solely on the most recent agreement.
    (2.10) Following the annexation of territory detached from another school district whereby the enrollment of the annexing district increases 90% or more as a result of the annexation, a supplementary State aid reimbursement shall be paid to the annexing district equal to the sum of $4,000 for each certified employee who is employed by the annexing district on a full-time basis and shall be calculated in accordance with subsection (a) of this Section. To be eligible for supplementary State aid reimbursement under this Section, the intergovernmental agreement to be submitted pursuant to Section 7-14A of this Code must show that certified staff members were transferred from the control of the district losing territory to the control of the district gaining territory in the annexation. The changes to this Section made by Public Act 95-707 are intended to be retroactive and applicable to any annexation taking effect on or after July 1, 2004. For annexations that are eligible for payments under this paragraph (2.10) and that are effective on or after July 1, 2004, but before January 11, 2008 (the effective date of Public Act 95-707), the first required yearly payment under this paragraph (2.10) shall be paid in the second fiscal year after January 11, 2008 (the effective date of Public Act 95-707). Any subsequent required yearly payments shall be paid in subsequent fiscal years until the payment obligation under this paragraph (2.10) is complete.
    (2.15) Following the deactivation of a school facility in accordance with Section 10-22.22b of this Code, a supplementary State aid reimbursement shall be paid for the lesser of 3 school years or the length of the deactivation agreement, including any renewals of the original deactivation agreement, to each receiving school district equal to the sum of $4,000 for each certified employee who is employed by that receiving district on a full-time basis for the regular term of any such school year who was originally transferred to the control of that receiving district as a result of the deactivation. Receiving districts are eligible for payments under this paragraph (2.15) based on the certified employees transferred to that receiving district as a result of the deactivation and are not required to receive at least 30% of the deactivating district's average daily attendance as required under paragraph (1) of this subsection (d) to be eligible for payments.
    (3) The supplementary State aid reimbursement payable under this subsection (d) shall be separate from and in addition to all other payments made to the district pursuant to any other Section of this Article.
    (4) During May of each school year for which a supplementary State aid reimbursement is to be paid to a new, annexing, or receiving school district or cooperative high school pursuant to this subsection (d), the school board or governing board shall certify to the State Board of Education, on forms furnished to the school board or governing board by the State Board of Education for purposes of this subsection (d), the number of certified employees for which the district or cooperative high school is entitled to reimbursement under this Section, together with the names, certificate numbers, and positions held by the certified employees.
    (5) Upon certification by the State Board of Education to the State Comptroller of the amount of the supplementary State aid reimbursement to which a school district or cooperative high school is entitled under this subsection (d), the State Comptroller shall draw his or her warrant upon the State Treasurer for the payment thereof to the school district or cooperative high school and shall promptly transmit the payment to the school district or cooperative high school through the appropriate school treasurer.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/11E-190)
    Sec. 11E-190. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-503, eff. 8-23-11. Repealed internally, eff. 1-31-13.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 12 heading)
ARTICLE 12. HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICTS--NONHIGH SCHOOL DISTRICTS--COMMUNITY HIGH
SCHOOL DISTRICTS

    (105 ILCS 5/12-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 12-1)
    Sec. 12-1. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1965, p. 225. Repealed by P.A. 89-159, eff. 1-1-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/12-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 12-2)
    Sec. 12-2. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 81-1490. Repealed by 89-159, eff. 1-1-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/12-6) (from Ch. 122, par. 12-6)
    Sec. 12-6. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 79-1366. Repealed by 89-159, eff. 1-1-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/12-7) (from Ch. 122, par. 12-7)
    Sec. 12-7. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 84-545. Repealed by 89-159, eff. 1-1-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/12-8) (from Ch. 122, par. 12-8)
    Sec. 12-8. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1965, p. 3739. Repealed by P.A. 89-159, eff. 1-1-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/12-9) (from Ch. 122, par. 12-9)
    Sec. 12-9. Application of laws of community high school district to other districts. All high school districts shall be governed by the provisions of this Act for the operation of a community high school district.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/prec. Sec. 12-10 heading)
NON-HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICTS

    (105 ILCS 5/12-10) (from Ch. 122, par. 12-10)
    Sec. 12-10. Territory constituting - Board of education. All the territory of each county not included in a district maintaining a recognized four year high school is a non-high school district for the purpose of levying a tax to pay the tuition of all eighth grade graduates residing therein, including pupils attending a recognized two or three year high school conducted by a school district. The board of education for each non-high school district shall consist of the county superintendent of schools who shall be an ex-officio member of the board and secretary thereof but who shall have no vote, and 3 members each of whom shall serve for 4 years from the first Monday of the month following his election. At the first such election those elected shall, by lot, determine one to serve for 2 years and 2 for 4 years; thereafter all terms shall be for 4 years. When a vacancy occurs on the board, the remaining members shall, within 30 days, fill the vacancy by appointment until the next regular election for members of the board. Within 10 days after the commencement of their terms the members of the board shall meet and organize by electing one of their number president.
    Notwithstanding any provision of Article 7 the non-high school board shall remain in existence after the elimination of all the non-high school territory of the county for which it was elected until it prepares for and delivers to the county clerk a final statement showing the amount of debts or obligations, other than bonded indebtedness, of the district, the date upon which such debts or obligations were incurred and to whom the obligations run, together with a map showing the extent of the territory on such dates.
    This section does not prevent the organization of any territory of non-high school districts into community high school districts.
(Source: P.A. 80-1469.)

    (105 ILCS 5/12-11) (from Ch. 122, par. 12-11)
    Sec. 12-11. Duties of board of education. The board of education of a non-high school district shall perform the duties prescribed in sections 12-11.1 through 12-11.5.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/12-11.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 12-11.1)
    Sec. 12-11.1. Tax levy. Levy a tax annually upon all the taxable property of the district not to exceed 1% of value as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue, for the purpose of paying the tuition of all eighth-grade graduates residing within the district attending any recognized high school. The board of education of such nonhigh school district may by proper resolution cause a proposition to increase the annual tax rate for such purpose to be submitted to the voters of such district at any regular scheduled election. The rate shall not be increased at any single referendum more than 0.21% upon the value as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue for such purpose, and the maximum rate for such purpose shall not exceed 1.60%. Such amount shall be certified and returned to the county clerk on or before the last Tuesday in September of each year. The certificate shall be signed by the president and the secretary of the board and may be in the following form:
CERTIFICATE OF TAX LEVY
    We hereby certify that we require the sum of .... dollars to be levied as a special tax to pay the tuition of graduates of the eighth grade residing in the nonhigh school district of .... County, on the equalized assessed valuation of the taxable property of our nonhigh school district.
    Signed on (insert date).
A..... B....., President
C..... D....., Secretary

    A failure to certify and return the certificate of tax levy to the county clerk in the time required shall not vitiate the assessment.
(Source: P.A. 91-357, eff. 7-29-99.)

    (105 ILCS 5/12-11.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 12-11.2)
    Sec. 12-11.2. Orders for payment of tuition.
    Issue orders on the county treasurer for the payment of the tuition of eighth-grade graduates residing within the non-high school district attending a recognized high school, provided such attendance is certified to the board by the board of education of the high school attended. Such orders shall be payable out of any funds belonging to the district.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/12-11.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 12-11.3)
    Sec. 12-11.3. Reports. Make such reports as may be required by the State Board of Education and by the regional superintendent of schools.
(Source: P.A. 81-1508.)

    (105 ILCS 5/12-11.5) (from Ch. 122, par. 12-11.5)
    Sec. 12-11.5. Transportation of pupils.
    If in the discretion of the board of education sufficient moneys of the district are available after payment of the other expenses of the district, including tuition, may provide free transportation for the pupils of their district not living within one and one-half miles of a high school which they may lawfully attend to the most convenient high school which such pupils may lawfully attend under the provisions of this Act, or reimburse pupils living in a portion of such district which cannot be reached by bus or train for the reasonable cost of their transportation, or for the amount necessarily expended by them for transportation in attending a high school approved by such board.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/12-12) (from Ch. 122, par. 12-12)
    Sec. 12-12. Anticipation warrants. When there is no money in the treasury of any non-high school district to defray the necessary expenses of the district, including amounts necessary to pay maturing principal and interest of bonds, the board of education may issue warrants or may provide a fund to meet the expenses by issuing and disposing of warrants drawn against and in anticipation of any taxes levied for the payment of such expenses, either for educational or building purposes or for the payment of maturing principal and interest of bonds, to the extent of 85% of the total amount of the tax so levied. The warrants shall show upon their faces that they are payable, in the numerical order of their issuance, solely from such taxes when collected, and shall be received by any collector of taxes in payment of the taxes against which they are issued, and such taxes shall be set apart and held for their payment.
    Every warrant shall bear interest payable only out of the taxes against which it is drawn, at the rate of not more than the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, for warrants issued before January 1, 1972 and not more than the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, for warrants issued after January 1, 1972, from the date of its issuance until paid or until notice is given by publication in a newspaper or otherwise that the money for its payment is available and that it will be paid on presentation, unless a lower rate of interest shall be specified therein, in which case the interest shall be computed and paid at the lower rate.
    With respect to instruments for the payment of money issued under this Section either before, on, or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1989, it is and always has been the intention of the General Assembly (i) that the Omnibus Bond Acts are and always have been supplementary grants of power to issue instruments in accordance with the Omnibus Bond Acts, regardless of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts, (ii) that the provisions of this Section are not a limitation on the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts, and (iii) that instruments issued under this Section within the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts are not invalid because of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts.
(Source: P.A. 86-4.)

    (105 ILCS 5/12-13) (from Ch. 122, par. 12-13)
    Sec. 12-13. Bond issue - Resolution - Election. If there has been a delay in the extension and collection of taxes levied by the governing body of any nonhigh school district caused by a reassessment of real property therein, the district may issue bonds for the purpose of paying unpaid tuition claims or other claims against it.
    Before any nonhigh school district issues any such bonds the board of education shall examine and consider the claims proposed to be paid, and if it appears that they were authorized and allowed for proper nonhigh school purposes, it shall adopt a resolution so declaring and set forth and describe in detail such claims. The adoption of the resolution shall establish the validity thereof. The resolution shall also declare the intention of the nonhigh school district to issue bonds for the purpose of paying such claims and direct that notice of such intention be published at least once in a newspaper published and having a general circulation in the district, if there be one, but if there is no newspaper published in such district then by publishing such notice in a newspaper having a general circulation in the district or if no newspaper is published in the district in one or more newspapers with a general circulation in the district. The notice shall include a statement of (1) the specific number of voters required to sign a petition requesting that the question of the adoption of the resolution be submitted to the electors of the district; (2) the time in which the petition must be filed; and (3) the date of the prospective referendum. The recording officer of the district shall provide a petition form to any individual requesting one. If within 30 days after the publication a petition is filed with the recording officer of the district, signed by voters of the district equal to 10% or more of the registered voters of the district, requesting that the proposition to issue the bonds be submitted to the voters thereof, then such district shall not be authorized to issue them until either the petition has been determined to be invalid or insufficient or the proposition has been submitted to and approved by a majority of the voters voting on the proposition at a regular scheduled election. The board shall certify the proposition to the proper election authorities for submission in accordance with the general election law. If no such petition is filed, or if any and all petitions filed are invalid, such district may issue the bonds. In addition to the requirements of the general election law the notice of the election shall set forth the intention of the district to issue bonds under the provisions of this Section. The ballot to be used at the election shall be in substantially the following form:
OFFICIAL BALLOT
--------------------------------------------------------------
    Shall the Board of Education
of Nonhigh School District No.                YES
...., .... County, Illinois, be            -------------------
authorized to issue bonds as authorized        NO
by Sec. 12-13 of the School Code?
--------------------------------------------------------------
(Source: P.A. 87-767.)

    (105 ILCS 5/12-14) (from Ch. 122, par. 12-14)
    Sec. 12-14. Resolution authorizing issue - Interest - Maturity - Taxes - Sale or exchange. Any non-high school district which has complied with the provisions of Section 12-13 and which is authorized to issue bonds thereunder shall adopt a resolution authorizing the issue of bonds. The resolution shall set forth the date, denomination, rate of interest and maturities of the bonds, fix all the details with respect to the issue and execution thereof, and provide for the levy of a separate tax sufficient to pay both principal and interest of the bonds as they mature. The bonds shall bear interest at a rate not to exceed the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, for bonds issued before January 1, 1972 and not to exceed the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, for bonds issued after January 1, 1972, payable annually or semi-annually as the board of education may determine, and mature in not more than 20 years from the date thereof.
    A certified copy of the resolution shall be filed with the county clerk of the county in which the non-high school district is situated. The county clerk shall annually extend taxes against all of the taxable property contained in the non-high school district in amounts sufficient to pay maturing principal and interest of the bonds without limitation as to rate and amount, and in addition to and in excess of any taxes authorized to be levied by the district.
    The bonds may be exchanged par for par for unpaid tuition claims or other unpaid claims or both or may be sold and the proceeds used to pay such claims.
    Purchasers of bonds shall not be obligated to inquire into the validity of the claims funded thereby but the determination of the board of education by resolution to issue such bonds for such purpose shall be conclusive evidence to such purchaser or owner as to the validity of the claims thereby funded.
    With respect to instruments for the payment of money issued under this Section either before, on, or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1989, it is and always has been the intention of the General Assembly (i) that the Omnibus Bond Acts are and always have been supplementary grants of power to issue instruments in accordance with the Omnibus Bond Acts, regardless of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts, (ii) that the provisions of this Section are not a limitation on the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts, and (iii) that instruments issued under this Section within the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts are not invalid because of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts.
(Source: P.A. 86-4.)

    (105 ILCS 5/12-15) (from Ch. 122, par. 12-15)
    Sec. 12-15. Bonds to pay tuition or judgments - Resolution - Election. Any nonhigh school district may issue bonds for the purpose of paying unpaid tuition claims or judgments which have been obtained by any school district against the nonhigh school district on unpaid tuition claims, or for the purpose of paying other claims against the nonhigh school district.
    Before any such district issues any such bonds the board of education thereof shall examine and consider the claims for unpaid tuition and other claims proposed to be paid including any judgments obtained against the district on unpaid tuition claims and if it appears that such claims and judgments were authorized and allowed for proper nonhigh school purposes, it shall adopt a resolution so declaring and set forth and describe in detail such claims and judgments and the adoption of the resolution shall establish the validity thereof. The intention of the district to issue bonds for the purpose of paying such claims and judgments shall be declared in the resolution and it shall be directed therein that notice of such intention be published in accordance with the general election law. The proposition to issue bonds shall be certified to the proper election authorities for submission to the voters of the district at a regular scheduled election, in accordance with the general election law and if approved by a majority of such voters voting thereon the district may issue the bonds. In addition to the requirements in the general election law notice of the election shall set forth the intention of the district to issue bonds under the provisions of this Section. The proposition shall be in substantially the following form:
OFFICIAL BALLOT
--------------------------------------------------------------
    Shall the Board of Education of
Nonhigh School District No.....,          YES
.... County, Illinois, be authorized     ---------------------
to issue bonds as authorized by           NO
Section 12-15 of the School Code?
--------------------------------------------------------------
(Source: P.A. 81-1489.)

    (105 ILCS 5/12-16) (from Ch. 122, par. 12-16)
    Sec. 12-16. Resolution authorizing issue - interest - maturity - taxes - sale or exchange. Any non-high school district which has complied with Section 12-15 and which is authorized to issue bonds thereunder shall adopt a resolution authorizing their issuance. The resolution shall set forth the date, denomination, rate of interest and maturities of the bonds, fix all details with respect to the issue and execution thereof, and provide for the levy of a separate tax sufficient to pay both principal and interest of the bonds as they mature. The bonds shall bear interest at a rate not to exceed the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, payable annually or semi-annually as the board of education may determine, and mature in not more than 20 years from the date thereof.
    A certified copy of the resolution authorizing the issue of the bonds shall be filed with the county clerk of the county in which the non-high school district is situated and the county clerk shall annually extend taxes against all of the taxable property in the non-high school district in amounts sufficient to pay maturing principal and interest of the bonds without limitation as to rate and amount, and in addition to and in excess of any taxes authorized to be levied by the district.
    The bonds may be exchanged par for par for unpaid tuition claims or such judgment or judgments or other unpaid claims or both, or may be sold and the proceeds used to pay such claims or judgments.
    Purchasers of bonds shall not be obligated to inquire into the validity of the claims funded thereby but the determination of the board of education by resolution to issue them shall be conclusive evidence of the validity of the claims thereby funded.
    With respect to instruments for the payment of money issued under this Section either before, on, or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1989, it is and always has been the intention of the General Assembly (i) that the Omnibus Bond Acts are and always have been supplementary grants of power to issue instruments in accordance with the Omnibus Bond Acts, regardless of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts, (ii) that the provisions of this Section are not a limitation on the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts, and (iii) that instruments issued under this Section within the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts are not invalid because of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts.
(Source: P.A. 86-4.)

    (105 ILCS 5/12-17) (from Ch. 122, par. 12-17)
    Sec. 12-17. Clerk to extend taxes.
    The County Clerk shall extend taxes to pay principal and interest of any outstanding bonds of a non-high school district issued to fund and pay unpaid tuition claims or judgments obtained by any school district against a non-high school district on unpaid tuition claims, as provided by each bond resolution on file in his office, against all the taxable property included within the said non-high school district as of the date of the said bonds, and the County Clerk shall extend taxes to pay principal and interest of any outstanding refunding bonds, as provided by each bond resolution on file in his office, against all of the taxable property included within said non-high school district as of the date of the bonds which were refunded thereby, and the County Clerk shall extend taxes for the payment of principal and interest of any refunding bonds hereafter issued, according to each such bond resolution on file in his office, against all the taxable property included within any non-high school district as of the date of the bonds of said District refunded thereby.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/12-18) (from Ch. 122, par. 12-18)
    Sec. 12-18. Winding up of affairs of Non-High School District.
    Upon the elimination of any non-high school district, as provided by Section 12-24 of this Article, the Regional Superintendent of Schools, the County Treasurer and the County Clerk shall constitute a Board of Education, ex-officio, for the purpose of winding up the affairs of the non-high school district and paying all outstanding obligations. The County Treasurer shall be Treasurer, ex-officio, of that Board to receive and collect all delinquent taxes and taxes in process of collection of the district at the time of its elimination, and the Board shall apply the taxes so collected to the payment of any outstanding obligations of the eliminated non-high school district. Such Board of Education shall meet annually by the second Tuesday in September of each year and ascertain the amount of outstanding bonds of the non-high school district, the amount of funds on hand from the tax levies for the payment of either principal or interest, or both, of such bond issues, and to ascertain the deficiencies in the collection of the taxes for the purpose of paying such principal and interest of such bonds, and to provide for and levy taxes annually in an amount sufficient to make up the deficiency in the levy and collection of such taxes for the purpose of paying in full the principal and interest of any outstanding bonds of such non-high school district. Such Board of Education shall file with the County Clerk by the second Monday of October in each year a certificate of the amounts necessary to be levied to make up any deficiency in the collection of taxes for payment of principal and interest of any outstanding bonds of the non-high school district over the signature of the Regional Superintendent of Schools and the County Treasurer, and the County Clerk shall extend the tax for the deficiency as so ascertained against all the taxable property of the non-high school district as it existed as of the date of the bonds for which the tax levy is made, and in accordance with the provisions of Section 12-17 of this Article.
    After payment of all outstanding bonds or after provision has been made for the payment of such bonds, any funds remaining in the bond principal and interest account shall be paid by the Board to high school districts organized since January 1, 1955 solely from the territory of an eliminated non-high school district. Payment to each high school district shall be made in the same ratio as the assessed valuation of each high school district bears to the total valuation of all high school districts to which payment is being made. In the event payment is made in more than one installment, second and succeeding installments shall be computed on the basis of the same percentages as were used for the first payment.
(Source: P.A. 86-1028.)

    (105 ILCS 5/12-19) (from Ch. 122, par. 12-19)
    Sec. 12-19. Treasurer.
    The county treasurer shall be the treasurer of the non-high school district of the county. He shall: (1) receive and hold all moneys belonging to the district and disburse them upon lawful orders issued by the board of education of the district; (2) report to the secretary of the board of education of the district on or before June 30, annually, the receipts and expenditures of funds belonging to the district and the balance on hand; (3) make annually a complete report to the county superintendent of schools, including therein whatever statistics may be required by the county superintendent; (4) perform such other duties in connection with the non-high school district as are performed by the township treasurers for school districts.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/12-20) (from Ch. 122, par. 12-20)
    Sec. 12-20. Attendance in other districts.
    If a recognized two or three year high school is conducted in a non-high school district, any eighth grade graduate residing in the district, upon the approval of the county superintendent of schools, may attend a recognized high school more convenient in some district other than the district in which he resides and his tuition shall be paid by the board of education of the non-high school district. If no recognized two or three year high school is conducted in a non-high school district, any eighth grade graduate residing in the district may attend any recognized two, three or four year high school, and his tuition shall be paid by the board of education of the non-high school district.
    When non-high school territory is eliminated from the non-high school district the pupils residing in the former non-high school territory who have been attending a recognized public high school in another district as tuition pupils may continue to attend such school until their high school education is finished and the annexing board shall pay the tuition after the annexation of the former non-high school territory.
    "Eighth grade graduate" in this section means any person of school age who gives satisfactory evidence of having completed the first eight grades of school work by presenting a certificate of promotion issued by the school board of the school attended by him, or by passing an examination given by the county superintendent of schools or by passing an examination given by the school attended.
    "Recognized high school" in this section means any public high school providing a course of two or more years of work approved by the Superintendent of Public Instruction.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/12-21) (from Ch. 122, par. 12-21)
    Sec. 12-21. Attendance in adjoining state. Upon a determination by the State Board of Education and of the regional superintendent of schools of the region in which a high school student or an eighth grade graduate resides that no high school of this State is readily accessible to the pupil or graduate, but that a high school in an adjoining state providing a course of two or more years of work approved by the State Board of Education of this State is readily accessible to him, the pupil or graduate may attend such high school in an adjoining state and the board of education of the high school district or of the non-high school district in which he resides shall pay his tuition.
(Source: P.A. 81-1508.)

    (105 ILCS 5/12-22) (from Ch. 122, par. 12-22)
    Sec. 12-22. Computation of tuition - audit of claims.
    The tuition paid shall in no case exceed the per capita cost of maintaining the high school attended, which tuition shall be computed by dividing the total cost of conducting and maintaining the high school by the average number of pupils enrolled, including tuition pupils. Depreciation on the building and equipment of the high school attended shall be included as part of the cost of maintaining the high school attended, and the amount of annual depreciation on such building and equipment shall be dependent upon the useful life of such property. The board of education of any non-high school district may audit the claims of any school submitting a claim for tuition, and shall, after making request of the school board and the school treasurer, have access to the school records and financial records of the district for the purpose of making the audit.
    The school board of the high school that the tuition pupils attend shall certify not later than August 1, of each year, to the non-high school board, the estimated amount of the tuition charges for the succeeding school year.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/12-23) (from Ch. 122, par. 12-23)
    Sec. 12-23. Detachment of territory from non-high school district.
    When all of the territory of the non-high school district is annexed to one or more districts, the funds remaining to the credit of the non-high school district and property of such district shall within 60 days be apportioned and paid by the county board of school trustees to the respective school districts to which non-high school territory has been annexed since May 1, 1945, on the basis of the assessed valuation of the non-high school territory annexed at the date of the annexation to the respective school districts.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/12-24) (from Ch. 122, par. 12-24)
    Sec. 12-24. Elimination of non-high school district. The territory of the non-high school district or unit district not maintaining a high school in existence on January 1, 1950 of any county having a population of 500,000 or less shall be automatically eliminated from the non-high school district or unit district, unless (1) the non-high school territory is adjacent to a district created by a special Act whose boundaries are required by such Act to be coterminous with some city or village or to a district maintaining grades 1 through 12 and (2) has children in such territory who customarily attend the high school of such district and (3) has no school district operating grades 9 through 12 to which such territory could be annexed without impairing the educational opportunities of the children of such territory and in such case the territory shall remain non-high school territory.
    Any such non-high school district including any unit district not maintaining a high school pursuant to the provisions of this Section shall pay tuition for high school students at a rate to be mutually agreed by the boards of education of each district affected.
    When territory is eliminated from a non-high school district or unit district not maintaining a high school it shall be annexed by the county board of school trustees as provided in Section 7-27 of this Code (now repealed).
    Any non-high school district affected by such elimination and annexation may continue to exercise all previously conferred and existing powers pending final administrative or judicial affirmance thereof.
(Source: P.A. 100-374, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/12-25) (from Ch. 122, par. 12-25)
    Sec. 12-25. Non-high territory surrounded by water or possessing an ancient grant.
    Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this Article for the elimination of non-high school territory and in addition to the exemptions provided in this Article for the elimination of non-high school territory, any non-high school territory that has no direct land connection with any school district to which it could be annexed or any school district whose inhabitants were entitled to the use and benefit of certain lands by virtue of an ancient grant prior to the admission of Illinois to the Union and which grant was recognized and confirmed by the government of the United States, may be permitted to remain non-high school territory, in whole or in part, or may be eliminated, in whole or in part, from the non-high school district of the county as part of an attachment, assignment, annexation, detachment, division, or dissolution action of the regional board of school trustees. In the event an elementary district is non-recognized by the State Board of Education, the elementary district and that portion of any non-high school district with coterminous boundaries with such elementary district shall be assigned, annexed, and attached to a unit district or to an elementary district and a high school district by the regional board of school trustees under the guidelines of Section 7-11.
(Source: P.A. 86-139.)

    (105 ILCS 5/12-26) (from Ch. 122, par. 12-26)
    Sec. 12-26. Transferred territory liable for indebtedness-Levy of tax.
    If any non-high school district or protectorate high school district has outstanding debts and obligations other than bonded indebtedness the territory constituting the district at the time the indebtedness is incurred shall remain liable for the indebtedness even though the district is dissolved or a part of the territory is detached from or ceases to be a part of such district.
    The board of education of the non-high school district or protectorate high school district at the time of making its annual tax levy or prior to the time it ceases to exist shall prepare and file with the county clerk a map of the district showing the territory embraced therein prior to any dissolution or change in the boundary thereof and shall also file with the county clerk a statement certified by the county superintendent of schools showing the amount of outstanding debts or obligations other than bonded indebtedness of the district remaining unpaid, the time when the indebtedness was created, the changes in the boundary of the district and the date of such changes.
    The board of education shall determine and certify to the county clerk the amount of tax required for the purpose of paying the outstanding debts or obligations other than bonded indebtedness and the county clerk shall extend each year upon all the territory so liable a rate of tax necessary to raise the amount thereof at the maximum rate permissible at the time the territory ceased to be non-high school territory or protectorate high school territory until such outstanding debts or obligations other than bonded indebtedness have been paid.
    When collected the tax shall be paid to the county superintendent of schools who shall pay the debts and obligations other than bonded indebtedness in the order that they were incurred.
(Source: P.A. 76-124.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 13 heading)
ARTICLE 13. SCHOOLS FOR DESIGNATED PURPOSES


 
    (105 ILCS 5/prec. Sec. 13-1 heading)
CONTINUATION SCHOOLS

    (105 ILCS 5/13-1)
    Sec. 13-1. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-2)
    Sec. 13-2. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-3)
    Sec. 13-3. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-4)
    Sec. 13-4. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1965, p. 3745. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-5)
    Sec. 13-5. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1965, p. 3745. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-6)
    Sec. 13-6. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 77-2267. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-7)
    Sec. 13-7. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 77-2267. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-8)
    Sec. 13-8. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-9)
    Sec. 13-9. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/prec. Sec. 13-10 heading)
PARENTAL SCHOOLS

    (105 ILCS 5/13-10)
    Sec. 13-10. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 81-1489. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/prec. Sec. 13-11 heading)
JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOLS

    (105 ILCS 5/13-11)
    Sec. 13-11. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/prec. Sec. 13-12 heading)
JUNIOR COLLEGES

    (105 ILCS 5/13-12) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-12)
    Sec. 13-12. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1965, p. 1606. Repealed by P.A. 89-159, eff. 1-1-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-16) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-16)
    Sec. 13-16. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1965, p. 1606. Repealed by P.A. 89-159, eff. 1-1-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-17) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-17)
    Sec. 13-17. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 81-1489. Repealed by 89-159, eff. 1-1-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-17.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-17.1)
    Sec. 13-17.1. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 87-767. Repealed by 89-159, eff. 1-1-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-18) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-18)
    Sec. 13-18. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31. Repealed by P.A. 89-159, eff. 1-1-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-19) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-19)
    Sec. 13-19. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 78-592. Repealed by P.A. 89-159, eff. 1-1-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-19.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-19.1)
    Sec. 13-19.1. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1963, p. 3053. Repealed by P.A. 89-159, eff. 1-1-96.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/prec. Sec. 13-36 heading)
COUNTY NORMAL SCHOOLS

    (105 ILCS 5/13-36)
    Sec. 13-36. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 79-1366. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/prec. Sec. 13-40 heading)
DEPARTMENT OF JUVENILE JUSTICE SCHOOL DISTRICT
(Source: P.A. 94-696, eff. 6-1-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-40) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-40)
    Sec. 13-40. To increase the effectiveness of the Department of Juvenile Justice and thereby to better serve the interests of the people of Illinois the following bill is presented.
    Its purpose is to enhance the quality and scope of education for inmates and wards within the Department of Juvenile Justice so that they will be better motivated and better equipped to restore themselves to constructive and law abiding lives in the community. The specific measure sought is the creation of a school district within the Department so that its educational programs can meet the needs of persons committed and so the resources of public education at the state and federal levels are best used, all of the same being contemplated within the provisions of the Illinois State Constitution of 1970 which provides that "A fundamental goal of the People of the State is the educational development of all persons to the limits of their capacities." Therefore, on July 1, 2006, the Department of Corrections school district shall be transferred to the Department of Juvenile Justice. It shall be responsible for the education of youth within the Department of Juvenile Justice and inmates age 21 or under within the Department of Corrections who have not yet earned a high school diploma or a high school equivalency certificate, and the district may establish primary, secondary, vocational, adult, special, and advanced educational schools as provided in this Act. The Department of Corrections retains authority as provided for in subsection (d) of Section 3-6-2 of the Unified Code of Corrections. The Board of Education for this district shall with the aid and advice of professional educational personnel of the Department of Juvenile Justice and the State Board of Education determine the needs and type of schools and the curriculum for each school within the school district and may proceed to establish the same through existing means within present and future appropriations, federal and state school funds, vocational rehabilitation grants and funds and all other funds, gifts and grants, private or public, including federal funds, but not exclusive to the said sources but inclusive of all funds which might be available for school purposes.
(Source: P.A. 98-718, eff. 1-1-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-41) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-41)
    Sec. 13-41. The Board of Education for this school district shall be composed of the Director of the Department of Juvenile Justice, 2 members appointed by the Director of the Department of Juvenile Justice and 4 members appointed by the State Board of Education, at least one of whom shall have knowledge of, or experience in, vocational education and one of whom shall have knowledge of, or experience in, higher and continuing education. All members of the Board shall hold office for a period of 3 years, except that members shall continue to serve until their replacements are appointed. Vacancies shall be filled in like manner for the unexpired balance of the term. The members appointed shall be selected so far as is practicable on the basis of their knowledge of, or experience in, problems of education in correctional, vocational and general educational institutions. Members shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
(Source: P.A. 94-696, eff. 6-1-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-42) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-42)
    Sec. 13-42. The Director of the Department of Juvenile Justice shall be the President of the Board of Education and the Secretary of said Board of Education shall be designated at the first regular meeting of said Board of Education. The Board shall hold regular meetings upon the call of the Chairman or any 3 members at such times as they may designate so long as they meet at least 6 times a year. Public notice of meetings must be given as prescribed in Sections 2.02 and 2.03 of "An Act in relation to meetings", approved July 11, 1957, as heretofore or hereafter amended. No official business shall be transacted by the Board except at a regular or special meeting. A majority of said Board shall constitute a quorum.
    The Board shall keep a record of the official acts of the Board and shall make reports as required by the State Board of Education and any reports required which shall be applicable to this type of school district and specifically shall maintain records to substantiate all district claims for State aid in accordance with regulations prescribed by the State Board of Education and to retain such records for a period of three years.
    The Board shall be supplied such clerical employee or employees as are necessary for the efficient operation by the Department of Juvenile Justice.
(Source: P.A. 94-696, eff. 6-1-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-43) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-43)
    Sec. 13-43. The Board of Education shall have the duties set out in Sections 13-43.1 through 13-43.20.
(Source: P.A. 86-1028.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-43.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-43.1)
    Sec. 13-43.1. To report to the County Superintendent within ten days after their employment the names of all teachers employed, with the dates of the beginning of their term of service.
(Source: P.A. 77-1779.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-43.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-43.2)
    Sec. 13-43.2. To adopt and enforce all necessary rules and for the management and government of the public schools of their district.
(Source: P.A. 77-1779.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-43.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-43.3)
    Sec. 13-43.3. To visit and inspect the public schools as the good of the schools may require.
(Source: P.A. 77-1779.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-43.4) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-43.4)
    Sec. 13-43.4.
    To close the schools during the holding of Teachers Institute.
(Source: P.A. 77-1779.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-43.5) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-43.5)
    Sec. 13-43.5. To establish schools of different grades and levels and types as enumerated in Section 13-40 of this Act, and to adopt regulations for the admission of pupils into them.
(Source: P.A. 77-1779.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-43.6) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-43.6)
    Sec. 13-43.6. To employ a superintendent who shall have charge of the administration of the schools under the direction of the Board of Education. In addition to the administrative duties, the superintendent shall make recommendations to the Board concerning the budget, building plans, the location of sites, the selection of textbooks, instructional material and courses of study. The superintendent shall keep or cause to be kept the records and accounts as directed and required of the Board, aid in making reports required by the Board, and perform such other duties as the Board may delegate to him.
(Source: P.A. 77-1779.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-43.7) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-43.7)
    Sec. 13-43.7. To employ supervisory personnel who hold valid supervisory or administrative certificates who shall supervise the operation of attendance centers as the Board shall determine necessary. Such supervisory personnel shall assume administrative responsibilities and instructional leadership, under the supervision of the superintendent, and in accordance with reasonable rules and regulations of the Board, for the planning, operation and evaluation of the educational program of the attendance area to which he is assigned. Such supervisory personnel shall submit recommendations to the superintendent concerning the appointment, retention, promotion and assignment of all personnel assigned to the attendance center.
(Source: P.A. 77-1779.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-43.8) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-43.8)
    Sec. 13-43.8. To enter agreements with school districts, private junior colleges and public community colleges, and public and private colleges and universities for the purpose of providing advanced vocational training of students who desire preparation for a trade. Such program would utilize private junior college and public community college facilities with transportation to and from those facilities provided by the participating school district, or by the participating school district in conjunction with other school districts. The duration of the advanced vocational training program shall be such period as the school district may approve, but it may not exceed 2 years. Participation in the program is accorded the same credit toward a high school diploma as time spent in other courses. If a student of this school district, because of his educational needs, attends a class or school in another school district or educational facility, the Department of Juvenile Justice School District where he resides shall be granted the proper permit, provide any necessary transportation, and pay to the school district or educational facility maintaining the educational facility the proportional per capita cost of educating such student.
(Source: P.A. 94-696, eff. 6-1-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-43.9) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-43.9)
    Sec. 13-43.9. To grant special holidays, but no deduction shall be made from the time or compensation of a teacher on account of such days.
(Source: P.A. 77-1779.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-43.10) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-43.10)
    Sec. 13-43.10. To have control and supervision of all schoolhouses in their district.
(Source: P.A. 77-1779.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-43.11) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-43.11)
    Sec. 13-43.11. Subject to the rules and regulations of the Department of Juvenile Justice and the laws and statutes applicable, the Board shall have the power and the authority to assign to schools within the district and to expel or suspend pupils for disciplinary purposes or to assign or reassign them as the needs of the district or the pupil shall be determined best. Once a student commences a course of training he shall attend all sessions unless restricted by illness, a reasonable excuse or by direction of the Department of Juvenile Justice or the facility at which he is located. Conferences shall be held at regular periodic intervals with the ward or the inmate and the school district authorities and facility officials shall determine the extent the ward or inmate is benefiting from the particular program, and shall further determine whether the said ward or inmate shall continue in the program to which he is assigned or be dropped from the same or be transferred to another program more suited to his needs or the school district's needs.
(Source: P.A. 94-696, eff. 6-1-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-43.12) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-43.12)
    Sec. 13-43.12. To make the necessary rules and regulations as to enrollment, attendance and all other matters regarding said school district and to determine the educability of each inmate. Rules shall be promulgated to prevent any discrimination as to race, creed, color, sex or nationality throughout the entire system.
(Source: P.A. 80-1155.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-43.13) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-43.13)
    Sec. 13-43.13. The length of the school year shall be determined by the Board of Education, but must comply with minimum requirements as established by law.
(Source: P.A. 77-1779.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-43.14) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-43.14)
    Sec. 13-43.14. The Board shall determine the branches and courses of study and the type of schools for each facility as well as to establish special schools at various facilities or facility within said district and to establish district wide schools at one or more locations for special purposes, and is empowered to enter into agreements with local school districts for the purpose of using their facilities or coordinating facilities for a more efficient use of funds, personnel, physical plants and other combined available resources. The Board shall also determine the type of textbooks and apparatus for said schools.
(Source: P.A. 77-1779.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-43.15) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-43.15)
    Sec. 13-43.15. To name the various individual schools but said names need not be associated or identified with the institution or facility within which they are situated, the same may be named for distinguished American educators.
(Source: P.A. 77-1779.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-43.16) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-43.16)
    Sec. 13-43.16. The Board of Education shall comply with and require all facilities within the school district to comply with the rules, regulations, statutes, both state and federal which are applicable to the individual unit. This includes primary, secondary, vocational, adult educational, special educational and advanced educational schools.
(Source: P.A. 77-1779.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-43.17) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-43.17)
    Sec. 13-43.17. To employ teacher personnel in accordance with the Personnel Code, of the State of Illinois, including Provisional Appointments, and such teacher personnel will be subject to Article 16 of the "Illinois Pension Code" and shall not be subject to Article 14 of that Code; and shall be subject to the "Personnel Code." The Board may also utilize personnel as set forth in Section 10-22.34 of this Act as well as vocational and occupational instructors.
(Source: P.A. 77-1779.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-43.18) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-43.18)
    Sec. 13-43.18. To develop through consultation with the staff of the Department of Juvenile Justice and the staff of the State Board of Education educational goals and objectives for the correctional education programs planned for or conducted by the district, along with the methods for evaluating the extent to which the goals and objectives are or have been achieved and to develop by July 1, 1973, a complete financial control system for all educational funds and programs operated by the school district.
(Source: P.A. 94-696, eff. 6-1-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-43.19) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-43.19)
    Sec. 13-43.19. To develop and annually revise an educational plan for achieving the goals and objectives called for in Section 13-43.18 for the Department of Juvenile Justice with specific recommendations for inmate educational assessment, curriculum, staffing and other necessary considerations.
(Source: P.A. 94-696, eff. 6-1-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-43.20) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-43.20)
    Sec. 13-43.20. To develop a method or methods for allocating state funds to the Board for expenditure within the various divisions and/or for programs conducted by the Board, and to annually determine the average per capita cost of students in the Department of Juvenile Justice and the average per capita cost of students in the Department of Corrections for education classes and/or programs required to accomplish the educational goals and objectives and programs specified in Sections 13-43.18 and 13-43.19 and recommend to the State Board of Education by July 15 of each year the per capita amount necessary to operate the Department of Juvenile Justice School District's educational program for the following fiscal year.
(Source: P.A. 94-696, eff. 6-1-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-44) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-44)
    Sec. 13-44. Other provisions, duties and conditions of the Department of Juvenile Justice School District are set out in Sections 13-44.1 through 13-44.5.
(Source: P.A. 94-696, eff. 6-1-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-44.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-44.1)
    Sec. 13-44.1. All acts of school personnel, including the Board of Education, shall be acts in a governmental capacity, this includes personnel as set forth in Section 10-22.34 of this Act whose services the Board may utilize.
(Source: P.A. 77-1779.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-44.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-44.2)
    Sec. 13-44.2. There shall be no restriction as to the age of students in this program, and regardless of the age of its students, the district shall have all the benefits, financial and otherwise, that are accorded to other school districts, including State and Federal grants and aid, Common School Funds, and Vocational Rehabilitation Funds. In calculating such benefits, those inmates or wards who have not completed grade or high school and those taking vocational courses and advanced courses shall be included.
(Source: P.A. 86-1028.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-44.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-44.3)
    Sec. 13-44.3. In order to fully carry out the purpose of this Act, the School District through its Board or designated supervisory personnel, with the approval of the Director of the Department of Juvenile Justice, may authorize field trips outside of the particular institution or facility where a school is established and may remove students therefrom or may with the approval of the Director of the Department of Juvenile Justice transfer inmates and wards to other schools and other facilities where particular subject matter or facilities are more suited to or are needed to complete the inmates' or wards' education. The Director of the Department of Juvenile Justice may authorize an educational furlough for an inmate or ward to attend institutions of higher education, other schools, vocational or technical schools or enroll and attend classes in subjects not available within the School District, to be financed by the inmate or ward or any grant or scholarship which may be available, including school aid funds of any kind when approved by the Board and the Director of the Department.
    The Department of Juvenile Justice may extend the limits of the place of confinement of an inmate or ward under the above conditions and for the above purposes, to leave for the aforesaid reasons, the confines of such place, accompanied or unaccompanied, in the discretion of the Director of such Department by a custodial agent or educational personnel.
    The willful failure of an inmate or ward to remain within the extended limits of his or her confinement or to return within the time prescribed to the place of confinement designated by the Department of Corrections or the Department of Juvenile Justice in granting such extension or when ordered to return by the custodial personnel or the educational personnel or other departmental order shall be deemed an escape from the custody of such Department and punishable as provided in the Unified Code of Corrections as to the Department of Corrections inmates, and the applicable provision of the Juvenile Court Act of 1987 shall apply to wards of the Department of Juvenile Justice who might abscond.
(Source: P.A. 94-696, eff. 6-1-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-44.4) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-44.4)
    Sec. 13-44.4. Department of Corrections Reimbursement and Education Fund; budget. All moneys received from the Common School Fund, federal aid and grants, vocational and educational funds and grants, and gifts and grants by individuals, foundations and corporations for educational purposes shall be deposited into the Department of Corrections Reimbursement and Education Fund in the State Treasury. Moneys in the Department of Corrections Reimbursement and Education Fund may be used, subject to appropriation, to pay the expense of the schools and school district of the Department of Corrections together with and supplemental to regular appropriations to the Department for educational purposes, including, but not limited to, the cost of teacher salaries, supplies and materials, building upkeep and costs, transportation, scholarships, non-academic salaries, equipment and other school costs.
    Beginning in 1972, the Board of Education shall, by November 15, adopt an annual budget for the use of education moneys for the next school year which it deems necessary to defray all necessary expenses and liabilities of the district, and in such annual budget shall specify the objects and purposes of each item and the amount needed for each object or purpose. The budget shall contain a statement of cash on hand at the beginning of the fiscal year, an estimate of the cash expected to be received during such fiscal year from all sources, an estimate of the expenditure contemplated for such fiscal year, and a statement of the estimated cash expected to be on hand at the end of such year. Prior to the adoption of the annual educational budget, this budget shall be submitted to the Department of Corrections and the State Board of Education for incorporation.
(Source: P.A. 90-9, eff. 7-1-97; 90-587, eff. 7-1-98.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-44.5) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-44.5)
    Sec. 13-44.5. In all cases where an inmate or ward is to leave the institution or facility where he or she is confined for educational furloughs, vocational training, for field trips or for any other reason herein stated, authority must first be granted by the Department of Juvenile Justice and the said authority shall be discretionary with the Department of Juvenile Justice. The question of whether or not the said inmate or ward or group of inmates or wards shall be accompanied or not accompanied by security personnel, custodial agent or agents or only educational personnel shall be in the discretion of the Department of Juvenile Justice. All transfers must be approved by the Department of Juvenile Justice.
(Source: P.A. 94-696, eff. 6-1-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-45) (from Ch. 122, par. 13-45)
    Sec. 13-45. Other provisions of this Code shall not apply to the Department of Juvenile Justice School District being all of the following Articles and Sections: Articles 3, 3A, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9, those Sections of Article 10 in conflict with any provisions of Sections 13-40 through 13-45, and Articles 11, 12, 15, 17, 18, 19, 19A, 20, 22, 24, 24A, 26, 31, 32, 33, and 34. Also Article 28 shall not apply except that this School District may use any funds available from State, Federal and other funds for the purchase of textbooks, apparatus and equipment.
(Source: P.A. 98-689, eff. 1-1-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13-50)
    Sec. 13-50. Contract cancellation; Macon-Piatt Regional Office of Education. All contracts between the Illinois Department of Corrections or the Illinois Department of Juvenile Justice and the Macon-Piatt Regional Office of Education to provide educational services for the Department of Corrections or the Department of Juvenile Justice shall be canceled in accordance with the terms of those contracts. Upon cancellation, each employee of the Macon-Piatt Regional Office of Education who had been providing educational services for the Department of Corrections or the Department of Juvenile Justice shall be offered certified employment status under the Personnel Code with the State of Illinois. To the extent that it is reasonably practicable, unless otherwise agreed to by the Department of Central Management Services and the collective bargaining representative, the position offered to each of these persons shall be at the same facility and shall consist of the same duties and hours as previously existed under the canceled contract or contracts.
(Source: P.A. 95-1021, eff. 6-1-09.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 13A heading)
ARTICLE 13A. ALTERNATIVE PUBLIC SCHOOLS

    (105 ILCS 5/13A-0.5)
    Sec. 13A-0.5. This Article may be cited as the Safe Schools Law.
(Source: P.A. 89-383, eff. 8-18-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13A-1)
    Sec. 13A-1. Legislative Declaration. The General Assembly finds and declares as follows:
    (a) The children of this State constitute its most important resource, and in order to enable those children to reach their full potential, the State must provide them the quality public education that the Constitution of the State of Illinois mandates.
    (b) The State cannot provide its children with the education they deserve and require unless the environment of the public schools is conducive to learning.
    (c) That environment cannot be achieved unless an atmosphere of safety prevails, assuring that the person of each student, teacher, and staff member is respected, and that none of those people are subjected to violence, threats, harassment, intimidation, or otherwise confrontational or inappropriate behaviors that disrupt the educational atmosphere.
    (d) In most schools, although the disruptive students who are the primary cause of inappropriate educational environments comprise a small percentage of the total student body, they nevertheless consume a substantial amount of the time and resources of teachers and school administrators who are required to address and contain that disruptive behavior.
    (e) Disruptive students typically derive little benefit from traditional school programs and may benefit substantially by being transferred from their current school into an alternative public school program, where their particular needs may be more appropriately and individually addressed and where they may benefit from the opportunity for a fresh start in a new educational environment. At those alternative school programs, innovative academic and school-to-work programs, including but not limited to the techniques of work based learning and technology delivered learning, can be utilized to best help the students enrolled in those schools to become productive citizens.
    (f) Students need an appropriate, constructive classroom atmosphere in order to benefit from the teacher's presentations. Students cannot afford the classroom disruptions and often become frustrated and angry at the inability of their teachers and schools to control disruptive students. As a result, they drop out of school too often. Furthermore, even if these students stay in school and graduate, they have been deprived by their disruptive classmates of the attention to their educational needs that their teachers would otherwise have provided, thereby diminishing their receiving the education and skills necessary to secure good jobs and become productive members of an increasingly competitive economic environment.
    (g) Parents of school children statewide have expressed their rising anger and concern at the failure of their local public schools to provide a safe and appropriate educational environment for their children and to deal appropriately with disruptive students, and the General Assembly deems their concerns to be understandable and justified.
    (h) Every school district in the State shall do all it can to ensure a safe and appropriate educational environment for all of its students, and the first, but not the only, step school districts must take to achieve that goal is to administratively transfer disruptive students from the schools they currently attend to the alternative school programs created by this Article. Those administrative transfers will also provide optional educational programs to best fit the needs of the transferred students.
    (i) Administrative transfers may prove more productive for dealing with disruptive students than out-of-school suspensions or expulsions, which have been the subject of much criticism.
    (j) Because of the urgency of the problems described in this Section, as well as their statewide impact, the State of Illinois bears the responsibility to establish and fully fund alternative schools as soon as possible, thereby providing school districts with an option for dealing with disruptive students that they do not now possess.
    (k) While school districts shall comply with all applicable federal laws and regulations, they should do so consistent with the goals and policies stated in this Article. Further, this Article is intended to be consistent with all applicable federal laws and regulations.
    (l) An alternative school program established under this Article is subject to the other provisions of this Code that apply generally in the public schools of this State and to the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except as otherwise provided in this Article.
    (m) The provisions of the Illinois Educational Labor Relations Act apply to those alternative school programs that are created on or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1995.
(Source: P.A. 89-383, eff. 8-18-95; 89-629, eff. 8-9-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13A-2)
    Sec. 13A-2. Definitions. In this Article words and phrases have the meanings set forth in the following Sections.
(Source: P.A. 89-383, eff. 8-18-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13A-2.5)
    Sec. 13A-2.5. Disruptive student. "Disruptive student" includes suspension or expulsion eligible students in any of grades 6 through 12. Suspension or expulsion eligible students are those students that have been found to be eligible for suspension or expulsion through the discipline process established by a school district.
(Source: P.A. 89-383, eff. 8-18-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13A-2.10)
    Sec. 13A-2.10. Regional superintendent. "Regional superintendent" has the meaning ascribed to it in Section 3A-2 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 89-383, eff. 8-18-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13A-2.15)
    Sec. 13A-2.15. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 89-383, eff. 8-18-95. Repealed by P.A. 89-629, eff. 8-9-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13A-2.20)
    Sec. 13A-2.20. Educational service region. "Educational service region" has the meaning ascribed to it in Article 3A of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 89-383, eff. 8-18-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13A-2.25)
    Sec. 13A-2.25. State board. "State board" means the State Board of Education, as defined in Section 1A-1 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 89-383, eff. 8-18-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13A-2.30)
    Sec. 13A-2.30. District superintendent. "District superintendent" has the meaning ascribed to it in Section 10-21.4 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 89-383, eff. 8-18-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13A-3)
    Sec. 13A-3. Alternative schools.
    (a) Except with respect to the Chicago public school system as provided in Section 13A-11, beginning with the 1996-97 school year, there is hereby created in this State a system of alternative school education programs. At least one alternative school program may be located within each educational service region or established jointly by more than one regional office of education to serve more than one educational service region.
    (b) Each regional superintendent shall hold a public hearing, by December 1 of the school year following the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1995, to determine the need for an alternative school. The hearing shall be held before the regional board. The regional superintendent, after consulting with the district superintendent of each school district located within the regional superintendent's educational service region and the regional board, shall determine the location and the need of the alternative school within that region. In making this determination, the regional superintendent shall consider the following:
        (1) the possible utilization of existing buildings,
    	
including but not limited to governmental buildings, that are, or could reasonably be made, usable as an alternative school;
        (2) which available option would be least costly; and
        (3) distances that administratively transferred
    	
students would need to travel and the costs of that travel.
    (c) Upon determination of the need for establishment of an alternative school program, each school district located within the region shall provide the regional superintendent with a copy of the district's discipline policy and procedure for effecting the suspension or expulsion of the students of that district. Thereafter, the regional superintendent in cooperation with a representative from each school district in the region shall establish and each school district in the region shall adopt policies and procedures that shall guide each district in the identification and placement of students in the alternative school program.
    (d) The regional superintendent shall locate the alternative school program so that it is as far away from any other school buildings or school grounds in that educational service region as circumstances permit.
    (e) With the approval of the State board, additional alternative school programs may be established in an educational service region. If the regional superintendent determines that an additional alternative school is required in the regional superintendent's educational service region, he or she may petition the State board to authorize one or more additional alternative school programs in that region.
    (f) In determining whether an additional alternative school program is necessary and appropriate for an educational service region requesting it, the State board shall consider, among other factors, the following:
        (1) the geographic size of the educational service
    	
region and distances that students within that region must travel in order to attend the existing alternative school program;
        (2) the student population of schools comprising the
    	
educational service region and the likely student population of all alternative school programs within that region if the petition is granted;
        (3) any other logistical considerations; and
        (4) the costs necessitated by establishing an
    	
additional alternative school in that educational service region.
    (g) In the event the State board grants a petition for an additional alternative school program, then the State board, after consulting the regional superintendent, shall decide where the additional alternative school program shall be located within that region.
(Source: P.A. 89-383, eff. 8-18-95; 89-629, eff. 8-9-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13A-4)
    Sec. 13A-4. Administrative transfers. A student who is determined to be subject to suspension or expulsion in the manner provided by Section 10-22.6 (or, in the case of a student enrolled in the public schools of a school district organized under Article 34, in accordance with the uniform system of discipline established under Section 34-19) may be immediately transferred to the alternative program. At the earliest time following that transfer appropriate personnel from the sending school district and appropriate personnel of the alternative program shall meet to develop an alternative education plan for the student. The student's parent or guardian shall be invited to this meeting. The student may be invited. The alternative educational plan shall include, but not be limited to all of the following:
        (1) The duration of the plan, including a date after
    	
which the student may be returned to the regular educational program in the public schools of the transferring district. If the parent or guardian of a student who is scheduled to be returned to the regular education program in the public schools of the district files a written objection to the return with the principal of the alternative school, the matter shall be referred by the principal to the regional superintendent of the educational service region in which the alternative school program is located for a hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be given by the regional superintendent to the student's parent or guardian. After the hearing, the regional superintendent may take such action as he or she finds appropriate and in the best interests of the student. The determination of the regional superintendent shall be final.
        (2) The specific academic and behavioral components
    	
of the plan.
        (3) A method and time frame for reviewing the
    	
student's progress.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article, if a student for whom an individualized educational program has been developed under Article 14 is transferred to an alternative school program under this Article 13A, that individualized educational program shall continue to apply to that student following the transfer unless modified in accordance with the provisions of Article 14.
(Source: P.A. 89-383, eff. 8-18-95; 89-629, eff. 8-9-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13A-5)
    Sec. 13A-5. Alternative school program curriculum.
    (a) The regional superintendent shall implement, or contract with one or more school districts to implement, a multi-disciplinary curriculum, which may include work-based learning and community service work approved by the regional superintendent of schools in consultation with the State Board of Education for which academic credit is earned, for the alternative school program designed to address the individualized needs of the students of that program, with special emphasis toward making the educational experience of each student meaningful and worthwhile. In the design and implementation of that curriculum, the regional superintendent or school district shall give due consideration to the rules and regulations adopted by the State Board of Education for alternative schools and optional education programs. The regional superintendent or school district (i) may contract with third parties for any services otherwise performed by employees and (ii) may apply for waivers or modifications of mandates of this Code or of administrative rules as provided in Section 2-3.25g of this Code and as are necessary for the alternative school program.
    (b) An administratively transferred student who successfully completes the requirements for his or her high school graduation shall receive a diploma identifying the student as graduating from the transferring high school. In the event the student is administratively transferred before enrolling in a high school, then that student shall receive a diploma from the high school the student would have attended if the student had not attended an alternative school program.
(Source: P.A. 90-283, eff. 7-31-97; 91-318, eff. 7-29-99.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13A-6)
    Sec. 13A-6. Administration; contracts; waivers.
    (a) The regional superintendent shall administer, or contract with one or more school districts to administer, alternative school programs located within the educational service region. The regional superintendent or school district (i) may contract with third parties for any services otherwise performed by employees and (ii) may apply for waivers or modifications of mandates of this Code or of administrative rules as provided in Section 2-3.25g of this Code and as are necessary for the alternative school program.
    (b) The regional superintendent is responsible for the administrative and fiscal structure for the program.
(Source: P.A. 91-318, eff. 7-29-99.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13A-7)
    Sec. 13A-7. Employees. In all school districts, including special charter districts and districts located in cities having a population exceeding 500,000, the local school board shall grant, for a period of up to 5 years, a leave of absence to those of its employees who accept employment with an alternative school, provided that the employee shall satisfy any leave of absence provisions that may exist under a collective bargaining agreement or, if such an agreement does not exist, a school board policy. At the end of the authorized leave of absence, the employee must return to the school district in a comparable position or resign. The contractual continued service status and retirement benefits of an employee of the district who is granted a leave of absence to accept employment with an alternative school shall not be affected by that leave of absence.
(Source: P.A. 89-383, eff. 8-18-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13A-8)
    Sec. 13A-8. Funding.
    (a) The State of Illinois shall provide funding for the alternative school programs within each educational service region and within the Chicago public school system by line item appropriation made to the State Board of Education for that purpose. This money, when appropriated, shall be provided to the regional superintendent and to the Chicago Board of Education, who shall establish a budget, including salaries, for their alternative school programs. Each program shall receive funding in the amount of $30,000 plus an amount based on the ratio of the region's or Chicago's best 3 months' average daily attendance in grades pre-kindergarten through 12 to the statewide totals of these amounts. For purposes of this calculation, the best 3 months' average daily attendance for each region or Chicago shall be calculated by adding to the best 3 months' average daily attendance the number of low-income students identified in the most recently available federal census multiplied by one-half times the percentage of the region's or Chicago's low-income students to the State's total low-income students. The State Board of Education shall retain up to 1.1% of the appropriation to be used to provide technical assistance, professional development, and evaluations for the programs.
    (a-5) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Section, for the 1998-1999 fiscal year, the total amount distributed under subsection (a) for an alternative school program shall be not less than the total amount that was distributed under that subsection for that alternative school program for the 1997-1998 fiscal year. If an alternative school program is to receive a total distribution under subsection (a) for the 1998-1999 fiscal year that is less than the total distribution that the program received under that subsection for the 1997-1998 fiscal year, that alternative school program shall also receive, from a separate appropriation made for purposes of this subsection (a-5), a supplementary payment equal to the amount by which its total distribution under subsection (a) for the 1997-1998 fiscal year exceeds the amount of the total distribution that the alternative school program receives under that subsection for the 1998-1999 fiscal year. If the amount appropriated for supplementary payments to alternative school programs under this subsection (a-5) is insufficient for that purpose, those supplementary payments shall be prorated among the alternative school programs entitled to receive those supplementary payments according to the aggregate amount of the appropriation made for purposes of this subsection (a-5).
    (b) An alternative school program shall be entitled to receive general State aid as calculated in subsection (K) of Section 18-8.05 or evidence-based funding as calculated in subsection (g) of Section 18-8.15 upon filing a claim as provided therein. Any time that a student who is enrolled in an alternative school program spends in work-based learning, community service, or a similar alternative educational setting shall be included in determining the student's minimum number of clock hours of daily school work that constitute a day of attendance for purposes of calculating general State aid or evidence-based funding.
    (c) An alternative school program may receive additional funding from its school districts in such amount as may be agreed upon by the parties and necessary to support the program. In addition, an alternative school program is authorized to accept and expend gifts, legacies, and grants, including but not limited to federal grants, from any source for purposes directly related to the conduct and operation of the program.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13A-9)
    Sec. 13A-9. Transportation. Subject to the requirements of Article 29 and except as otherwise agreed by the parents, school and regional superintendent, the school from which a student is administratively transferred shall provide for any transportation that the transfer necessitates, if transportation is required pursuant to Section 29-3. The regional superintendent shall coordinate all transportation arrangements with transferring school districts. The regional superintendent may also arrange for cooperation between school districts in the regional superintendent's educational service region regarding the transportation needs of transferred students in order to reduce the costs of that transportation and to provide greater convenience for the students involved.
(Source: P.A. 89-383, eff. 8-18-95; 89-629, eff. 8-9-96; 89-636, eff. 8-9-96; 90-14, eff. 7-1-97.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13A-10)
    Sec. 13A-10. Alternative School Programs in Class II Counties. The executive director of educational service centers located in Class II counties outside a city of 500,000 or more inhabitants shall, for the educational service center area, perform the duties assigned by this Article to regional superintendents.
(Source: P.A. 89-383, eff. 8-18-95; 89-629, eff. 8-9-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13A-11)
    Sec. 13A-11. Chicago public schools.
    (a) The Chicago Board of Education may establish alternative schools within Chicago and may contract with third parties for services otherwise performed by employees, including those in a bargaining unit, in accordance with Sections 34-8.1, 34-18, and 34-49.
    (b) Alternative schools operated by third parties within Chicago shall be exempt from all provisions of this Code, except provisions concerning:
        (1) student civil rights;
        (2) staff civil rights;
        (3) health and safety;
        (4) performance and financial audits;
        (5) the assessments required under Section 2-3.64a-5
    	
of this Code;
        (6) Chicago learning outcomes;
        (7) Sections 2-3.25a through 2-3.25j of this Code;
        (8) the Inspector General; and
        (9) Section 34-2.4b of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 98-972, eff. 8-15-14.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 13B heading)
ARTICLE 13B. ALTERNATIVE LEARNING OPPORTUNITIES

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-1)
    Sec. 13B-1. Short title. This Article may be cited as the Alternative Learning Opportunities Law.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-5)
    Sec. 13B-5. Legislative findings and declarations. The General Assembly finds and declares the following:
        (1) It is the responsibility of each school district
    	
to provide educational support for every student to meet Illinois Learning Standards.
        (2) School districts need flexibility and financial
    	
support to assist local schools in their efforts to provide students with educational and other services needed for students to successfully master the curriculum.
        (3) Alternative education in this State has
    	
traditionally provided student-centered curriculum, social services, and other support needed to help students succeed.
        (4) Standards-based reform requires a comprehensive
    	
approach to alternative education to ensure that every student has the opportunity to meet the State's rigorous learning standards.
        (5) While school districts operating alternative
    	
learning opportunities programs must comply with all applicable State and federal laws and rules, these districts should do so in a manner consistent with the goals and policies stated in this Article.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-10)
    Sec. 13B-10. Purpose. The purpose of this Article is to specify the requirements for the operation of alternative learning opportunities programs, which are intended to provide students at risk of academic failure with the education and support services needed to meet Illinois Learning Standards and to complete their education in an orderly, safe, and secure learning environment. Services provided under this Article should be provided in a manner that addresses individual learning styles, career development, and social needs to enable students to successfully complete their education.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-15)
    Sec. 13B-15. Definitions. In this Article, words and phrases have the meanings set forth in the following Sections preceding Section 13B-20 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-15.5)
    Sec. 13B-15.5. State Board. "State Board" means the State Board of Education.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-15.10)
    Sec. 13B-15.10. Student at risk of academic failure. "Student at risk of academic failure" means a student at risk of not meeting the Illinois Learning Standards or not graduating from elementary or high school and who demonstrates a need for educational support or social services beyond that provided by the regular school program. Such students are eligible for services up to the age of 21.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-15.15)
    Sec. 13B-15.15. Student Success Plan. "Student Success Plan" means a plan based on an assessment of a student's educational and social functioning and skills and that establishes goals and objectives for satisfactory performance in an alternative learning opportunities program. The Plan must (i) specify the curriculum and instructional methods to be used in improving the student's educational performance, (ii) outline the support services needed to remove barriers to learning, (iii) specify, when appropriate, the career development experiences the student will receive to enhance his or her career awareness, (iv) set objectives to ensure a successful transition back to the regular school program or to post-secondary educational options, and (v) outline the student's responsibilities under the Plan.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-15.20)
    Sec. 13B-15.20. Support services. "Support services" include alcohol and drug rehabilitation; individual, group, and family counseling; mentoring; tutoring; school physicals; health and nutrition education; classroom aides; career counseling; child care; and any other social, health, or supplemental service approved as part of the Student Success Plan that is required by students for their academic success.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-20)
    Sec. 13B-20. Alternative learning opportunities program. An alternative learning opportunities program shall provide a flexible standards-based learning environment, innovative and varied instructional strategies, a student-centered curriculum, social programs, and supplemental social, health, and support services to improve the educational achievement of students at risk of academic failure.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-20.5)
    Sec. 13B-20.5. Eligible activities and services. Alternative learning opportunities programs may include without limitation evening high school, in-school tutoring and mentoring programs, in-school suspension programs, high school completion programs to assist high school dropouts in completing their education, support services, parental involvement programs, and programs to develop, enhance, or extend the transition for students transferring back to the regular school program, an adult education program, or a post-secondary education program.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-20.10)
    Sec. 13B-20.10. Who may establish and operate programs. School districts may establish alternative learning opportunities programs or may contract with regional offices of education, intermediate service centers, public community colleges, non-profit or for-profit education providers, youth service agencies, community-based organizations, or other appropriate entities to establish alternative learning opportunities programs within the public school system and provide a range of alternative learning opportunities for those students in the State who do not meet Illinois Learning Standards. Districts may individually operate alternative learning opportunities programs or may collaborate with 2 or more districts or one or more regional offices of education or both or with intermediate service centers to create and operate alternative learning opportunities programs.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-20.15)
    Sec. 13B-20.15. Other eligible providers of alternative learning opportunities. School districts may contract with health, mental health, or human service organizations, workforce development boards or agencies, juvenile court services, juvenile justice agencies, juvenile detention programs, programs operated by the Department of Juvenile Justice, or other appropriate agencies or organizations to serve students whose needs are not being met in the regular school program by providing alternative learning opportunities.
(Source: P.A. 94-696, eff. 6-1-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-20.20)
    Sec. 13B-20.20. Enrollment in other programs. High school equivalency testing preparation programs are not eligible for funding under this Article. A student may enroll in a program approved under Section 18-8.05 or 18-8.15 of this Code, as appropriate, or attend both the alternative learning opportunities program and the regular school program to enhance student performance and facilitate on-time graduation.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-20.25)
    Sec. 13B-20.25. Eligible students. Students in grades 4 through 12 who meet enrollment criteria established by the school district and who meet the definition of "student at risk of academic failure" are eligible to participate in an alternative learning opportunities program funded under this Article. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, enrollment in a charter alternative learning opportunities program shall be open to any pupil who has been expelled or suspended for more than 20 days under Section 10-22.6 or 34-19 of this Code. All rights granted under this Article to a student's parent or guardian become exclusively those of the student upon the student's 18th birthday.
(Source: P.A. 97-495, eff. 1-1-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-20.30)
    Sec. 13B-20.30. Location of program. A school district must consider offering an alternative learning opportunities program on-site in the regular school. An alternative learning opportunities program may be provided at facilities separate from the regular school or in classrooms elsewhere on school premises.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-20.35)
    Sec. 13B-20.35. Transportation of students. School districts that are required to provide transportation pursuant to Section 29-3 of this Code shall provide transportation for students enrolled in alternative learning opportunities programs. Other school districts shall provide transportation to the same extent that they provide transportation to other students. A school district may collaborate with the regional superintendent of schools to establish a cooperative transportation agreement among school districts in the region to reduce the costs of transportation and to provide for greater accessibility for students attending alternative learning opportunities programs.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-25)
    Sec. 13B-25. Eligibility for funding. The criteria set forth in the following Sections preceding Section 13B-30 of this Code shall determine the eligibility of an alternative learning opportunities program for funding.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-25.5)
    Sec. 13B-25.5. General standards for eligibility for funding. To be eligible for funding, an alternative learning opportunities program must provide evidence of an administrative structure, program activities, program staff, a budget, and a specific curriculum that is consistent with Illinois Learning Standards but may be different from the regular school program in terms of location, length of school day, program sequence, pace, instructional activities, or any combination of these.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-25.10)
    Sec. 13B-25.10. District policies, guidelines, and procedures; notification. Before receiving State funds for an alternative learning opportunities program, a school district must adopt policies and guidelines for the admission and transfer of students to the program and for transitioning students as appropriate back to the regular school program in a manner consistent with guidelines provided by the State Board. A school district must adopt policies and procedures for the establishment of a new alternative learning opportunities program or for securing State approval for an existing program. Any district that plans to establish an alternative learning opportunities program must notify the State Superintendent of Education before enrolling students in the program.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-25.15)
    Sec. 13B-25.15. Planning process and district plan. To apply for funding to establish or maintain an alternative learning opportunities program, a school district must initiate a planning process to specify the type of program needed by the district. Before submission of the district plan, the school district or consortium may apply for a one-year planning grant. The planning process may involve key education and community stakeholders, such as teachers, administrators, parents, interested members of the community, and other agencies or organizations as appropriate.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-25.20)
    Sec. 13B-25.20. Requirements for the district plan. The district plan must be consistent with the school district's overall mission and goals and aligned with the local school improvement plans of each participating school. The district plan must include all of the following:
        (1) A description of the program, including the
    	
students at risk of academic failure to be served, evidence of need, program goals, objectives, and measurable outcomes.
        (2) A staffing plan, including the experiences,
    	
competency, and qualifications of certified and non-certificated staff and emphasizing their individual and collective abilities to work with students at risk of academic failure.
        (3) A description and schedule of support services
    	
that will be available to students as part of their instructional program, including procedures for accessing services required for students on an as-needed basis.
        (4) How the district will use grant funds to improve
    	
the educational achievement of students at risk of academic failure.
        (5) A detailed program budget that includes sources
    	
of funding to be used in conjunction with alternative learning opportunities grant funds and a plan for allocating costs to those funds.
        (6) A plan that outlines how funding for alternative
    	
learning opportunities will be coordinated with other State and federal funds to ensure the efficient and effective delivery of the program.
        (7) A description of other sources of revenue the
    	
district will allocate to the program.
        (8) An estimate of the total cost per student for the
    	
program and an estimate of any gap between existing revenue available for the program and the total cost of the program.
        (9) A description of how parents and community
    	
members will be involved in the program.
        (10) Policies and procedures used by the district to
    	
grant credit for student work satisfactorily completed in the program.
        (11) How the district will assess students enrolled
    	
in the program, including how statewide testing for students in alternative learning opportunities settings will be addressed.
        (12) How students will be admitted to the program and
    	
how students will make an effective transition back to the regular school program, as appropriate.
        (13) All cooperative and intergovernmental agreements
    	
and subcontracts with eligible entities.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-25.25)
    Sec. 13B-25.25. Testing and assessment. A district plan for an alternative learning opportunities program operated through a cooperative or intergovernmental agreement must provide procedures for ensuring that students are included in the administration of statewide testing programs. Students enrolled in an alternative learning opportunities program shall participate in State assessments under Section 2-3.64a-5 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 98-972, eff. 8-15-14.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-25.30)
    Sec. 13B-25.30. Annual update and submission of district plan. A district plan must be updated annually and submitted to the State Board.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-25.35)
    Sec. 13B-25.35. Regional plan. Based on district plans to provide alternative learning opportunities, the regional office of education must submit an annual plan summarizing the number, needs, and demographics of students at risk of academic failure expected to be served in its region. This plan must be updated annually and submitted to the State Board.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-30)
    Sec. 13B-30. Responsibilities of the State Board; rules. The State Board has the responsibilities set forth in the following Sections preceding Section 13B-35 of this Code. The State Board may adopt rules as necessary to implement this Article.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-30.5)
    Sec. 13B-30.5. Program assistance, evaluation, and monitoring. Subject to the availability of State funds, the State Board is authorized to assist school districts in developing and implementing alternative learning opportunities programs to meet the educational needs of students at risk of academic failure. The State Board shall develop research-based guidelines for alternative learning opportunities programs, provide technical assistance to ensure the establishment of quality programs aligned with Illinois Learning Standards, and contract for services to conduct an annual statewide evaluation. The State Board shall conduct compliance visits of and monitor programs, as appropriate. The State Board may conduct other program-related research and planning projects, as appropriate, to enhance student outcomes.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-30.10)
    Sec. 13B-30.10. Compliance. The State Board is responsible for ensuring that all alternative learning opportunities programs are in compliance with all applicable federal and State laws, unless otherwise specified in this Article.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-30.15)
    Sec. 13B-30.15. Statewide program evaluation of student outcomes. Alternative learning opportunities programs must be evaluated annually on a statewide basis. Indicators used to measure student outcomes for this evaluation may include program completion, elementary school graduation, high school graduation or passage of high school equivalency testing, attendance, the number of students involved in work-based learning activities, the number of students making an effective transition to the regular school program, further education or work, and improvement in the percentage of students enrolled in the sending school district or districts that meet State standards.
(Source: P.A. 98-718, eff. 1-1-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-30.20)
    Sec. 13B-30.20. Suspension or revocation of program approval. The State Board may suspend or revoke approval of an alternative learning opportunities program under any one of the following conditions:
        (1) A failure to meet educational outcomes as
    	
enumerated in Section 13B-30.15 of this Code and as specified in the alternative learning opportunities grant agreement for a period of 2 or more consecutive years.
        (2) A failure to comply with all applicable laws as
    	
specified in this Code.
        (3) A failure to comply with the terms and conditions
    	
of the alternative learning opportunities grant.
        (4) A failure to maintain financial records according
    	
to generally accepted accounting procedures as specified by the State Board.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-30.25)
    Sec. 13B-30.25. Corrective action plan. For school districts whose alternative learning opportunities programs are not making progress in specified program outcomes, the State Board may require a school district to submit a corrective action plan.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-30.30)
    Sec. 13B-30.30. Technical assistance before suspension or revocation of funding. Funding of an alternative learning opportunities program may not be suspended or revoked unless the program has been provided with technical assistance and has had an opportunity to implement a corrective action plan.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-30.35)
    Sec. 13B-30.35. Recovery of grant funds. The State may recover grant funds from school districts that consistently fail to improve student performance or have failed to implement corrective actions to improve their alternative learning opportunities programs.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-30.40)
    Sec. 13B-30.40. Application for funding after suspension or revocation of program approval. Once approval to operate an alternative learning opportunities program is suspended or revoked, the school district or consortium must reapply for funding.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-30.45)
    Sec. 13B-30.45. Administrative support. The State Board shall use 1.5% of the State appropriation for the purposes of this Article to conduct activities related to the provision of technical assistance, professional development, evaluations, and compliance monitoring.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-35)
    Sec. 13B-35. Application to cooperative agreements. The provisions set forth in the following Sections preceding Section 13B-40 of this Code apply to cooperative agreements among alternative learning opportunities program providers.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-35.5)
    Sec. 13B-35.5. Local governance; cooperative agreements. For an alternative learning opportunities program operated jointly or offered under contract, the local governance of the program shall be established by each local school board through a cooperative or intergovernmental agreement with other school districts. Cooperative agreements may be established among regional offices of education, public community colleges, community-based organizations, health and human service agencies, youth service agencies, juvenile court services, the Department of Juvenile Justice, and other non-profit or for-profit education or support service providers as appropriate. Nothing contained in this Section shall prevent a school district, regional office of education, or intermediate service center from forming a cooperative for the purpose of delivering an alternative learning opportunities program.
(Source: P.A. 94-696, eff. 6-1-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-35.10)
    Sec. 13B-35.10. Committee of Cooperative Services. The State Superintendent of Education shall convene a State-level Committee of Cooperative Services. The Committee shall include representatives of the following agencies and organizations, selected by their respective heads: the Office of the Governor, the State Board of Education, the Illinois Association of Regional Superintendents of Schools, the Chicago Public Schools, the Intermediate Service Centers, the State Teacher Certification Board, the Illinois Community College Board, the Department of Human Services, the Department of Children and Family Services, the Illinois Principals Association, the Illinois Education Association, the Illinois Federation of Teachers, the Illinois Juvenile Justice Commission, the Office of the Attorney General, the Illinois Association of School Administrators, the Administrative Office of the Illinois Courts, the Department of Juvenile Justice, special education advocacy organizations, and non-profit and community-based organizations, as well as parent representatives and child advocates designated by the State Superintendent of Education.
(Source: P.A. 94-696, eff. 6-1-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-35.15)
    Sec. 13B-35.15. Role of Committee of Cooperative Services. The Committee of Cooperative Services shall advise the State Superintendent of Education on the statewide development, implementation, and coordination of alternative learning opportunities programs. The Committee shall make recommendations to the heads of the various State entities represented on the Committee to improve the educational outcomes of students at risk of academic failure through the coordinated provision of education, health, mental health, and human services.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-35.20)
    Sec. 13B-35.20. Operation of Committee of Cooperative Services. The Committee of Cooperative Services shall establish its by-laws and procedures, subject to approval of the State Superintendent of Education.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-40)
    Sec. 13B-40. Funding. The provisions set forth in the following Sections preceding Section 13B-45 of this Code apply to the funding of alternative learning opportunities programs under this Article.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-40.5)
    Sec. 13B-40.5. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02. Repealed by P.A. 95-793, eff. 1-1-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-40.10)
    Sec. 13B-40.10. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02. Repealed by P.A. 95-793, eff. 1-1-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-40.15)
    Sec. 13B-40.15. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02. Repealed by P.A. 95-793, eff. 1-1-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-40.20)
    Sec. 13B-40.20. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02. Repealed by P.A. 95-793, eff. 1-1-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-40.25)
    Sec. 13B-40.25. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02. Repealed by P.A. 95-793, eff. 1-1-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-40.30)
    Sec. 13B-40.30. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02. Repealed by P.A. 95-793, eff. 1-1-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-40.35)
    Sec. 13B-40.35. Supplanting prohibited. Alternative learning opportunities grants may not be used to supplant existing funds that the student would otherwise generate if in attendance in the regular school program.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-40.40)
    Sec. 13B-40.40. Cooperative and intergovernmental agreements funding. Alternative learning opportunities programs operating under a cooperative or intergovernmental agreement shall receive the total of funding that each individual program would be entitled to receive separately.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-40.45)
    Sec. 13B-40.45. Deobligated funds. Within any given grant year, deobligated funds shall be redistributed to existing alternative learning opportunities programs.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-40.50)
    Sec. 13B-40.50. Supplemental funding. An alternative learning opportunities program may receive federal, State, and local grants, gifts, and foundation grants to support the program.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-45)
    Sec. 13B-45. Days and hours of attendance. An alternative learning opportunities program shall provide students with at least the minimum number of days of pupil attendance required under Section 10-19 of this Code and the minimum number of daily hours of school work required under Section 10-19.05 of this Code, provided that the State Board may approve exceptions to these requirements if the program meets all of the following conditions:
        (1) The district plan submitted under Section
    	
13B-25.15 of this Code establishes that a program providing the required minimum number of days of attendance or daily hours of school work would not serve the needs of the program's students.
        (2) Each day of attendance shall provide no fewer
    	
than 3 clock hours of school work, as defined under Section 10-19.05 of this Code.
        (3) Each day of attendance that provides fewer than 5
    	
clock hours of school work shall also provide supplementary services, including without limitation work-based learning, student assistance programs, counseling, case management, health and fitness programs, or life-skills or conflict resolution training, in order to provide a total daily program to the student of 5 clock hours. A program may claim evidence-based funding for up to 2 hours of the time each day that a student is receiving supplementary services.
        (4) Each program shall provide no fewer than 174 days
    	
of actual pupil attendance during the school term; however, approved evening programs that meet the requirements of Section 13B-45 of this Code may offer less than 174 days of actual pupil attendance during the school term.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17; 101-12, eff. 7-1-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-50)
    Sec. 13B-50. Eligibility to receive general State aid or evidence-based funding. In order to receive general State aid or evidence-based funding, alternative learning opportunities programs must meet the requirements for claiming general State aid as specified in Section 18-8.05 of this Code or evidence-based funding as specified in Section 18-8.15 of this Code, as applicable, with the exception of the length of the instructional day, which may be less than 5 hours of school work if the program meets the criteria set forth under Sections 13B-50.5 and 13B-50.10 of this Code and if the program is approved by the State Board.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-50.5)
    Sec. 13B-50.5. Conditions of funding. If an alternative learning opportunities program provides less than the daily 5 clock hours of school work required under Section 10-19.05, the program must meet guidelines established by the State Board and must provide supplementary services, including without limitation work-based learning, student assistance programs, counseling, case management, health and fitness programs, life skills, conflict resolution, or service learning, that are equal to the required attendance.
(Source: P.A. 101-12, eff. 7-1-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-50.10)
    Sec. 13B-50.10. Additional criteria for general State aid or evidence-based funding. In order to claim general State aid or evidence-based funding, an alternative learning opportunities program must meet the following criteria:
        (1) Teacher professional development plans should
    	
include education in the instruction of at-risk students.
        (2) Facilities must meet the health, life, and safety
    	
requirements in this Code.
        (3) The program must comply with all other State and
    	
federal laws applicable to education providers.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-50.15)
    Sec. 13B-50.15. Level of funding. Approved alternative learning opportunities programs are entitled to claim general State aid or evidence-based funding, subject to Sections 13B-50, 13B-50.5, and 13B-50.10 of this Code. Approved programs operated by regional offices of education are entitled to receive general State aid at the foundation level of support. A school district or consortium must ensure that an approved program receives supplemental general State aid, transportation reimbursements, and special education resources, if appropriate, for students enrolled in the program.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-55)
    Sec. 13B-55. Non-resident students. If one school district can more efficiently serve students from multiple school districts, an approved alternative learning opportunities program may admit non-resident students pursuant to the terms of an intergovernmental agreement negotiated among participating districts. The tuition charge must not be less than 100% nor greater than 110% of the per capita tuition rate for the resident district.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-60)
    Sec. 13B-60. Enrollment in program. The provisions set forth in the following Sections preceding Section 13B-65 of this Code govern enrollment in an alternative learning opportunities program.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-60.5)
    Sec. 13B-60.5. Request for enrollment. A school district that operates an alternative learning opportunities program shall ensure that parents and guardians are aware of the program and the services that the program offers. A student may be enrolled in the program only upon the request of the student or the student's parent or guardian and only after a conference under Section 13B-60.10 of this Code has been held.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-60.10)
    Sec. 13B-60.10. Parent conference. Before being enrolled in an alternative learning opportunities program, the student and each of his or her parents or guardians shall receive written notice to attend a conference to determine if the student would benefit from attending an alternative learning opportunities program. The conference must provide all of the information necessary for the student and parent or guardian to make an informed decision regarding enrollment in an alternative learning opportunities program. The conference shall include a discussion of the extent to which the student, if enrolled in the program, may participate in school activities. No student shall be enrolled in an alternative learning opportunities program without the consent of the student's parent or guardian.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-60.15)
    Sec. 13B-60.15. Review of student progress. A school district must regularly review the progress of students enrolled in an alternative learning opportunities program to ensure that students may return to the regular school program as soon as appropriate. Upon request of the student's parent or guardian, the school district shall review the student's progress using procedures established by the district. A student shall remain in the program only with the consent of the student's parent or guardian and shall be promptly returned to the regular school program upon the request of the student's parent or guardian.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-60.20)
    Sec. 13B-60.20. Enrollment of special education students. Any enrollment of a special education student in an alternative learning opportunities program must be done only if included in the student's individualized education plan. The student's individualized education plan must be implemented in the program by appropriately certified personnel.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-60.25)
    Sec. 13B-60.25. Student Success Plan. A Student Success Plan must be developed for each student enrolled in an alternative learning opportunities program. The student and his or her parent or guardian must be afforded an opportunity to participate in the development of this Plan.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-65)
    Sec. 13B-65. Teacher certification. Teachers with a valid and active elementary, secondary, or special PK-12 Illinois teaching certificate may teach in an alternative learning opportunities program.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-65.5)
    Sec. 13B-65.5. Alternative learning credentials for teachers. Certificated teachers may receive an endorsement or approval in the area of alternative learning. The State Board shall establish teaching standards in alternative learning that lead to such an endorsement or approval.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-65.10)
    Sec. 13B-65.10. Continuing professional development for teachers. Teachers may receive continuing professional development units, subject to the provisions of Section 13B-65.5 of this Code, for professional development related to alternative learning.
(Source: P.A. 95-793, eff. 1-1-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-70)
    Sec. 13B-70. Truancy and attendance problems. If a student is a chronic or habitual truant as defined in Section 26-2a of this Code or if a child has been ordered to attend school, the school district may consider the student for placement in an alternative learning opportunities program specifically designed to prevent truancy, supplement instruction for students with attendance problems, intervene to decrease chronic truancy, and provide alternatives to high school completion. A program operating pursuant to the truants' alternative and optional education program may contract with a school district or consortium to provide these services.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-75)
    Sec. 13B-75. Subcontracting. A school district, regional office of education, or public community college may contract with a non-profit or for-profit educational entity for the delivery of services under this Article. All educational entities providing instructional services for eligible students must be recognized by the State Board.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-80)
    Sec. 13B-80. Student credit. A school district must grant academic credit to a student in an alternative learning opportunities program for work completed at an education provider that is accredited by a regional accrediting body or recognized by the State Board if the student's performance meets district standards.
(Source: P.A. 92-42, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/13B-85)
    Sec. 13B-85. High school equivalency testing. A student 16 years of age or over who satisfactorily completes an alternative learning opportunities program in accordance with school district guidelines and the Student Success Plan may take a high school equivalency test.
(Source: P.A. 98-718, eff. 1-1-15.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 14 heading)
ARTICLE 14. CHILDREN WITH DISABILITIES

    (105 ILCS 5/14-1.01) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-1.01)
    Sec. 14-1.01. Meaning of terms. Unless the context indicates otherwise, the terms used in this Article have the meanings ascribed to them in Sections 14-1.02 to 14-1.10, each inclusive.
(Source: Laws 1965, p. 1948.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-1.02) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-1.02)
    Sec. 14-1.02. Children with disabilities. "Children with disabilities" means children between the ages of 3 and 21 for whom it is determined, through definitions and procedures described in the Illinois Rules and Regulations to Govern the Organization and Administration of Special Education, that special education services are needed. An eligible student who requires continued public school educational experience to facilitate his or her successful transition and integration into adult life is eligible for such services through age 21, inclusive, which, for purposes of this Article, means the day before the student's 22nd birthday. An individualized education program must be written and agreed upon by appropriate school personnel and parents or their representatives for any child receiving special education.
(Source: P.A. 95-14, eff. 7-16-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-1.03a) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-1.03a)
    Sec. 14-1.03a. Children with Specific Learning Disabilities. "Children with Specific Learning Disabilities" means children between the ages of 3 and 21 years who have a disorder in one or more of the basic psychological processes involved in understanding or in using language, spoken or written, which disorder may manifest itself in imperfect ability to listen, think, speak, read, write, spell or do mathematical calculations. Such disorders include such conditions as perceptual disabilities, brain injury, minimal brain dysfunction, dyslexia, and developmental aphasia. Such term does not include children who have learning problems which are primarily the result of visual, hearing or motor disabilities, of an intellectual disability, emotional disturbance or environmental disadvantage.
(Source: P.A. 97-227, eff. 1-1-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-1.08) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-1.08)
    Sec. 14-1.08. Special educational facilities and services. "Special educational facilities and services" includes special schools, special classes, special housing, including residential facilities, special instruction, special reader service, braillists and typists for children with visual disabilities, sign language interpreters, transportation, maintenance, instructional material, therapy, professional consultant services, medical services only for diagnostic and evaluation purposes provided by a physician licensed to practice medicine in all its branches to determine a child's need for special education and related services, psychological services, school social worker services, special administrative services, salaries of all required special personnel, and other special educational services, including special equipment for use in the classroom, required by the child because of his disability if such services or special equipment are approved by the State Superintendent of Education and the child is eligible therefor under this Article and the regulations of the State Board of Education.
(Source: P.A. 89-397, eff. 8-20-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-1.09) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-1.09)
    Sec. 14-1.09. School psychologist. "School psychologist" means a psychologist who meets the following qualifications:
        (1) The psychologist:
            (A) has graduated with a master's or higher
        	
degree in psychology or educational psychology from an institution of higher learning that maintains equipment, courses of study, and standards of scholarship approved by the State Board of Education, has had at least one school year of full-time supervised experience in the delivery of school psychological services of a character approved by the State Superintendent of Education, and has such additional qualifications as may be required by the State Board of Education; or
            (B) holds a valid Nationally Certified School
        	
Psychologist (NCSP) credential.
        (2) The psychologist holds a Professional Educator
    	
License with a school psychologist endorsement issued pursuant to Section 21B-25 of this Code. Persons so licensed may use the title "school psychologist" and may offer school psychological services which are limited to those services set forth in 23 Ill. Adm. Code 226, Special Education, pertaining to children between the ages of 3 to 21, promulgated by the State Board of Education.
    School psychologists may make evaluations, recommendations or interventions regarding the placement of children in educational programs or special education classes. However, a school psychologist shall not provide such services outside his or her employment to any student in the district or districts which employ such school psychologist.
(Source: P.A. 100-750, eff. 8-10-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-1.09a) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-1.09a)
    Sec. 14-1.09a. School social worker. "School social worker" means a social worker who has graduated with a master's or higher degree in social work from an accredited graduate school of social work and has such additional qualifications as may be required by the State Board of Education and who holds a Professional Educator License with a school support personnel endorsement for school social work pursuant to Section 21B-25 of this Code. Only persons so licensed and endorsed may use the title "school social worker". A social worker may offer school social work services as provided in this Code and other applicable laws and as set forth in 23 Ill. Adm. Code 226, Special Education, promulgated by the State Board of Education, governing the provision of special education and related services to children with disabilities and requirements for the treatment of children with disabilities between the ages of 3 and 21. School social workers may make evaluations, recommendations or interventions regarding the placement of children in educational programs or special education classes. However, a school social worker shall not provide such services outside his or her employment to any student in the district or districts which employ such school social worker.
(Source: P.A. 100-356, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-1.09b)
    Sec. 14-1.09b. Speech-language pathologist.
    (a) For purposes of supervision of a speech-language pathology assistant, "speech-language pathologist" means a person who has received a license pursuant to the Illinois Speech-Language Pathology and Audiology Practice Act to engage in the practice of speech-language pathology.
    (b) The School Service Personnel Certificate with a speech-language endorsement shall be issued under Section 21-25 of this Code to a speech-language pathologist who meets all of the following requirements:
        (1) (A) Holds a regular license as a speech-language
    	
pathologist pursuant to the Illinois Speech-Language Pathology and Audiology Practice Act, (B) holds a current Certificate of Clinical Competence in speech-language pathology from the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association and a regular license in speech-language pathology from another state or territory or the District of Columbia and has applied for a regular license as a speech-language pathologist pursuant to the Illinois Speech-Language Pathology and Audiology Practice Act, or (C) holds or has applied for a temporary license pursuant to Section 8.1 of the Illinois Speech-Language Pathology and Audiology Practice Act.
        (2) Holds a master's or doctoral degree with a major
    	
emphasis in speech-language pathology from an institution whose course of study was approved or program was accredited by the Council on Academic Accreditation in Audiology and Speech-Language Pathology of the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association or its predecessor.
        (3) Either (i) has completed a program of study that
    	
meets the content area standards for speech-language pathologists approved by the State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Teachers Certification Board, (ii) has completed a program in another state, territory, or possession of the United States that is comparable to an approved program of study described in item (i), or (iii) holds a certificate issued by another state, territory, or possession of the United States that is comparable to the school service personnel certificate with a speech-language endorsement. If the requirements described in items (i), (ii), or (iii) of this paragraph (3) have not been met, a person must provide evidence that he or she has completed at least 150 clock hours of supervised experience in speech-language pathology with students with disabilities in a school setting, including experience required by federal law or federal court order; however, a person who lacks such experience may obtain interim certification as established by the Illinois State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Teacher Certification Board, and shall participate in school-based professional experience of at least 150 clock hours to meet this requirement.
        (4) Has successfully completed the required Illinois
    	
certification tests.
        (5) Has paid the application fee required for
    	
certification.
    The provisions of this subsection (b) do not preclude the issuance of a teaching certificate to a speech-language pathologist who qualifies for such a certificate.
    (c) Notwithstanding subsection (b), a Professional Educator License with a school support personnel endorsement for non-teaching speech-language pathologist shall be issued under Section 21B-25 to a speech-language pathologist who (i) holds a regular license as a speech-language pathologist pursuant to the Illinois Speech-Language Pathology and Audiology Practice Act and (ii) holds a current Certificate of Clinical Competence in speech-language pathology from the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association.
(Source: P.A. 101-94, eff. 1-1-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-1.09c)
    Sec. 14-1.09c. Speech-language pathology assistant. "Speech-language pathology assistant" means a person who has received a license to assist a speech-language pathologist pursuant to the Illinois Speech-Language Pathology and Audiology Practice Act.
(Source: P.A. 92-510, eff. 6-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-1.09.1)
    Sec. 14-1.09.1. School psychological services. In the public schools, school psychological services provided by qualified specialists who hold Type 73 School Service Personnel Certificates endorsed for school psychology issued by the State Teacher Certification Board may include, but are not limited to: (i) administration and interpretation of psychological and educational evaluations; (ii) developing school-based prevention programs, including violence prevention programs; (iii) counseling with students, parents, and teachers on educational and mental health issues; (iv) acting as liaisons between public schools and community agencies; (v) evaluating program effectiveness; (vi) providing crisis intervention within the school setting; (vii) helping teachers, parents, and others involved in the educational process to provide optimum teaching and learning conditions for all students; (viii) supervising school psychologist interns enrolled in school psychology programs that meet the standards established by the State Board of Education; and (ix) screening of school enrollments to identify children who should be referred for individual study. Nothing in this Section prohibits other qualified professionals from providing those services listed for which they are appropriately trained.
(Source: P.A. 89-339, eff. 8-17-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-1.09.2)
    Sec. 14-1.09.2. School Social Work Services. In the public schools, social work services may be provided by qualified specialists who hold Type 73 School Service Personnel Certificates endorsed for school social work issued by the State Teacher Certification Board or who hold a Professional Educator License with a school support personnel endorsement in the area of school social worker under Section 21B-25 of this Code.
    School social work services may include, but are not limited to:
        (1) Identifying students in need of special education
    	
services by conducting a social-developmental study in a case study evaluation;
        (2) Developing and implementing comprehensive
    	
interventions with students, parents, and teachers that will enhance student adjustment to, and performance in, the school setting;
        (3) Consulting and collaborating with teachers and
    	
other school personnel regarding behavior management and intervention plans and inclusion in support of special education students in regular classroom settings;
        (4) Counseling with students, parents, and teachers
    	
in accordance with the rules and regulations governing provision of related services, provided that parent permission must be obtained in writing before a student participates in a group counseling session;
        (5) Acting as a liaison between the public schools
    	
and community resources;
        (6) Developing and implementing school-based
    	
prevention programs, including mediation and violence prevention, implementing social and emotional education programs and services, and establishing and implementing bullying prevention and intervention programs;
        (7) Providing crisis intervention within the school
    	
setting;
        (8) Supervising school social work interns enrolled
    	
in school social work programs that meet the standards established by the State Board of Education;
        (9) Providing parent education and counseling as
    	
appropriate in relation to the child's educational assessment;
        (10) Assisting in completing a functional behavioral
    	
assessment, as well as assisting in the development of nonaversive behavioral intervention strategies; and
        (11) Evaluating program effectiveness.
    Nothing in this Section prohibits other certified professionals from providing any of the services listed in this Section for which they are appropriately trained.
(Source: P.A. 98-338, eff. 8-13-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-1.09d)
    Sec. 14-1.09d. Behavior analyst. "Behavior analyst" means a person who is certified by the Behavior Analyst Certification Board.
(Source: P.A. 94-948, eff. 1-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-1.10) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-1.10)
    Sec. 14-1.10. Qualified worker. "Qualified worker" means a trained specialist and includes a behavior analyst, certificated school nurse, professional consultant, registered therapist, school nurse intern, school counselor, school counselor intern, school psychologist, school psychologist intern, school social worker, school social worker intern, special administrator or supervisor giving full time to special education, speech language pathologist, speech language pathologist intern, and teacher of students with IEPs who meets the requirements of this Article, who has the required special training in the understandings, techniques, and special instructional strategies for children with disabilities and who delivers services to students with IEPs, and any other trained specialist set forth by the State Board of Education in rules.
(Source: P.A. 95-363, eff. 8-23-07; 96-257, eff. 8-11-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-1.11) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-1.11)
    Sec. 14-1.11. Resident district; parent; legal guardian. The resident district is the school district in which the parent or guardian, or both parent and guardian, of the student reside when:
        (1) the parent has legal guardianship of the student
    	
and resides within Illinois; or
        (2) an individual guardian has been appointed by the
    	
courts and resides within Illinois; or
        (3) an Illinois public agency has legal guardianship
    	
and the student resides either in the home of the parent or within the same district as the parent; or
        (4) an Illinois court orders a residential placement
    	
but the parents retain any legal rights or guardianship and have not been subject to a termination of parental rights order.
    In cases of divorced or separated parents, when only one parent has legal guardianship or custody, the district in which the parent having legal guardianship or custody resides is the resident district. When both parents retain legal guardianship or custody, the resident district is the district in which either parent who provides the student's primary regular fixed night-time abode resides; provided, that the election of resident district may be made only one time per school year.
    When the parent has legal guardianship and lives outside of the State of Illinois, or when the individual legal guardian other than the natural parent lives outside the State of Illinois, the parent, legal guardian, or other placing agent is responsible for making arrangements to pay the Illinois school district serving the child for the educational services provided. Those service costs shall be determined in accordance with Section 14-7.01.
(Source: P.A. 95-844, eff. 8-15-08.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-1.11a) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-1.11a)
    Sec. 14-1.11a. Resident district; student. The resident district is the school district in which the student resides when:
        (1) the parent has legal guardianship but the
    	
location of the parent is unknown; or
        (2) an individual guardian has been appointed but the
    	
location of the guardian is unknown; or
        (3) the student is 18 years of age or older and no
    	
legal guardian has been appointed; or
        (4) the student is legally an emancipated minor; or
        (5) an Illinois public agency has legal guardianship
    	
and such agency or any court in this State has placed the student residentially outside of the school district in which the parent lives.
    In cases where an Illinois public agency has legal guardianship and has placed the student residentially outside of Illinois, the last school district that provided at least 45 days of educational service to the student shall continue to be the district of residence until the student is no longer under guardianship of an Illinois public agency or until the student is returned to Illinois.
    The resident district of a homeless student is the Illinois district in which the student enrolls for educational services. Homeless students include individuals as defined in the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act.
(Source: P.A. 95-844, eff. 8-15-08.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-1.11b) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-1.11b)
    Sec. 14-1.11b. Resident district; applicability. The provisions of Sections 14-1.11 and 14-1.11a shall be used to determine the resident district in all cases where special education services and facilities are provided pursuant to Article 14.
(Source: P.A. 87-1117.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-2)
    Sec. 14-2. Definition of general education classroom for special education students receiving services in the general education classroom.
    (a) With respect to any State statute or administrative rule that defines a general education classroom to be composed of a certain percentage of students with individualized education programs (IEPs), students with individualized education programs shall exclude students receiving only speech services outside of the general education classroom, provided that the instruction the students receive in the general education classroom does not require modification.
    (b) In every instance, a school district must ensure that composition of the general education classroom does not interfere with the provision of a free and appropriate public education to any student.
(Source: P.A. 97-284, eff. 8-9-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-3.01) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-3.01)
    Sec. 14-3.01. Advisory Council. This amendatory Act of 1998, in compliance with the reauthorization of IDEA in 1997, makes changes in the membership and responsibilities of the Advisory Council on the Education of Children with Disabilities. The Council shall provide advice and policy guidance to the Governor, General Assembly, and the State Board of Education with respect to special education and related services for children with disabilities. The State Board of Education shall seek the advice of the Advisory Council regarding all rules and regulations related to the education of children with disabilities that are to be promulgated by the State Board of Education. The State Board of Education shall seek the advice of the Advisory Council on modifications or additions to comprehensive plans submitted under Section 14-4.01. The Council shall consider any rule or regulation or plan submitted to it by the State Board of Education within 60 days after its receipt by the chairperson of the Council.
    Additionally, the Advisory Council shall: (1) advise the General Assembly, the Governor, and the State Board of Education on unmet needs in the education of children with disabilities; (2) assist the State Board of Education in developing evaluations and reporting on data to the United States Secretary of Education; (3) advise the State Board of Education relative to qualifications for hearing officers and the rules and procedures for hearings conducted under Section 14-8.02 or 14-8.02a; (4) comment publicly on any rules or regulations proposed by the State regarding the education of children with disabilities and the procedures for distribution of funds under this Act; (5) advise the State Board of Education in developing corrective action plans to address findings identified in federal monitoring reports pursuant to the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act; (6) advise State and local education agencies regarding educational programs and materials that may be provided to children with disabilities to enable them to fully exercise their constitutional and legal rights and entitlements as citizens, including those afforded under the Federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, and the Illinois Human Rights Act; and (7) advise the State Board of Education in developing and implementing policies relating to the coordination of services for children with disabilities.
    The Council shall be composed of 27 members, including 23 voting members appointed by the Governor and 4 ex-officio voting members. Members shall be broadly representative of the State's population in regard to developmental, physical, and mental disabilities, race, ethnic background, gender, and geographic location. Nine members shall be parents of children with disabilities between the ages of 3 and 21 years currently receiving special education services at public expense. Five members shall be individuals with disabilities, including one student or former student who is at least 18 years of age and no older than 21 years of age at the time of his or her appointment to the Council and who is receiving special education services at public expense or received those services at the time his or her high school program terminated. Within 30 days after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1998, the Governor or his designee shall invite statewide organizations, being as inclusive as possible and based upon a reasonable inquiry, and Parent Training and Information Centers representing parents of children with disabilities, individuals with disabilities or both, to convene for the purpose of recommending to the Governor twice the number of individuals required to be appointed as members from each of the categories described in this paragraph, from which the Governor may appoint the 14 members of the Council who are parents of children with disabilities and individuals with disabilities. The 9 members who are parents of children with disabilities between the ages of 3 and 21 years receiving special education services at public expense and the 5 members who are individuals with disabilities shall not be current full or part-time employees of school districts, special education cooperatives, regional service areas or centers, or any agency under the jurisdiction of any elected State official.
    In addition, the Governor shall appoint one regional superintendent of schools, one representative of an institution of higher education that prepares special education and related services personnel, one teacher of students with disabilities, one superintendent of a public school district, one director of a special education cooperative or special education administrator from a school district of less than 500,000 population, one representative of a public charter school, one representative of a private school serving children with disabilities, one representative of a vocational, community, or business organization that provides transition services to children with disabilities, and one at-large member from the general public. In addition, the Secretary of Human Services or his or her designee, the Director of Children and Family Services or his or her designee, the Director of Corrections or his or her designee, and the Director of Special Education for the City of Chicago School District #299 or his or her designee shall serve as ex-officio voting members of the Council.
    All Council members shall be legal residents of the State of Illinois and shall be selected, as far as practicable, on the basis of their knowledge of, or experience in, the education of children with disabilities.
    The initial members to be appointed to the Council by the Governor under the provisions of this amendatory Act of 1998 shall be appointed within 60 days after the effective date of that amendatory Act; provided that those persons who are serving as Council members on that effective date and who, as determined by the Governor after consultation with the State Board of Education, meet the requirements established by this amendatory Act for appointment to membership on the Council shall continue to serve as Council members until the completion of the remainder of their current terms. The initial members of the Council who are not Council members on the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1998 and who are appointed by the Governor under this amendatory Act of 1998 shall by lot determine one-third of their number to serve for a term of 2 years (provided that person appointed as the student or former student member shall be included among those members who are to serve a term of 2 years), one-third of their number to serve for a term of 3 years, and one-third of their number to serve for a term of 4 years; provided, that if the total number of initial members so appointed by the Governor is not divisible into 3 whole numbers, all of the initial members so appointed shall by lot be assigned to 3 groups as follows: (i) the members assigned to the first group, who shall include the student or former student member and who shall be equal in number to the number of members who are assigned to the second group, shall serve for a term of 2 years; (ii) the members assigned to the second group, who shall be equal in number to the number of members who are assigned to the first group, shall serve for a term of 3 years; and (iii) the members assigned to the third group, who shall comprise the remainder of the initial members so appointed by the Governor and whose number shall be either one more or one less than the number of members assigned to either the first group or second group, shall serve for a term of 4 years. Upon expiration of the term of office of a member of the Council who is not an ex-officio member, his or her successor shall be appointed by the Governor to serve for a term of 4 years, except that a successor appointed as the student or former student member shall be appointed to serve for a term of 2 years. Each member of the Council who is not an ex-officio member and whose term of office expires shall nevertheless continue to serve as a Council member until his or her successor is appointed. Each of the 4 ex-officio members of the Council shall continue to serve as a Council member during the period in which he or she continues to hold the office by reason of which he or she became an ex-officio member of the Council. The initial members of the Council who are not ex-officio members shall not, upon completion of their respective initial terms, be appointed to serve more than one additional consecutive term of 4 years, nor shall any successor member of the Council be appointed to serve more than 2 full consecutive 4-year terms; provided, that a person appointed as the student or former student member shall serve only one two-year term and shall not be reappointed to serve for an additional term. Vacancies in Council memberships held by parents of children with disabilities or individuals with disabilities may be filled from the original list of such parents and individuals recommended to the Governor. The Governor shall reconvene the group of organizations that provided the original list of parents of children with disabilities and individuals with disabilities when additional recommendations for those Council memberships are needed, but at a minimum the group shall be convened every 2 years for the purpose of updating the list of recommended parents or individuals. A vacancy in an appointed membership on the Council shall be filled for the unexpired balance of the term of that membership in the same manner that the original appointment for that membership was made.
    The terms of all persons serving as Advisory Council members on the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1998 who are not determined by the Governor, after consultation with the State Board of Education, to meet the requirements established by this amendatory Act for appointment to initial membership on the Council shall terminate on the date that the Governor completes his appointments of the initial members of the Council under this amendatory Act, and the members of the Council as constituted under this amendatory Act shall take office and assume their powers and duties on that date.
    The Council as constituted under this amendatory Act of 1998 shall organize with a chairperson selected by the Council members and shall meet at the call of the chairperson upon 10 days written notice but not less than 4 times a year. The Council shall establish such committees and procedures as it deems appropriate to carry out its responsibilities under this Act and the federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Act.
    The State Board of Education shall designate an employee to act as executive secretary of the Council and shall furnish all professional and clerical assistance necessary for the performance of its duties.
    Members of the Council shall serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed for the necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties in accordance with the State Board of Education's Travel Control Policy.
(Source: P.A. 89-397, eff. 8-20-95; 89-507, eff. 7-1-97; 90-644, eff. 7-24-98.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-3.02)
    Sec. 14-3.02. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 89-397, eff. 8-20-95. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-3.03)
    Sec. 14-3.03. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 89-397, eff. 8-20-95. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-4.01) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-4.01)
    Sec. 14-4.01. Special educational facilities for children with disabilities.
    (a) School boards of any school districts that maintain a recognized school, whether operating under the general law or under a special charter, subject to any limitations hereinafter specified, shall establish and maintain such special educational facilities as may be needed for children with disabilities as defined in Section 14-1.02 of this Article who are residents of their school district, and such children, residents of other school districts as may be authorized by this Article.
    All such school boards shall place or by regulation may authorize the director of special education to place, pursuant to procedures required by this Act and rules and regulations promulgated by the State Board of Education, eligible children into special education programs designed to benefit children with disabilities defined in Sections 14-1.02 through 14-1.07 of this Act.
    (b) All school districts, administrative districts or governing boards responsible for providing special education services shall submit to the appropriate regional superintendent comprehensive plans or modifications thereto for the provision of special education services in accordance with rules promulgated by the State Board of Education. Copies of comprehensive plans or modifications thereto shall be forwarded by the regional superintendent to the State Board of Education. Regional superintendents who provide special education services shall submit comprehensive plans or modifications thereto directly to the State Board of Education. Comprehensive plans or modifications thereto shall be made available by regional superintendents for public inspection during regular business hours.
    The State Board of Education shall provide for the submission of comprehensive plans not more frequently than once every 3 years but may require the submission of such modifications as it deems necessary to achieve the purposes of this Act and applicable federal law.
    (c) Special education cooperatives established by school districts are eligible for school maintenance project grants under Section 5-100 of the School Construction Law.
(Source: P.A. 98-710, eff. 7-16-14.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-5.01) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-5.01)
    Sec. 14-5.01. Application of Article. This Article applies to school boards of all types and sizes of school districts, including but not limited to special charter districts, community consolidated school districts, community unit school districts, consolidated school districts, high school districts, non-high school districts, community high school districts, and districts exceeding 500,000 inhabitants.
(Source: Laws 1965, p. 1948.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-6.01) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-6.01)
    Sec. 14-6.01. Powers and duties of school boards. School boards of one or more school districts establishing and maintaining any of the educational facilities described in this Article shall, in connection therewith, exercise similar powers and duties as are prescribed by law for the establishment, maintenance, and management of other recognized educational facilities. Such school boards shall include only eligible children in the program and shall comply with all the requirements of this Article and all rules and regulations established by the State Board of Education. Such school boards shall accept in part-time attendance children with disabilities of the types described in Sections 14-1.02 through 14-1.07 who are enrolled in nonpublic schools. A request for part-time attendance must be submitted by a parent or guardian of the child with a disability and may be made only to those public schools located in the district where the child attending the nonpublic school resides; however, nothing in this Section shall be construed as prohibiting an agreement between the district where the child resides and another public school district to provide special educational services if such an arrangement is deemed more convenient and economical. Special education and related services must be provided in accordance with the student's IEP no later than 10 school attendance days after notice is provided to the parents pursuant to Section 300.503 of Title 34 of the Code of Federal Regulations and implementing rules adopted by the State Board of Education. Transportation for students in part time attendance shall be provided only if required in the child's individualized educational program on the basis of the child's disabling condition or as the special education program location may require.
    Beginning with the 2019-2020 school year, a school board shall post on its Internet website, if any, and incorporate into its student handbook or newsletter notice that students with disabilities who do not qualify for an individualized education program, as required by the federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Act and implementing provisions of this Code, may qualify for services under Section 504 of the federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973 if the child (i) has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities, (ii) has a record of a physical or mental impairment, or (iii) is regarded as having a physical or mental impairment. Such notice shall identify the location and phone number of the office or agent of the school district to whom inquiries should be directed regarding the identification, assessment and placement of such children.
    For a school district organized under Article 34 only, beginning with the 2019-2020 school year, the school district shall, in collaboration with its primary office overseeing special education, publish on the school district's publicly available website any proposed changes to its special education policies, directives, guidelines, or procedures that impact the provision of educational or related services to students with disabilities or the procedural safeguards afforded to students with disabilities or their parents or guardians made by the school district or school board. Any policy, directive, guideline, or procedural change that impacts those provisions or safeguards that is authorized by the school district's primary office overseeing special education or any other administrative office of the school district must be published on the school district's publicly available website no later than 45 days before the adoption of that change. Any policy directive, guideline, or procedural change that impacts those provisions or safeguards that is authorized by the school board must be published on the school district's publicly available website no later than 30 days before the date of presentation to the school board for adoption. The school district's website must allow for virtual public comments on proposed special education policy, directive, guideline, or procedural changes that impact the provision of educational or related services to students with disabilities or the procedural safeguards afforded to students with disabilities or their parents or guardians from the date of the notification of the proposed change on the website until the date the change is adopted by the school district or until the date the change is presented to the school board for adoption. After the period for public comment is closed, the school district must maintain all public comments for a period of not less than 2 years from the date the special education change is adopted. The public comments are subject to the Freedom of Information Act. The school board shall, at a minimum, advertise the notice of the change and availability for public comment on its website. The State Board of Education may add additional reporting requirements for the district beyond policy, directive, guideline, or procedural changes that impact the provision of educational or related services to students with disabilities or the procedural safeguards afforded to students with disabilities or their parents or guardians if the State Board determines it is in the best interest of the students enrolled in the district receiving special education services.
    School boards shall immediately provide upon request by any person written materials and other information that indicates the specific policies, procedures, rules and regulations regarding the identification, evaluation or educational placement of children with disabilities under Section 14-8.02 of the School Code. Such information shall include information regarding all rights and entitlements of such children under this Code, and of the opportunity to present complaints with respect to any matter relating to educational placement of the student, or the provision of a free appropriate public education and to have an impartial due process hearing on the complaint. The notice shall inform the parents or guardian in the parents' or guardian's native language, unless it is clearly not feasible to do so, of their rights and all procedures available pursuant to this Act and federal Public Law 94-142; it shall be the responsibility of the State Superintendent to develop uniform notices setting forth the procedures available under this Act and federal Public Law 94-142, as amended, to be used by all school boards. The notice shall also inform the parents or guardian of the availability upon request of a list of free or low-cost legal and other relevant services available locally to assist parents or guardians in exercising rights or entitlements under this Code. For a school district organized under Article 34 only, the school district must make the entirety of its special education Procedural Manual and any other guidance documents pertaining to special education publicly available, in print and on the school district's website, in both English and Spanish. Upon request, the school district must make the Procedural Manual and other guidance documents available in print in any other language and accessible for individuals with disabilities.
    Any parent or guardian who is deaf, or does not normally communicate using spoken English, who participates in a meeting with a representative of a local educational agency for the purposes of developing an individualized educational program shall be entitled to the services of an interpreter.
    No student with a disability or, in a school district organized under Article 34 of this Code, child with a learning disability may be denied promotion, graduation or a general diploma on the basis of failing a minimal competency test when such failure can be directly related to the disabling condition of the student. For the purpose of this Act, "minimal competency testing" is defined as tests which are constructed to measure the acquisition of skills to or beyond a certain defined standard.
    Effective July 1, 1966, high school districts are financially responsible for the education of pupils with disabilities who are residents in their districts when such pupils have reached age 15 but may admit children with disabilities into special educational facilities without regard to graduation from the eighth grade after such pupils have reached the age of 14 1/2 years. Upon a pupil with a disability attaining the age of 14 1/2 years, it shall be the duty of the elementary school district in which the pupil resides to notify the high school district in which the pupil resides of the pupil's current eligibility for special education services, of the pupil's current program, and of all evaluation data upon which the current program is based. After an examination of that information the high school district may accept the current placement and all subsequent timelines shall be governed by the current individualized educational program; or the high school district may elect to conduct its own evaluation and multidisciplinary staff conference and formulate its own individualized educational program, in which case the procedures and timelines contained in Section 14-8.02 shall apply.
(Source: P.A. 100-201, eff. 8-18-17; 100-1112, eff. 8-28-18; 101-515, eff. 8-23-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-6.02) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-6.02)
    Sec. 14-6.02. Service animals. Service animals such as guide dogs, signal dogs or any other animal individually trained to perform tasks for the benefit of a student with a disability shall be permitted to accompany that student at all school functions, whether in or outside the classroom. For the purposes of this Section, "service animal" has the same meaning as in Section 48-8 of the Criminal Code of 2012.
(Source: P.A. 97-956, eff. 8-14-12; 97-1150, eff. 1-25-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-6.03)
    Sec. 14-6.03. Speech-language pathology assistants.
    (a) Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, on or after January 1, 2002, no person shall perform the duties of a speech-language pathology assistant without first applying for and receiving a license for that purpose from the Department of Professional Regulation. A person employed as a speech-language pathology assistant in any class, service, or program authorized by this Article may perform only those duties authorized by this Section under the supervision of a speech-language pathologist as provided in this Section. This Section does not apply to speech-language pathology paraprofessionals approved by the State Board of Education.
    (b) A speech-language pathology assistant may not be assigned his or her own student caseload. The student caseload limit of a speech-language pathologist who supervises any speech-language pathology assistants shall be determined by the severity of the needs of the students served by the speech-language pathologist. A full-time speech-language pathologist's caseload limit may not exceed 80 students (60 students on or after September 1, 2003) at any time. The caseload limit of a part-time speech-language pathologist shall be determined by multiplying the caseload limit of a full-time speech-language pathologist by a percentage that equals the number of hours worked by the part-time speech-language pathologist divided by the number of hours worked by a full-time speech-language pathologist in that school district. Employment of a speech-language pathology assistant may not increase or decrease the caseload of the supervising speech-language pathologist.
    (c) A school district that intends to utilize the services of a speech-language pathology assistant must provide written notification to the parent or guardian of each student who will be served by a speech-language pathology assistant.
    (d) The scope of responsibility of a speech-language pathology assistant shall be limited to supplementing the role of the speech-language pathologist in implementing the treatment program established by a speech-language pathologist. The functions and duties of a speech-language pathology assistant shall be limited to the following:
        (1) Conducting speech-language screening, without
    	
interpretation, and using screening protocols selected by the supervising speech-language pathologist.
        (2) Providing direct treatment assistance to students
    	
under the supervision of a speech-language pathologist.
        (3) Following and implementing documented treatment
    	
plans or protocols developed by a supervising speech-language pathologist.
        (4) Documenting student progress toward meeting
    	
established objectives, and reporting the information to a supervising speech-language pathologist.
        (5) Assisting a speech-language pathologist during
    	
assessments, including, but not limited to, assisting with formal documentation, preparing materials, and performing clerical duties for a supervising speech-language pathologist.
        (6) Acting as an interpreter for non-English speaking
    	
students and their family members when competent to do so.
        (7) Scheduling activities and preparing charts,
    	
records, graphs, and data.
        (8) Performing checks and maintenance of equipment,
    	
including, but not limited to, augmentative communication devices.
        (9) Assisting with speech-language pathology research
    	
projects, in-service training, and family or community education.
    (e) A speech-language pathology assistant may not:
        (1) perform standardized or nonstandardized
    	
diagnostic tests or formal or informal evaluations or interpret test results;
        (2) screen or diagnose students for feeding or
    	
swallowing disorders;
        (3) participate in parent conferences, case
    	
conferences, or any interdisciplinary team without the presence of the supervising speech-language pathologist;
        (4) provide student or family counseling;
        (5) write, develop, or modify a student's
    	
individualized treatment plan;
        (6) assist with students without following the
    	
individualized treatment plan prepared by the supervising speech-language pathologist;
        (7) sign any formal documents, such as treatment
    	
plans, reimbursement forms, or reports;
        (8) select students for services;
        (9) discharge a student from services;
        (10) disclose clinical or confidential information,
    	
either orally or in writing, to anyone other than the supervising speech-language pathologist;
        (11) make referrals for additional services;
        (12) counsel or consult with the student, family, or
    	
others regarding the student's status or service;
        (13) represent himself or herself to be a
    	
speech-language pathologist or a speech therapist;
        (14) use a checklist or tabulate results of feeding
    	
or swallowing evaluations; or
        (15) demonstrate swallowing strategies or precautions
    	
to students, family, or staff.
    (f) A speech-language pathology assistant shall practice only under the supervision of a speech-language pathologist who has at least 2 years experience in addition to the supervised professional experience required under subsection (f) of Section 8 of the Illinois Speech-Language Pathology and Audiology Practice Act. A speech-language pathologist who supervises a speech-language pathology assistant must have completed at least 10 clock hours of training in the supervision of speech-language pathology assistants. The State Board of Education shall promulgate rules describing the supervision training requirements. The rules may allow a speech-language pathologist to apply to the State Board of Education for an exemption from this training requirement based upon prior supervisory experience.
    (g) A speech-language pathology assistant must be under the direct supervision of a speech-language pathologist at least 30% of the speech-language pathology assistant's actual student contact time per student for the first 90 days of initial employment as a speech-language pathology assistant. Thereafter, the speech-language pathology assistant must be under the direct supervision of a speech-language pathologist at least 20% of the speech-language pathology assistant's actual student contact time per student. Supervision of a speech-language pathology assistant beyond the minimum requirements of this subsection may be imposed at the discretion of the supervising speech-language pathologist. A supervising speech-language pathologist must be available to communicate with a speech-language pathology assistant whenever the assistant is in contact with a student.
    (h) A speech-language pathologist that supervises a speech-language pathology assistant must document direct supervision activities. At a minimum, supervision documentation must provide (i) information regarding the quality of the speech-language pathology assistant's performance of assigned duties and (ii) verification that clinical activity is limited to duties specified in this Section.
    (i) A full-time speech-language pathologist may supervise no more than 2 speech-language pathology assistants. A speech-language pathologist that does not work full-time may supervise no more than one speech-language pathology assistant.
(Source: P.A. 92-510, eff. 6-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-6.04)
    Sec. 14-6.04. Contracting for speech-language pathology services.
    (a) For purposes of this Section:
    "Reasonable efforts" means performing all of the following:
        (1) placing at least 3 employment advertisements for
    	
a speech-language pathologist published in the newspaper of widest distribution within the school district or cooperative;
        (2) placing one employment listing in the placement
    	
bulletin of a college or university that has a speech-language pathology curriculum that is located in the geographic area of the school district or cooperative, if any; and
        (3) posting the position for speech-language
    	
pathologist on the Illinois Association of School Administrators' job placement service for at least 30 days.
    "Speech-language pathologist" means a person who:
        (1) holds a master's or doctoral degree with a major
    	
emphasis in speech-language pathology from an institution whose course of study was approved or program was accredited by the Council on Academic Accreditation in Audiology and Speech-Language Pathology of the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association or its predecessor; and
        (2) either (i) has completed a program of study that
    	
meets the content-area standards for speech-language pathologists approved by the State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Teacher Certification Board, (ii) has completed a program in another state, territory, or possession of the United States that is comparable to an approved program of study described in item (i), or (iii) holds a certificate issued by another state, territory, or possession of the United States that is comparable to the school service personnel certificate with a speech-language endorsement. If the requirements described in items (i), (ii), or (iii) of this paragraph (2) have not been met, a person must provide evidence that he or she has completed at least 150 clock hours of supervised experience in speech-language pathology with students with disabilities in a school setting, including experience required by federal law or federal court order; however, a person who lacks such experience may obtain interim certification as established by the Illinois State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Teacher Certification Board, and shall participate in school-based professional experience of at least 150 clock hours to meet this requirement.
    "Speech-language pathology services" means the application of methods and procedures for identifying, measuring, testing, appraising, predicting, and modifying communication development and disorders or disabilities of speech, language, voice, swallowing, and other speech, language, and voice-related disorders for the purpose of counseling, consulting, and rendering services or participating in the planning, directing, or conducting of programs that are designed to modify communicative disorders and conditions in individuals or groups of individuals involving speech, language, voice, and swallowing functions.
    (b) A school district or a cooperative must make reasonable efforts to employ a speech-language pathologist. While making those reasonable efforts or after unsuccessful reasonable efforts have been made, or both, a school district or cooperative may contract for speech-language pathology services with a speech-language pathologist or an entity that employs speech-language pathologists. A speech-language pathologist who provides speech-language pathology services pursuant to a contract must:
        (1) hold a speech-language pathology license under
    	
the Illinois Speech-Language Pathology and Audiology Practice Act or hold or have applied for a temporary license issued under Section 8.1 of that Act; and
        (2) hold a certificate under this Code with an
    	
endorsement in speech-language pathology.
(Source: P.A. 93-110, eff. 7-8-03; 93-1060, eff. 12-23-04.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-6.10)
    Sec. 14-6.10. Transfer of parental rights at the age of majority.
    (a) When a student who is eligible for special education under this Article reaches the majority age of 18 years, all rights accorded to the student's parents under this Article transfer to the student, except as provided in this Section. This transfer of rights also applies to students who are incarcerated in an adult or juvenile State or local correctional institution. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to deny a student with a disability who has reached majority age the right to have an adult of his or her choice, including, but not limited to, the student's parent, assist the student in making decisions regarding the student's individualized education program.
    (b) The school district must notify the student and the student's parents of the transfer of rights in writing at a meeting convened to review the student's individualized education program during the school year in which the student turns 17 years of age. At that time, the school district must provide the student with a copy of the Delegation of Rights form described in this Section. The school district must mail the notice and a copy of the Delegation of Rights form to the student and to the student's parents, addressed to their last known address, if they do not attend the meeting.
    (c) Rights shall not transfer from the parents to the student under this Section if either of the following apply:
        (1) The student with a disability who has reached
    	
the age of majority has been adjudged incompetent under State law.
        (2) The student has not been adjudged incompetent
    	
under State law, but the student has executed a Delegation of Rights to make educational decisions pursuant to this Section for the purpose of appointing the student's parent or other adult to represent the educational interests of the student.
    A student may terminate the Delegation of Rights at any time and assume the right to make decisions regarding his or her education. The Delegation of Rights shall meet all of the following requirements:
        (A) It shall remain in effect for one year after the
    	
date of execution, but may be renewed annually with the written or other formal authorization of the student and the person the student delegates to represent the educational interests of the student.
        (B) It shall be signed by the student or verified by
    	
other means, such as audio or video or other alternative format compatible with the student's disability showing that the student has agreed to the terms of the delegation.
        (C) It shall be signed or otherwise manifest
    	
verification that the designee accepts the delegation.
        (D) It shall include declarations that the student
    	
(i) is 18 years of age or older, (ii) intends to delegate his or her educational rights under federal and State law to a specified individual who is at least 18 years of age, (iii) has not been adjudged incompetent under State law, (iv) is entitled to be present during the development of the student's individualized education program and to raise issues or concerns about the student's individualized education program, (v) will be permitted to terminate the Delegation of Rights at any time, and (vi) will notify the school district immediately if the student terminates the Delegation of Rights.
        (E) It shall be identical or substantially the same
    	
as the following form:

 
DELEGATION OF RIGHTS TO MAKE EDUCATIONAL DECISION

    I, (insert name), am 18 years of age or older and a student who has the right to make educational decisions for myself under State and federal law. I have not been adjudged incompetent and, as of the date of the execution of this document, I hereby delegate my right to give consent and make decisions concerning my education to (insert name), who will be considered my "parent" for purposes of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act of 2004 and Article 14 of the School Code and will exercise all of the rights and responsibilities concerning my education that are conferred on a parent under those laws. I understand and give my consent for (insert name) to make all decisions relating to my education on my behalf. I understand that I have the right to be present at meetings held to develop my individualized education program and that I have the right to raise any issues or concerns I may have and that the school district must consider them.
    This delegation will be in effect for one year from the date of execution below and may be renewed by my written or other formal authorization. I also understand that I have the right to terminate this Delegation of Rights at any time and assume the right to make my own decisions regarding my education. I understand that I must notify the school district immediately if I revoke this Delegation of Rights prior to its expiration.
 
(insert name)
Student
 
DATE: (insert date)
 
Accepted by: (insert name)
             Designated Representative
(Source: P.A. 95-372, eff. 8-23-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-7.01) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-7.01)
    Sec. 14-7.01. Children attending classes in another district.) If a child, resident of one school district, because of his disability, attends a class or school for any of such types of children in another school district, the school district in which he resides shall grant the proper permit, provide any necessary transportation, and pay to the school district maintaining the special educational facilities the per capita cost of educating such children.
    Such per capita cost shall be computed in the following manner. The cost of conducting and maintaining any special educational facility shall be first determined and shall include the following expenses applicable only to such educational facility under rules and regulations established by the State Board of Education as follows:
    (a) Salaries of teachers, professional workers, necessary non-certified workers, clerks, librarians, custodial employees, readers, and any district taxes specifically for their pension and retirement benefits.
    (b) Educational supplies and equipment including textbooks.
    (c) Administrative costs and communication.
    (d) Operation of physical plant including heat, light, water, repairs, and maintenance.
    (e) Auxiliary service, including up to 20% of transportation cost.
    (f) Depreciation of physical facilities at a rate of $200 per pupil, or the actual rental paid for the physical facilities calculated on a per pupil basis. From such total cost thus determined there shall be deducted the State reimbursement due on account of such educational program for the same year, not including any State reimbursement for special education transportation and offsetting federal revenue for the program, except federally funded health care reimbursement need not be deducted. Such net cost shall be divided by the average number of pupils in average daily enrollment in such special education facility for the school year in order to arrive at the net per capita tuition cost.
    If the child, resident of any school district, because of his disability, attends a class or school for any of such types of children maintained in a teacher training center supported by public funds or State institution of higher learning, the resident district shall provide any necessary transportation and shall be eligible to the transportation reimbursement provided in Section 14-13.01.
    A resident district may, upon request, provide transportation for residents of the district who meet the requirements, other than the specified age, of children with disabilities as defined in Section 14-1.02, who attend classes in another district, and shall make a charge for any such transportation in an amount equal to the cost thereof, including a reasonable allowance for depreciation of the vehicles used.
(Source: P.A. 89-397, eff. 8-20-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-7.02) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-7.02)
    Sec. 14-7.02. Children attending private schools, public out-of-state schools, public school residential facilities or private special education facilities. The General Assembly recognizes that non-public schools or special education facilities provide an important service in the educational system in Illinois.
    If because of his or her disability the special education program of a district is unable to meet the needs of a child and the child attends a non-public school or special education facility, a public out-of-state school or a special education facility owned and operated by a county government unit that provides special educational services required by the child and is in compliance with the appropriate rules and regulations of the State Superintendent of Education, the school district in which the child is a resident shall pay the actual cost of tuition for special education and related services provided during the regular school term and during the summer school term if the child's educational needs so require, excluding room, board and transportation costs charged the child by that non-public school or special education facility, public out-of-state school or county special education facility, or $4,500 per year, whichever is less, and shall provide him any necessary transportation. "Nonpublic special education facility" shall include a residential facility, within or without the State of Illinois, which provides special education and related services to meet the needs of the child by utilizing private schools or public schools, whether located on the site or off the site of the residential facility.
    The State Board of Education shall promulgate rules and regulations for determining when placement in a private special education facility is appropriate. Such rules and regulations shall take into account the various types of services needed by a child and the availability of such services to the particular child in the public school. In developing these rules and regulations the State Board of Education shall consult with the Advisory Council on Education of Children with Disabilities and hold public hearings to secure recommendations from parents, school personnel, and others concerned about this matter.
    The State Board of Education shall also promulgate rules and regulations for transportation to and from a residential school. Transportation to and from home to a residential school more than once each school term shall be subject to prior approval by the State Superintendent in accordance with the rules and regulations of the State Board.
    A school district making tuition payments pursuant to this Section is eligible for reimbursement from the State for the amount of such payments actually made in excess of the district per capita tuition charge for students not receiving special education services. Such reimbursement shall be approved in accordance with Section 14-12.01 and each district shall file its claims, computed in accordance with rules prescribed by the State Board of Education, on forms prescribed by the State Superintendent of Education. Data used as a basis of reimbursement claims shall be for the preceding regular school term and summer school term. Each school district shall transmit its claims to the State Board of Education on or before August 15. The State Board of Education, before approving any such claims, shall determine their accuracy and whether they are based upon services and facilities provided under approved programs. Upon approval the State Board shall cause vouchers to be prepared showing the amount due for payment of reimbursement claims to school districts, for transmittal to the State Comptroller on the 30th day of September, December, and March, respectively, and the final voucher, no later than June 20. If the money appropriated by the General Assembly for such purpose for any year is insufficient, it shall be apportioned on the basis of the claims approved.
    No child shall be placed in a special education program pursuant to this Section if the tuition cost for special education and related services increases more than 10 percent over the tuition cost for the previous school year or exceeds $4,500 per year unless such costs have been approved by the Illinois Purchased Care Review Board. The Illinois Purchased Care Review Board shall consist of the following persons, or their designees: the Directors of Children and Family Services, Public Health, Public Aid, and the Governor's Office of Management and Budget; the Secretary of Human Services; the State Superintendent of Education; and such other persons as the Governor may designate. The Review Board shall also consist of one non-voting member who is an administrator of a private, nonpublic, special education school. The Review Board shall establish rules and regulations for its determination of allowable costs and payments made by local school districts for special education, room and board, and other related services provided by non-public schools or special education facilities and shall establish uniform standards and criteria which it shall follow. The Review Board shall approve the usual and customary rate or rates of a special education program that (i) is offered by an out-of-state, non-public provider of integrated autism specific educational and autism specific residential services, (ii) offers 2 or more levels of residential care, including at least one locked facility, and (iii) serves 12 or fewer Illinois students.
    In determining rates based on allowable costs, the Review Board shall consider any wage increases awarded by the General Assembly to front line personnel defined as direct support persons, aides, front-line supervisors, qualified intellectual disabilities professionals, nurses, and non-administrative support staff working in service settings in community-based settings within the State and adjust customary rates or rates of a special education program to be equitable to the wage increase awarded to similar staff positions in a community residential setting. Any wage increase awarded by the General Assembly to front line personnel defined as direct support persons, aides, front-line supervisors, qualified intellectual disabilities professionals, nurses, and non-administrative support staff working in community-based settings within the State, including the $0.75 per hour increase contained in Public Act 100-23 and the $0.50 per hour increase included in Public Act 100-23, shall also be a basis for any facility covered by this Section to appeal its rate before the Review Board under the process defined in Title 89, Part 900, Section 340 of the Illinois Administrative Code. Illinois Administrative Code Title 89, Part 900, Section 342 shall be updated to recognize wage increases awarded to community-based settings to be a basis for appeal. However, any wage increase that is captured upon appeal from a previous year shall not be counted by the Review Board as revenue for the purpose of calculating a facility's future rate.
    Any definition used by the Review Board in administrative rule or policy to define "related organizations" shall include any and all exceptions contained in federal law or regulation as it pertains to the federal definition of "related organizations".
    The Review Board shall establish uniform definitions and criteria for accounting separately by special education, room and board and other related services costs. The Board shall also establish guidelines for the coordination of services and financial assistance provided by all State agencies to assure that no otherwise qualified child with a disability receiving services under Article 14 shall be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of or be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity provided by any State agency.
    The Review Board shall review the costs for special education and related services provided by non-public schools or special education facilities and shall approve or disapprove such facilities in accordance with the rules and regulations established by it with respect to allowable costs.
    The State Board of Education shall provide administrative and staff support for the Review Board as deemed reasonable by the State Superintendent of Education. This support shall not include travel expenses or other compensation for any Review Board member other than the State Superintendent of Education.
    The Review Board shall seek the advice of the Advisory Council on Education of Children with Disabilities on the rules and regulations to be promulgated by it relative to providing special education services.
    If a child has been placed in a program in which the actual per pupil costs of tuition for special education and related services based on program enrollment, excluding room, board and transportation costs, exceed $4,500 and such costs have been approved by the Review Board, the district shall pay such total costs which exceed $4,500. A district making such tuition payments in excess of $4,500 pursuant to this Section shall be responsible for an amount in excess of $4,500 equal to the district per capita tuition charge and shall be eligible for reimbursement from the State for the amount of such payments actually made in excess of the districts per capita tuition charge for students not receiving special education services.
    If a child has been placed in an approved individual program and the tuition costs including room and board costs have been approved by the Review Board, then such room and board costs shall be paid by the appropriate State agency subject to the provisions of Section 14-8.01 of this Act. Room and board costs not provided by a State agency other than the State Board of Education shall be provided by the State Board of Education on a current basis. In no event, however, shall the State's liability for funding of these tuition costs begin until after the legal obligations of third party payors have been subtracted from such costs. If the money appropriated by the General Assembly for such purpose for any year is insufficient, it shall be apportioned on the basis of the claims approved. Each district shall submit estimated claims to the State Superintendent of Education. Upon approval of such claims, the State Superintendent of Education shall direct the State Comptroller to make payments on a monthly basis. The frequency for submitting estimated claims and the method of determining payment shall be prescribed in rules and regulations adopted by the State Board of Education. Such current state reimbursement shall be reduced by an amount equal to the proceeds which the child or child's parents are eligible to receive under any public or private insurance or assistance program. Nothing in this Section shall be construed as relieving an insurer or similar third party from an otherwise valid obligation to provide or to pay for services provided to a child with a disability.
    If it otherwise qualifies, a school district is eligible for the transportation reimbursement under Section 14-13.01 and for the reimbursement of tuition payments under this Section whether the non-public school or special education facility, public out-of-state school or county special education facility, attended by a child who resides in that district and requires special educational services, is within or outside of the State of Illinois. However, a district is not eligible to claim transportation reimbursement under this Section unless the district certifies to the State Superintendent of Education that the district is unable to provide special educational services required by the child for the current school year.
    Nothing in this Section authorizes the reimbursement of a school district for the amount paid for tuition of a child attending a non-public school or special education facility, public out-of-state school or county special education facility unless the school district certifies to the State Superintendent of Education that the special education program of that district is unable to meet the needs of that child because of his disability and the State Superintendent of Education finds that the school district is in substantial compliance with Section 14-4.01. However, if a child is unilaterally placed by a State agency or any court in a non-public school or special education facility, public out-of-state school, or county special education facility, a school district shall not be required to certify to the State Superintendent of Education, for the purpose of tuition reimbursement, that the special education program of that district is unable to meet the needs of a child because of his or her disability.
    Any educational or related services provided, pursuant to this Section in a non-public school or special education facility or a special education facility owned and operated by a county government unit shall be at no cost to the parent or guardian of the child. However, current law and practices relative to contributions by parents or guardians for costs other than educational or related services are not affected by this amendatory Act of 1978.
    Reimbursement for children attending public school residential facilities shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this Section.
    Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any school district receiving a payment under this Section or under Section 14-7.02b, 14-13.01, or 29-5 of this Code may classify all or a portion of the funds that it receives in a particular fiscal year or from general State aid pursuant to Section 18-8.05 of this Code as funds received in connection with any funding program for which it is entitled to receive funds from the State in that fiscal year (including, without limitation, any funding program referenced in this Section), regardless of the source or timing of the receipt. The district may not classify more funds as funds received in connection with the funding program than the district is entitled to receive in that fiscal year for that program. Any classification by a district must be made by a resolution of its board of education. The resolution must identify the amount of any payments or general State aid to be classified under this paragraph and must specify the funding program to which the funds are to be treated as received in connection therewith. This resolution is controlling as to the classification of funds referenced therein. A certified copy of the resolution must be sent to the State Superintendent of Education. The resolution shall still take effect even though a copy of the resolution has not been sent to the State Superintendent of Education in a timely manner. No classification under this paragraph by a district shall affect the total amount or timing of money the district is entitled to receive under this Code. No classification under this paragraph by a district shall in any way relieve the district from or affect any requirements that otherwise would apply with respect to that funding program, including any accounting of funds by source, reporting expenditures by original source and purpose, reporting requirements, or requirements of providing services.
(Source: P.A. 100-587, eff. 6-4-18; 101-10, eff. 6-5-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-7.02a) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-7.02a)
    Sec. 14-7.02a. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 92-568, eff. 6-26-02. Repealed by P.A. 93-1022, eff. 8-24-04.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-7.02b)
    Sec. 14-7.02b. Funding for children requiring special education services. Payments to school districts for children requiring special education services documented in their individualized education program regardless of the program from which these services are received, excluding children claimed under Sections 14-7.02 and 14-7.03 of this Code, shall be made in accordance with this Section. Funds received under this Section may be used only for the provision of special educational facilities and services as defined in Section 14-1.08 of this Code.
    The appropriation for fiscal year 2005 through fiscal year 2017 shall be based upon the IDEA child count of all students in the State, excluding students claimed under Sections 14-7.02 and 14-7.03 of this Code, on December 1 of the fiscal year 2 years preceding, multiplied by 17.5% of the general State aid foundation level of support established for that fiscal year under Section 18-8.05 of this Code.
    Beginning with fiscal year 2005 and through fiscal year 2007, individual school districts shall not receive payments under this Section totaling less than they received under the funding authorized under Section 14-7.02a of this Code during fiscal year 2004, pursuant to the provisions of Section 14-7.02a as they were in effect before the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 93rd General Assembly. This base level funding shall be computed first.
    Beginning with fiscal year 2008 through fiscal year 2017, individual school districts must not receive payments under this Section totaling less than they received in fiscal year 2007. This funding shall be computed last and shall be a separate calculation from any other calculation set forth in this Section. This amount is exempt from the requirements of Section 1D-1 of this Code.
    Through fiscal year 2017, an amount equal to 85% of the funds remaining in the appropriation shall be allocated to school districts based upon the district's average daily attendance reported for purposes of Section 18-8.05 of this Code for the preceding school year. Fifteen percent of the funds remaining in the appropriation shall be allocated to school districts based upon the district's low income eligible pupil count used in the calculation of general State aid under Section 18-8.05 of this Code for the same fiscal year. One hundred percent of the funds computed and allocated to districts under this Section shall be distributed and paid to school districts.
    For individual students with disabilities whose program costs exceed 4 times the district's per capita tuition rate as calculated under Section 10-20.12a of this Code, the costs in excess of 4 times the district's per capita tuition rate shall be paid by the State Board of Education from unexpended IDEA discretionary funds originally designated for room and board reimbursement pursuant to Section 14-8.01 of this Code. The amount of tuition for these children shall be determined by the actual cost of maintaining classes for these children, using the per capita cost formula set forth in Section 14-7.01 of this Code, with the program and cost being pre-approved by the State Superintendent of Education. Reimbursement for individual students with disabilities whose program costs exceed 4 times the district's per capita tuition rate shall be claimed beginning with costs encumbered for the 2004-2005 school year and thereafter.
    The State Board of Education shall prepare vouchers equal to one-fourth the amount allocated to districts, for transmittal to the State Comptroller on the 30th day of September, December, and March, respectively, and the final voucher, no later than June 20. The Comptroller shall make payments pursuant to this Section to school districts as soon as possible after receipt of vouchers. If the money appropriated from the General Assembly for such purposes for any year is insufficient, it shall be apportioned on the basis of the payments due to school districts.
    Nothing in this Section shall be construed to decrease or increase the percentage of all special education funds that are allocated annually under Article 1D of this Code or to alter the requirement that a school district provide special education services.
    Nothing in this amendatory Act of the 93rd General Assembly shall eliminate any reimbursement obligation owed as of the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 93rd General Assembly to a school district with in excess of 500,000 inhabitants.
    Except for reimbursement for individual students with disabilities whose program costs exceed 4 times the district's per capita tuition rate, no funding shall be provided to school districts under this Section after fiscal year 2017.
    In fiscal year 2018 and each fiscal year thereafter, all funding received by a school district from the State pursuant to Section 188.15 of this Code that is attributable to students requiring special education services must be used for special education services authorized under this Code.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-7.02c)
    Sec. 14-7.02c. Private therapeutic day schools; student enrollment data. The Illinois Purchased Care Review Board must accept amended student enrollment data from special education private therapeutic day schools that have specialized contractual agreements with a school district having a population exceeding 500,000 inhabitants in the 2016-2017 and 2017-2018 school years. The amended student enrollment data must be based on actual monthly enrollment days where a student placed by the school district was formally enrolled and began to receive services through the last date he or she was formally exited from the therapeutic day school. All enrolled days must be confined to the official beginning and end dates of the therapeutic day school's official calendar on file with the State Board of Education. In no instance may the amended enrollment be further reduced to account for student absences. A school district having a population of 500,000 or less inhabitants must be billed at the per diem rate approved by the Illinois Purchased Care Review Board based on days enrolled as prescribed in Section 900.330 of Title 89 of the Illinois Administrative Code.
(Source: P.A. 101-10, eff. 6-5-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-7.03) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-7.03)
    Sec. 14-7.03. Special education classes for children from orphanages, foster family homes, children's homes, or State residential units. If a school district maintains special education classes on the site of orphanages and children's homes, or if children from the orphanages, children's homes, foster family homes, other State agencies, or State residential units for children attend classes for children with disabilities in which the school district is a participating member of a joint agreement, or if the children from the orphanages, children's homes, foster family homes, other State agencies, or State residential units attend classes for the children with disabilities maintained by the school district, then reimbursement shall be paid to eligible districts in accordance with the provisions of this Section by the Comptroller as directed by the State Superintendent of Education.
    The amount of tuition for such children shall be determined by the actual cost of maintaining such classes, using the per capita cost formula set forth in Section 14-7.01, such program and cost to be pre-approved by the State Superintendent of Education.
    If a school district makes a claim for reimbursement under Section 18-3 of this Code it shall not include in any claim filed under this Section a claim for such children. Payments authorized by law, including State or federal grants for education of children included in this Section, shall be deducted in determining the tuition amount.
    Nothing in this Code shall be construed so as to prohibit reimbursement for the tuition of children placed in for profit facilities. Private facilities shall provide adequate space at the facility for special education classes provided by a school district or joint agreement for children with disabilities who are residents of the facility at no cost to the school district or joint agreement upon request of the school district or joint agreement. If such a private facility provides space at no cost to the district or joint agreement for special education classes provided to children with disabilities who are residents of the facility, the district or joint agreement shall not include any costs for the use of those facilities in its claim for reimbursement.
    Reimbursement for tuition may include the cost of providing summer school programs for children with severe and profound disabilities served under this Section. Claims for that reimbursement shall be filed by November 1 and shall be paid on or before December 15 from appropriations made for the purposes of this Section.
    The State Board of Education shall establish such rules and regulations as may be necessary to implement the provisions of this Section.
    Claims filed on behalf of programs operated under this Section housed in an orphanage, children's home, private facility, State residential unit, district or joint agreement site, jail, detention center, or county-owned shelter care facility shall be on an individual student basis only for eligible students with disabilities. These claims shall be in accordance with applicable rules.
    Each district claiming reimbursement for individual students shall have the eligibility of those students verified by the State Board of Education. On September 30, December 31, and March 31, the State Board of Education shall voucher payments for individual students based upon an estimated cost calculated from the prior year's claim. Final claims for individual students for the regular school term must be received at the State Board of Education by June 15. Claims for individual students received after June 15 shall not be honored. Claims received by June 15 may be amended until August 1. Final claims for individual students shall be vouchered by August 31. However, notwithstanding any other provisions of this Section or this Code, if the amount appropriated for any fiscal year is less than the amount required for purposes of this Section, the amount required to eliminate any insufficient reimbursement for each district claim under this Section shall be reimbursed on August 31 of the next fiscal year. Payments required to eliminate any insufficiency for prior fiscal year claims shall be made before any claims are paid for the current fiscal year.
    Regional superintendents may operate special education classes for children from orphanages, foster family homes, children's homes, or State residential units located within the educational services region upon consent of the school board otherwise so obligated. In electing to assume the powers and duties of a school district in providing and maintaining such a special education program, the regional superintendent may enter into joint agreements with other districts and may contract with public or private schools or the orphanage, foster family home, children's home, or State residential unit for provision of the special education program. The regional superintendent exercising the powers granted under this Section shall be reimbursed for the actual cost of providing such programs by the resident district as defined in Section 14-1.11a.
    Any child who is not a resident of Illinois who is placed in a child welfare institution, private facility, foster family home, State operated program, orphanage, or children's home shall have the payment for his educational tuition and any related services assured by the placing agent.
    For each student with a disability who is placed in a residential facility by an Illinois public agency or by any court in this State, the costs for educating the student are eligible for reimbursement under this Section.
    The district of residence of the student with a disability as defined in Section 14-1.11a is responsible for the actual costs of the student's special education program and is eligible for reimbursement under this Section when placement is made by a State agency or the courts.
    When a dispute arises over the determination of the district of residence under this Section, the district or districts may appeal the decision in writing to the State Superintendent of Education, who, upon review of materials submitted and any other items or information he or she may request for submission, shall issue a written decision on the matter. The decision of the State Superintendent of Education shall be final.
    In the event a district does not make a tuition payment to another district that is providing the special education program and services, the State Board of Education shall immediately withhold 125% of the then remaining annual tuition cost from the State aid or categorical aid payment due to the school district that is determined to be the resident school district. All funds withheld by the State Board of Education shall immediately be forwarded to the school district where the student is being served.
    When a child eligible for services under this Section 14-7.03 must be placed in a nonpublic facility, that facility shall meet the programmatic requirements of Section 14-7.02 and its regulations, and the educational services shall be funded only in accordance with this Section 14-7.03.
(Source: P.A. 101-17, eff. 6-14-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-7.03a) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-7.03a)
    Sec. 14-7.03a. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 80-1481. Repealed by P.A. 90-644, eff. 7-24-98.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-7.04) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-7.04)
    Sec. 14-7.04. Health care reimbursement.
    (a) Local educational agencies may utilize federally funded health care programs to share in the costs of services which are provided to children requiring special education and related services and which are either listed on an individualized education program established pursuant to the federal Education for All Handicapped Children Act of 1975, Public Law No. 94-142 or are provided under an individualized family service plan established pursuant to the federal Education of the Handicapped Act Amendments of 1986, Public Law No. 99-457. Those federally funded health care programs shall also share in the cost of all screenings and diagnostic evaluations for children suspected of having or known to have a disability. However, all such services shall continue to be initially funded by the local educational agency and shall be provided regardless of subsequent cost sharing with other funding sources. Federally funded health care reimbursement funds are supplemental and shall not be used to reduce any other Federal payments, private payments or State Board of Education funds for special education as provided in Article 14 of the School Code for which the local education agency is eligible.
    Local educational agencies providing early periodic screening and diagnostic testing services on or after August 1, 1991, including screening and diagnostic services, health care and treatment, preventive health care, and any other measure to correct or improve health impairments of Medicaid-eligible children, may also access federally funded health care resources.
    The State Board of Education and the Department of Healthcare and Family Services may enter into an intergovernmental agreement whereby school districts or their agents may claim medicaid matching funds for medicaid eligible special education children as authorized by Section 1903 of the Social Security Act. Under that intergovernmental agreement, school districts or their agents may also claim federal funds for the services provided to special education students enrolled in the Children's Health Insurance Program.
    (b) No employee or officer of a school district, special education joint agreement, office of a regional superintendent of schools or the State Board of Education may have a direct or indirect financial interest in any agreement between the entity of which the person is an employee or officer and any corporation, organization or other entity that collects or participates in the collection of payments from private health care benefit plans or federally funded health care programs authorized under this Section.
(Source: P.A. 95-331, eff. 8-21-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-7.05)
    Sec. 14-7.05. Placement in residential facility; payment of educational costs. For any student with a disability in a residential facility placement made or paid for by an Illinois public State agency or made by any court in this State, the school district of residence as determined pursuant to this Article is responsible for the costs of educating the child and shall be reimbursed for those costs in accordance with this Code. Subject to this Section and relevant State appropriation, the resident district's financial responsibility and reimbursement must be calculated in accordance with the provisions of Section 14-7.02 of this Code. In those instances in which a district receives a block grant pursuant to Article 1D of this Code, the district's financial responsibility is limited to the actual educational costs of the placement, which must be paid by the district from its block grant appropriation. Resident district financial responsibility and reimbursement applies for both residential facilities that are approved by the State Board of Education and non-approved facilities, subject to the requirements of this Section. The Illinois placing agency or court remains responsible for funding the residential portion of the placement and for notifying the resident district prior to the placement, except in emergency situations. The residential facility in which the student is placed shall notify the resident district of the student's enrollment as soon as practicable after the placement. Failure of the placing agency or court to notify the resident district prior to the placement does not absolve the resident district of financial responsibility for the educational costs of the placement; however, the resident district shall not become financially responsible unless and until it receives written notice of the placement by either the placing agency, court, or residential facility. The placing agency or parent shall request an individualized education program (IEP) meeting from the resident district if the placement would entail additional educational services beyond the student's current IEP. The district of residence shall retain control of the IEP process, and any changes to the IEP must be done in compliance with the federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Act.
    Payments shall be made by the resident district to the entity providing the educational services, whether the entity is the residential facility or the school district wherein the facility is located, no less than once per quarter unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the parties.
    A residential facility providing educational services within the facility, but not approved by the State Board of Education, is required to demonstrate proof to the State Board of (i) appropriate certification of teachers for the student population, (ii) age-appropriate curriculum, (iii) enrollment and attendance data, and (iv) the ability to implement the child's IEP. A school district is under no obligation to pay such a residential facility unless and until such proof is provided to the State Board's satisfaction.
    When a dispute arises over the determination of the district of residence under this Section, any person or entity, including without limitation a school district or residential facility, may make a written request for a residency decision to the State Superintendent of Education, who, upon review of materials submitted and any other items of information he or she may request for submission, shall issue his or her decision in writing. The decision of the State Superintendent of Education is final.
(Source: P.A. 95-844, eff. 8-15-08; 95-938, eff. 8-29-08.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-8.01) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-8.01)
    Sec. 14-8.01. Supervision of special education buildings and facilities. All special educational facilities, building programs, housing, and all educational programs for the types of children with disabilities defined in Section 14-1.02 shall be under the supervision of and subject to the approval of the State Board of Education.
    All special education facilities, building programs, and housing shall comply with the building code authorized by Section 2-3.12.
    All educational programs for children with disabilities as defined in Section 14-1.02 administered by any State agency shall be under the general supervision of the State Board of Education. Such supervision shall be limited to insuring that such educational programs meet standards jointly developed and agreed to by both the State Board of Education and the operating State agency, including standards for educational personnel.
    Any State agency providing special educational programs for children with disabilities as defined in Section 14-1.02 shall promulgate rules and regulations, in consultation with the State Board of Education and pursuant to the Illinois Administrative Procedure Act as now or hereafter amended, to insure that all such programs comply with this Section and Section 14-8.02.
    No otherwise qualified child with a disability receiving special education and related services under Article 14 shall solely by reason of his or her disability be excluded from the participation in or be denied the benefits of or be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity provided by a State agency.
    State agencies providing special education and related services, including room and board, either directly or through grants or purchases of services shall continue to provide these services according to current law and practice. Room and board costs not provided by a State agency other than the State Board of Education shall be provided by the State Board of Education to the extent of available funds. An amount equal to one-half of the State education agency's share of IDEA PART B federal monies, or so much thereof as may actually be needed, shall annually be appropriated to pay for the additional costs of providing for room and board for those children placed pursuant to Section 14-7.02 of this Code and, after all such room and board costs are paid, for similar expenditures for children served pursuant to Section 14-7.02 or 14-7.02b of this Code. Any such excess room and board funds must first be directed to those school districts with students costing in excess of 4 times the district's per capita tuition charge and then to community based programs that serve as alternatives to residential placements.
    Beginning with Fiscal Year 1997 and continuing through Fiscal Year 2000, 100% of the former Chapter I, Section 89-313 federal funds shall be allocated by the State Board of Education in the same manner as IDEA, PART B "flow through" funding to local school districts, joint agreements, and special education cooperatives for the maintenance of instructional and related support services to students with disabilities. However, beginning with Fiscal Year 1998, the total IDEA Part B discretionary funds available to the State Board of Education shall not exceed the maximum permissible under federal law or 20% of the total federal funds available to the State, whichever is less. After all room and board payments and similar expenditures are made by the State Board of Education as required by this Section, the State Board of Education may use the remaining funds for administration and for providing discretionary activities. However, the State Board of Education may use no more than 25% of its available IDEA Part B discretionary funds for administrative services.
    Special education and related services included in the child's individualized educational program which are not provided by another State agency shall be included in the special education and related services provided by the State Board of Education and the local school district.
    The State Board of Education with the advice of the Advisory Council shall prescribe the standards and make the necessary rules and regulations for special education programs administered by local school boards, including but not limited to establishment of classes, training requirements of teachers and other professional personnel, eligibility and admission of pupils, the curriculum, class size limitation, building programs, housing, transportation, special equipment and instructional supplies, and the applications for claims for reimbursement. The State Board of Education shall promulgate rules and regulations for annual evaluations of the effectiveness of all special education programs and annual evaluation by the local school district of the individualized educational program for each child for whom it provides special education services.
    A school district is responsible for the provision of educational services for all school age children residing within its boundaries excluding any student placed under the provisions of Section 14-7.02 or any student with a disability whose parent or guardian lives outside of the State of Illinois as described in Section 14-1.11.
(Source: P.A. 99-143, eff. 7-27-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-8.02) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-8.02)
    Sec. 14-8.02. Identification, evaluation, and placement of children.
    (a) The State Board of Education shall make rules under which local school boards shall determine the eligibility of children to receive special education. Such rules shall ensure that a free appropriate public education be available to all children with disabilities as defined in Section 14-1.02. The State Board of Education shall require local school districts to administer non-discriminatory procedures or tests to English learners coming from homes in which a language other than English is used to determine their eligibility to receive special education. The placement of low English proficiency students in special education programs and facilities shall be made in accordance with the test results reflecting the student's linguistic, cultural and special education needs. For purposes of determining the eligibility of children the State Board of Education shall include in the rules definitions of "case study", "staff conference", "individualized educational program", and "qualified specialist" appropriate to each category of children with disabilities as defined in this Article. For purposes of determining the eligibility of children from homes in which a language other than English is used, the State Board of Education shall include in the rules definitions for "qualified bilingual specialists" and "linguistically and culturally appropriate individualized educational programs". For purposes of this Section, as well as Sections 14-8.02a, 14-8.02b, and 14-8.02c of this Code, "parent" means a parent as defined in the federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 U.S.C. 1401(23)).
    (b) No child shall be eligible for special education facilities except with a carefully completed case study fully reviewed by professional personnel in a multidisciplinary staff conference and only upon the recommendation of qualified specialists or a qualified bilingual specialist, if available. At the conclusion of the multidisciplinary staff conference, the parent of the child shall be given a copy of the multidisciplinary conference summary report and recommendations, which includes options considered, and be informed of their right to obtain an independent educational evaluation if they disagree with the evaluation findings conducted or obtained by the school district. If the school district's evaluation is shown to be inappropriate, the school district shall reimburse the parent for the cost of the independent evaluation. The State Board of Education shall, with advice from the State Advisory Council on Education of Children with Disabilities on the inclusion of specific independent educational evaluators, prepare a list of suggested independent educational evaluators. The State Board of Education shall include on the list clinical psychologists licensed pursuant to the Clinical Psychologist Licensing Act. Such psychologists shall not be paid fees in excess of the amount that would be received by a school psychologist for performing the same services. The State Board of Education shall supply school districts with such list and make the list available to parents at their request. School districts shall make the list available to parents at the time they are informed of their right to obtain an independent educational evaluation. However, the school district may initiate an impartial due process hearing under this Section within 5 days of any written parent request for an independent educational evaluation to show that its evaluation is appropriate. If the final decision is that the evaluation is appropriate, the parent still has a right to an independent educational evaluation, but not at public expense. An independent educational evaluation at public expense must be completed within 30 days of a parent written request unless the school district initiates an impartial due process hearing or the parent or school district offers reasonable grounds to show that such 30 day time period should be extended. If the due process hearing decision indicates that the parent is entitled to an independent educational evaluation, it must be completed within 30 days of the decision unless the parent or the school district offers reasonable grounds to show that such 30 day period should be extended. If a parent disagrees with the summary report or recommendations of the multidisciplinary conference or the findings of any educational evaluation which results therefrom, the school district shall not proceed with a placement based upon such evaluation and the child shall remain in his or her regular classroom setting. No child shall be eligible for admission to a special class for children with a mental disability who are educable or for children with a mental disability who are trainable except with a psychological evaluation and recommendation by a school psychologist. Consent shall be obtained from the parent of a child before any evaluation is conducted. If consent is not given by the parent or if the parent disagrees with the findings of the evaluation, then the school district may initiate an impartial due process hearing under this Section. The school district may evaluate the child if that is the decision resulting from the impartial due process hearing and the decision is not appealed or if the decision is affirmed on appeal. The determination of eligibility shall be made and the IEP meeting shall be completed within 60 school days from the date of written parental consent. In those instances when written parental consent is obtained with fewer than 60 pupil attendance days left in the school year, the eligibility determination shall be made and the IEP meeting shall be completed prior to the first day of the following school year. Special education and related services must be provided in accordance with the student's IEP no later than 10 school attendance days after notice is provided to the parents pursuant to Section 300.503 of Title 34 of the Code of Federal Regulations and implementing rules adopted by the State Board of Education. The appropriate program pursuant to the individualized educational program of students whose native tongue is a language other than English shall reflect the special education, cultural and linguistic needs. No later than September 1, 1993, the State Board of Education shall establish standards for the development, implementation and monitoring of appropriate bilingual special individualized educational programs. The State Board of Education shall further incorporate appropriate monitoring procedures to verify implementation of these standards. The district shall indicate to the parent and the State Board of Education the nature of the services the child will receive for the regular school term while waiting placement in the appropriate special education class. At the child's initial IEP meeting and at each annual review meeting, the child's IEP team shall provide the child's parent or guardian with a written notification that informs the parent or guardian that the IEP team is required to consider whether the child requires assistive technology in order to receive free, appropriate public education. The notification must also include a toll-free telephone number and internet address for the State's assistive technology program.
    If the child is deaf, hard of hearing, blind, or visually impaired and he or she might be eligible to receive services from the Illinois School for the Deaf or the Illinois School for the Visually Impaired, the school district shall notify the parents, in writing, of the existence of these schools and the services they provide and shall make a reasonable effort to inform the parents of the existence of other, local schools that provide similar services and the services that these other schools provide. This notification shall include without limitation information on school services, school admissions criteria, and school contact information.
    In the development of the individualized education program for a student who has a disability on the autism spectrum (which includes autistic disorder, Asperger's disorder, pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified, childhood disintegrative disorder, and Rett Syndrome, as defined in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fourth edition (DSM-IV, 2000)), the IEP team shall consider all of the following factors:
        (1) The verbal and nonverbal communication needs of
    	
the child.
        (2) The need to develop social interaction skills
    	
and proficiencies.
        (3) The needs resulting from the child's unusual
    	
responses to sensory experiences.
        (4) The needs resulting from resistance to
    	
environmental change or change in daily routines.
        (5) The needs resulting from engagement in
    	
repetitive activities and stereotyped movements.
        (6) The need for any positive behavioral
    	
interventions, strategies, and supports to address any behavioral difficulties resulting from autism spectrum disorder.
        (7) Other needs resulting from the child's
    	
disability that impact progress in the general curriculum, including social and emotional development.
Public Act 95-257 does not create any new entitlement to a service, program, or benefit, but must not affect any entitlement to a service, program, or benefit created by any other law.
    If the student may be eligible to participate in the Home-Based Support Services Program for Adults with Mental Disabilities authorized under the Developmental Disability and Mental Disability Services Act upon becoming an adult, the student's individualized education program shall include plans for (i) determining the student's eligibility for those home-based services, (ii) enrolling the student in the program of home-based services, and (iii) developing a plan for the student's most effective use of the home-based services after the student becomes an adult and no longer receives special educational services under this Article. The plans developed under this paragraph shall include specific actions to be taken by specified individuals, agencies, or officials.
    (c) In the development of the individualized education program for a student who is functionally blind, it shall be presumed that proficiency in Braille reading and writing is essential for the student's satisfactory educational progress. For purposes of this subsection, the State Board of Education shall determine the criteria for a student to be classified as functionally blind. Students who are not currently identified as functionally blind who are also entitled to Braille instruction include: (i) those whose vision loss is so severe that they are unable to read and write at a level comparable to their peers solely through the use of vision, and (ii) those who show evidence of progressive vision loss that may result in functional blindness. Each student who is functionally blind shall be entitled to Braille reading and writing instruction that is sufficient to enable the student to communicate with the same level of proficiency as other students of comparable ability. Instruction should be provided to the extent that the student is physically and cognitively able to use Braille. Braille instruction may be used in combination with other special education services appropriate to the student's educational needs. The assessment of each student who is functionally blind for the purpose of developing the student's individualized education program shall include documentation of the student's strengths and weaknesses in Braille skills. Each person assisting in the development of the individualized education program for a student who is functionally blind shall receive information describing the benefits of Braille instruction. The individualized education program for each student who is functionally blind shall specify the appropriate learning medium or media based on the assessment report.
    (d) To the maximum extent appropriate, the placement shall provide the child with the opportunity to be educated with children who do not have a disability; provided that children with disabilities who are recommended to be placed into regular education classrooms are provided with supplementary services to assist the children with disabilities to benefit from the regular classroom instruction and are included on the teacher's regular education class register. Subject to the limitation of the preceding sentence, placement in special classes, separate schools or other removal of the child with a disability from the regular educational environment shall occur only when the nature of the severity of the disability is such that education in the regular classes with the use of supplementary aids and services cannot be achieved satisfactorily. The placement of English learners with disabilities shall be in non-restrictive environments which provide for integration with peers who do not have disabilities in bilingual classrooms. Annually, each January, school districts shall report data on students from non-English speaking backgrounds receiving special education and related services in public and private facilities as prescribed in Section 2-3.30. If there is a disagreement between parties involved regarding the special education placement of any child, either in-state or out-of-state, the placement is subject to impartial due process procedures described in Article 10 of the Rules and Regulations to Govern the Administration and Operation of Special Education.
    (e) No child who comes from a home in which a language other than English is the principal language used may be assigned to any class or program under this Article until he has been given, in the principal language used by the child and used in his home, tests reasonably related to his cultural environment. All testing and evaluation materials and procedures utilized for evaluation and placement shall not be linguistically, racially or culturally discriminatory.
    (f) Nothing in this Article shall be construed to require any child to undergo any physical examination or medical treatment whose parents object thereto on the grounds that such examination or treatment conflicts with his religious beliefs.
    (g) School boards or their designee shall provide to the parents of a child prior written notice of any decision (a) proposing to initiate or change, or (b) refusing to initiate or change, the identification, evaluation, or educational placement of the child or the provision of a free appropriate public education to their child, and the reasons therefor. Such written notification shall also inform the parent of the opportunity to present complaints with respect to any matter relating to the educational placement of the student, or the provision of a free appropriate public education and to have an impartial due process hearing on the complaint. The notice shall inform the parents in the parents' native language, unless it is clearly not feasible to do so, of their rights and all procedures available pursuant to this Act and the federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act of 2004 (Public Law 108-446); it shall be the responsibility of the State Superintendent to develop uniform notices setting forth the procedures available under this Act and the federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act of 2004 (Public Law 108-446) to be used by all school boards. The notice shall also inform the parents of the availability upon request of a list of free or low-cost legal and other relevant services available locally to assist parents in initiating an impartial due process hearing. The State Superintendent shall revise the uniform notices required by this subsection (g) to reflect current law and procedures at least once every 2 years. Any parent who is deaf, or does not normally communicate using spoken English, who participates in a meeting with a representative of a local educational agency for the purposes of developing an individualized educational program shall be entitled to the services of an interpreter. The State Board of Education must adopt rules to establish the criteria, standards, and competencies for a bilingual language interpreter who attends an individualized education program meeting under this subsection to assist a parent who has limited English proficiency.
    (g-5) For purposes of this subsection (g-5), "qualified professional" means an individual who holds credentials to evaluate the child in the domain or domains for which an evaluation is sought or an intern working under the direct supervision of a qualified professional, including a master's or doctoral degree candidate.
    To ensure that a parent can participate fully and effectively with school personnel in the development of appropriate educational and related services for his or her child, the parent, an independent educational evaluator, or a qualified professional retained by or on behalf of a parent or child must be afforded reasonable access to educational facilities, personnel, classrooms, and buildings and to the child as provided in this subsection (g-5). The requirements of this subsection (g-5) apply to any public school facility, building, or program and to any facility, building, or program supported in whole or in part by public funds. Prior to visiting a school, school building, or school facility, the parent, independent educational evaluator, or qualified professional may be required by the school district to inform the building principal or supervisor in writing of the proposed visit, the purpose of the visit, and the approximate duration of the visit. The visitor and the school district shall arrange the visit or visits at times that are mutually agreeable. Visitors shall comply with school safety, security, and visitation policies at all times. School district visitation policies must not conflict with this subsection (g-5). Visitors shall be required to comply with the requirements of applicable privacy laws, including those laws protecting the confidentiality of education records such as the federal Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act and the Illinois School Student Records Act. The visitor shall not disrupt the educational process.
        (1) A parent must be afforded reasonable access of
    	
sufficient duration and scope for the purpose of observing his or her child in the child's current educational placement, services, or program or for the purpose of visiting an educational placement or program proposed for the child.
        (2) An independent educational evaluator or a
    	
qualified professional retained by or on behalf of a parent or child must be afforded reasonable access of sufficient duration and scope for the purpose of conducting an evaluation of the child, the child's performance, the child's current educational program, placement, services, or environment, or any educational program, placement, services, or environment proposed for the child, including interviews of educational personnel, child observations, assessments, tests or assessments of the child's educational program, services, or placement or of any proposed educational program, services, or placement. If one or more interviews of school personnel are part of the evaluation, the interviews must be conducted at a mutually agreed upon time, date, and place that do not interfere with the school employee's school duties. The school district may limit interviews to personnel having information relevant to the child's current educational services, program, or placement or to a proposed educational service, program, or placement.
    (h) (Blank).
    (i) (Blank).
    (j) (Blank).
    (k) (Blank).
    (l) (Blank).
    (m) (Blank).
    (n) (Blank).
    (o) (Blank).
(Source: P.A. 100-122, eff. 8-18-17; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18; 100-993, eff. 8-20-18; 101-124, eff. 1-1-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-8.02a)
    Sec. 14-8.02a. Impartial due process hearing; civil action.
    (a) This Section shall apply to all impartial due process hearings requested on or after July 1, 2005. Impartial due process hearings requested before July 1, 2005 shall be governed by the rules described in Public Act 89-652.
    (a-5) For purposes of this Section and Section 14-8.02b of this Code, days shall be computed in accordance with Section 1.11 of the Statute on Statutes.
    (b) The State Board of Education shall establish an impartial due process hearing system in accordance with this Section and may, with the advice and approval of the Advisory Council on Education of Children with Disabilities, promulgate rules and regulations consistent with this Section to establish the rules and procedures for due process hearings.
    (c) (Blank).
    (d) (Blank).
    (e) (Blank).
    (f) An impartial due process hearing shall be convened upon the request of a parent, student if at least 18 years of age or emancipated, or a school district. A school district shall make a request in writing to the State Board of Education and promptly mail a copy of the request to the parents or student (if at least 18 years of age or emancipated) at the parent's or student's last known address. A request made by the parent or student shall be made in writing to the superintendent of the school district where the student resides. The superintendent shall forward the request to the State Board of Education within 5 days after receipt of the request. The request shall be filed no more than 2 years following the date the person or school district knew or should have known of the event or events forming the basis for the request. The request shall, at a minimum, contain all of the following:
        (1) The name of the student, the address of the
    	
student's residence, and the name of the school the student is attending.
        (2) In the case of homeless children (as defined
    	
under the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 11434a(2))), available contact information for the student and the name of the school the student is attending.
        (3) A description of the nature of the problem
    	
relating to the actual or proposed placement, identification, services, or evaluation of the student, including facts relating to the problem.
        (4) A proposed resolution of the problem to the
    	
extent known and available to the party at the time.
    (f-5) Within 3 days after receipt of the hearing request, the State Board of Education shall appoint a due process hearing officer using a rotating appointment system and shall notify the hearing officer of his or her appointment.
    For a school district other than a school district located in a municipality having a population exceeding 500,000, a hearing officer who is a current resident of the school district, special education cooperative, or other public entity involved in the hearing shall recuse himself or herself. A hearing officer who is a former employee of the school district, special education cooperative, or other public entity involved in the hearing shall immediately disclose the former employment to the parties and shall recuse himself or herself, unless the parties otherwise agree in writing. A hearing officer having a personal or professional interest that may conflict with his or her objectivity in the hearing shall disclose the conflict to the parties and shall recuse himself or herself unless the parties otherwise agree in writing. For purposes of this subsection an assigned hearing officer shall be considered to have a conflict of interest if, at any time prior to the issuance of his or her written decision, he or she knows or should know that he or she may receive remuneration from a party to the hearing within 3 years following the conclusion of the due process hearing.
    A party to a due process hearing shall be permitted one substitution of hearing officer as a matter of right, in accordance with procedures established by the rules adopted by the State Board of Education under this Section. The State Board of Education shall randomly select and appoint another hearing officer within 3 days after receiving notice that the appointed hearing officer is ineligible to serve or upon receiving a proper request for substitution of hearing officer. If a party withdraws its request for a due process hearing after a hearing officer has been appointed, that hearing officer shall retain jurisdiction over a subsequent hearing that involves the same parties and is requested within one year from the date of withdrawal of the previous request, unless that hearing officer is unavailable.
    Any party may raise facts that constitute a conflict of interest for the hearing officer at any time before or during the hearing and may move for recusal.
    (g) Impartial due process hearings shall be conducted pursuant to this Section and any rules and regulations promulgated by the State Board of Education consistent with this Section and other governing laws and regulations. The hearing shall address only those issues properly raised in the hearing request under subsection (f) of this Section or, if applicable, in the amended hearing request under subsection (g-15) of this Section. The hearing shall be closed to the public unless the parents request that the hearing be open to the public. The parents involved in the hearing shall have the right to have the student who is the subject of the hearing present. The hearing shall be held at a time and place which are reasonably convenient to the parties involved. Upon the request of a party, the hearing officer shall hold the hearing at a location neutral to the parties if the hearing officer determines that there is no cost for securing the use of the neutral location. Once appointed, the impartial due process hearing officer shall not communicate with the State Board of Education or its employees concerning the hearing, except that, where circumstances require, communications for administrative purposes that do not deal with substantive or procedural matters or issues on the merits are authorized, provided that the hearing officer promptly notifies all parties of the substance of the communication as a matter of record.
    (g-5) Unless the school district has previously provided prior written notice to the parent or student (if at least 18 years of age or emancipated) regarding the subject matter of the hearing request, the school district shall, within 10 days after receiving a hearing request initiated by a parent or student (if at least 18 years of age or emancipated), provide a written response to the request that shall include all of the following:
        (1) An explanation of why the school district
    	
proposed or refused to take the action or actions described in the hearing request.
        (2) A description of other options the IEP team
    	
considered and the reasons why those options were rejected.
        (3) A description of each evaluation procedure,
    	
assessment, record, report, or other evidence the school district used as the basis for the proposed or refused action or actions.
        (4) A description of the factors that are or were
    	
relevant to the school district's proposed or refused action or actions.
    (g-10) When the hearing request has been initiated by a school district, within 10 days after receiving the request, the parent or student (if at least 18 years of age or emancipated) shall provide the school district with a response that specifically addresses the issues raised in the school district's hearing request. The parent's or student's response shall be provided in writing, unless he or she is illiterate or has a disability that prevents him or her from providing a written response. The parent's or student's response may be provided in his or her native language, if other than English. In the event that illiteracy or another disabling condition prevents the parent or student from providing a written response, the school district shall assist the parent or student in providing the written response.
    (g-15) Within 15 days after receiving notice of the hearing request, the non-requesting party may challenge the sufficiency of the request by submitting its challenge in writing to the hearing officer. Within 5 days after receiving the challenge to the sufficiency of the request, the hearing officer shall issue a determination of the challenge in writing to the parties. In the event that the hearing officer upholds the challenge, the party who requested the hearing may, with the consent of the non-requesting party or hearing officer, file an amended request. Amendments are permissible for the purpose of raising issues beyond those in the initial hearing request. In addition, the party who requested the hearing may amend the request once as a matter of right by filing the amended request within 5 days after filing the initial request. An amended request, other than an amended request as a matter of right, shall be filed by the date determined by the hearing officer, but in no event any later than 5 days prior to the date of the hearing. If an amended request, other than an amended request as a matter of right, raises issues that were not part of the initial request, the applicable timeline for a hearing, including the timeline under subsection (g-20) of this Section, shall recommence.
    (g-20) Within 15 days after receiving a request for a hearing from a parent or student (if at least 18 years of age or emancipated) or, in the event that the school district requests a hearing, within 15 days after initiating the request, the school district shall convene a resolution meeting with the parent and relevant members of the IEP team who have specific knowledge of the facts contained in the request for the purpose of resolving the problem that resulted in the request. The resolution meeting shall include a representative of the school district who has decision-making authority on behalf of the school district. Unless the parent is accompanied by an attorney at the resolution meeting, the school district may not include an attorney representing the school district.
    The resolution meeting may not be waived unless agreed to in writing by the school district and the parent or student (if at least 18 years of age or emancipated) or the parent or student (if at least 18 years of age or emancipated) and the school district agree in writing to utilize mediation in place of the resolution meeting. If either party fails to cooperate in the scheduling or convening of the resolution meeting, the hearing officer may order an extension of the timeline for completion of the resolution meeting or, upon the motion of a party and at least 7 days after ordering the non-cooperating party to cooperate, order the dismissal of the hearing request or the granting of all relief set forth in the request, as appropriate.
    In the event that the school district and the parent or student (if at least 18 years of age or emancipated) agree to a resolution of the problem that resulted in the hearing request, the terms of the resolution shall be committed to writing and signed by the parent or student (if at least 18 years of age or emancipated) and the representative of the school district with decision-making authority. The agreement shall be legally binding and shall be enforceable in any State or federal court of competent jurisdiction. In the event that the parties utilize the resolution meeting process, the process shall continue until no later than the 30th day following the receipt of the hearing request by the non-requesting party (or as properly extended by order of the hearing officer) to resolve the issues underlying the request, at which time the timeline for completion of the impartial due process hearing shall commence. The State Board of Education may, by rule, establish additional procedures for the conduct of resolution meetings.
    (g-25) If mutually agreed to in writing, the parties to a hearing request may request State-sponsored mediation as a substitute for the resolution process described in subsection (g-20) of this Section or may utilize mediation at the close of the resolution process if all issues underlying the hearing request have not been resolved through the resolution process.
    (g-30) If mutually agreed to in writing, the parties to a hearing request may waive the resolution process described in subsection (g-20) of this Section. Upon signing a written agreement to waive the resolution process, the parties shall be required to forward the written waiver to the hearing officer appointed to the case within 2 business days following the signing of the waiver by the parties. The timeline for the impartial due process hearing shall commence on the date of the signing of the waiver by the parties.
    (g-35) The timeline for completing the impartial due process hearing, as set forth in subsection (h) of this Section, shall be initiated upon the occurrence of any one of the following events:
        (1) The unsuccessful completion of the resolution
    	
process as described in subsection (g-20) of this Section.
        (2) The mutual agreement of the parties to waive the
    	
resolution process as described in subsection (g-25) or (g-30) of this Section.
    (g-40) The hearing officer shall convene a prehearing conference no later than 14 days before the scheduled date for the due process hearing for the general purpose of aiding in the fair, orderly, and expeditious conduct of the hearing. The hearing officer shall provide the parties with written notice of the prehearing conference at least 7 days in advance of the conference. The written notice shall require the parties to notify the hearing officer by a date certain whether they intend to participate in the prehearing conference. The hearing officer may conduct the prehearing conference in person or by telephone. Each party shall at the prehearing conference (1) disclose whether it is represented by legal counsel or intends to retain legal counsel; (2) clarify matters it believes to be in dispute in the case and the specific relief being sought; (3) disclose whether there are any additional evaluations for the student that it intends to introduce into the hearing record that have not been previously disclosed to the other parties; (4) disclose a list of all documents it intends to introduce into the hearing record, including the date and a brief description of each document; and (5) disclose the names of all witnesses it intends to call to testify at the hearing. The hearing officer shall specify the order of presentation to be used at the hearing. If the prehearing conference is held by telephone, the parties shall transmit the information required in this paragraph in such a manner that it is available to all parties at the time of the prehearing conference. The State Board of Education may, by rule, establish additional procedures for the conduct of prehearing conferences.
    (g-45) The impartial due process hearing officer shall not initiate or participate in any ex parte communications with the parties, except to arrange the date, time, and location of the prehearing conference, due process hearing, or other status conferences convened at the discretion of the hearing officer and to receive confirmation of whether a party intends to participate in the prehearing conference.
    (g-50) The parties shall disclose and provide to each other any evidence which they intend to submit into the hearing record no later than 5 days before the hearing. Any party to a hearing has the right to prohibit the introduction of any evidence at the hearing that has not been disclosed to that party at least 5 days before the hearing. The party requesting a hearing shall not be permitted at the hearing to raise issues that were not raised in the party's initial or amended request, unless otherwise permitted in this Section.
    (g-55) All reasonable efforts must be made by the parties to present their respective cases at the hearing within a cumulative period of 7 days. When scheduling hearing dates, the hearing officer shall schedule the final day of the hearing no more than 30 calendar days after the first day of the hearing unless good cause is shown. This subsection (g-55) shall not be applied in a manner that (i) denies any party to the hearing a fair and reasonable allocation of time and opportunity to present its case in its entirety or (ii) deprives any party to the hearing of the safeguards accorded under the federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act of 2004 (Public Law 108-446), regulations promulgated under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act of 2004, or any other applicable law. The school district shall present evidence that the special education needs of the child have been appropriately identified and that the special education program and related services proposed to meet the needs of the child are adequate, appropriate, and available. Any party to the hearing shall have the right to (1) be represented by counsel and be accompanied and advised by individuals with special knowledge or training with respect to the problems of children with disabilities, at the party's own expense; (2) present evidence and confront and cross-examine witnesses; (3) move for the exclusion of witnesses from the hearing until they are called to testify, provided, however, that this provision may not be invoked to exclude the individual designated by a party to assist that party or its representative in the presentation of the case; (4) obtain a written or electronic verbatim record of the proceedings within 30 days of receipt of a written request from the parents by the school district; and (5) obtain a written decision, including findings of fact and conclusions of law, within 10 calendar days, excluding Saturday, Sunday, and any State holiday, after the conclusion of the hearing. If at issue, the school district shall present evidence that it has properly identified and evaluated the nature and severity of the student's suspected or identified disability and that, if the student has been or should have been determined eligible for special education and related services, that it is providing or has offered a free appropriate public education to the student in the least restrictive environment, consistent with procedural safeguards and in accordance with an individualized educational program. At any time prior to the conclusion of the hearing, the impartial due process hearing officer shall have the authority to require additional information and order independent evaluations for the student at the expense of the school district. The State Board of Education and the school district shall share equally the costs of providing a written or electronic verbatim record of the proceedings. Any party may request that the due process hearing officer issue a subpoena to compel the testimony of witnesses or the production of documents relevant to the resolution of the hearing. Whenever a person refuses to comply with any subpoena issued under this Section, the circuit court of the county in which that hearing is pending, on application of the impartial hearing officer or the party requesting the issuance of the subpoena, may compel compliance through the contempt powers of the court in the same manner as if the requirements of a subpoena issued by the court had been disobeyed.
    (h) The impartial hearing officer shall issue a written decision, including findings of fact and conclusions of law, within 10 calendar days, excluding Saturday, Sunday, and any State holiday, after the conclusion of the hearing and send by certified mail a copy of the decision to the parents or student (if the student requests the hearing), the school district, the director of special education, legal representatives of the parties, and the State Board of Education. Unless the hearing officer has granted specific extensions of time at the request of a party, a final decision, including the clarification of a decision requested under this subsection, shall be reached and mailed to the parties named above not later than 45 days after the initiation of the timeline for conducting the hearing, as described in subsection (g-35) of this Section. The decision shall specify the educational and related services that shall be provided to the student in accordance with the student's needs and the timeline for which the school district shall submit evidence to the State Board of Education to demonstrate compliance with the hearing officer's decision in the event that the decision orders the school district to undertake corrective action. The hearing officer shall retain jurisdiction for the sole purpose of considering a request for clarification of the final decision submitted in writing by a party to the impartial hearing officer within 5 days after receipt of the decision. A copy of the request for clarification shall specify the portions of the decision for which clarification is sought and shall be mailed to all parties of record and to the State Board of Education. The request shall operate to stay implementation of those portions of the decision for which clarification is sought, pending action on the request by the hearing officer, unless the parties otherwise agree. The hearing officer shall issue a clarification of the specified portion of the decision or issue a partial or full denial of the request in writing within 10 days of receipt of the request and mail copies to all parties to whom the decision was mailed. This subsection does not permit a party to request, or authorize a hearing officer to entertain, reconsideration of the decision itself. The statute of limitations for seeking review of the decision shall be tolled from the date the request is submitted until the date the hearing officer acts upon the request. The hearing officer's decision shall be binding upon the school district and the parents unless a civil action is commenced.
    (i) Any party to an impartial due process hearing aggrieved by the final written decision of the impartial due process hearing officer shall have the right to commence a civil action with respect to the issues presented in the impartial due process hearing. That civil action shall be brought in any court of competent jurisdiction within 120 days after a copy of the decision of the impartial due process hearing officer is mailed to the party as provided in subsection (h). The civil action authorized by this subsection shall not be exclusive of any rights or causes of action otherwise available. The commencement of a civil action under this subsection shall operate as a supersedeas. In any action brought under this subsection the Court shall receive the records of the impartial due process hearing, shall hear additional evidence at the request of a party, and, basing its decision on the preponderance of the evidence, shall grant such relief as the court determines is appropriate. In any instance where a school district willfully disregards applicable regulations or statutes regarding a child covered by this Article, and which disregard has been detrimental to the child, the school district shall be liable for any reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the parent in connection with proceedings under this Section.
    (j) During the pendency of any administrative or judicial proceeding conducted pursuant to this Section, including mediation (if the school district or other public entity voluntarily agrees to participate in mediation), unless the school district and the parents or student (if at least 18 years of age or emancipated) otherwise agree, the student shall remain in his or her present educational placement and continue in his or her present eligibility status and special education and related services, if any. If mediation fails to resolve the dispute between the parties, or if the parties do not agree to use mediation, the parent (or student if 18 years of age or older or emancipated) shall have 10 days after the mediation concludes, or after a party declines to use mediation, to file a request for a due process hearing in order to continue to invoke the "stay-put" provisions of this subsection (j). If applying for initial admission to the school district, the student shall, with the consent of the parents (if the student is not at least 18 years of age or emancipated), be placed in the school district program until all such proceedings have been completed. The costs for any special education and related services or placement incurred following 60 school days after the initial request for evaluation shall be borne by the school district if the services or placement is in accordance with the final determination as to the special education and related services or placement that must be provided to the child, provided that during that 60-day period there have been no delays caused by the child's parent. The requirements and procedures of this subsection (j) shall be included in the uniform notices developed by the State Superintendent under subsection (g) of Section 14-8.02 of this Code.
    (k) Whenever the parents of a child of the type described in Section 14-1.02 are not known or are unavailable or the child is a youth in care as defined in Section 4d of the Children and Family Services Act, a person shall be assigned to serve as surrogate parent for the child in matters relating to the identification, evaluation, and educational placement of the child and the provision of a free appropriate public education to the child. Persons shall be assigned as surrogate parents by the State Superintendent of Education. The State Board of Education shall promulgate rules and regulations establishing qualifications of those persons and their responsibilities and the procedures to be followed in making assignments of persons as surrogate parents. Surrogate parents shall not be employees of the school district, an agency created by joint agreement under Section 10-22.31, an agency involved in the education or care of the student, or the State Board of Education. Services of any person assigned as surrogate parent shall terminate if the parent becomes available unless otherwise requested by the parents. The assignment of a person as surrogate parent at no time supersedes, terminates, or suspends the parents' legal authority relative to the child. Any person participating in good faith as surrogate parent on behalf of the child before school officials or a hearing officer shall have immunity from civil or criminal liability that otherwise might result by reason of that participation, except in cases of willful and wanton misconduct.
    (l) At all stages of the hearing, the hearing officer shall require that interpreters be made available by the school district for persons who are deaf or for persons whose normally spoken language is other than English.
    (m) If any provision of this Section or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity of that provision or application does not affect other provisions or applications of the Section that can be given effect without the invalid application or provision, and to this end the provisions of this Section are severable, unless otherwise provided by this Section.
(Source: P.A. 100-122, eff. 8-18-17; 100-159, eff. 8-18-17; 100-849, eff. 8-14-18; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-8.02b)
    Sec. 14-8.02b. Expedited Hearings.
    (a) The changes made to this Section by this amendatory Act of the 94th General Assembly shall apply to all expedited hearings requested on or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 94th General Assembly.
    (b) Unless otherwise provided by this Section, the provisions of Section 14-8.02a are applicable to this Section. The State Board of Education shall provide for the conduct of expedited hearings in accordance with the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, Public Law 108-446, 20 USC Sections 1400 et seq. (hereafter IDEA).
    (c) An expedited hearing may be requested by:
        (i) a parent or student if the student is at least 18
    	
years of age or emancipated, if there is a disagreement with regard to a determination that the student's behavior was not a manifestation of the student's disability, or if there is a disagreement regarding the district's decision to move the student to an interim alternative educational setting for behavior at school, on school premises, or at a school function involving a weapon or drug or for behavior at school, on school premises, or at a school function involving the infliction of serious bodily injury by the student, as defined by IDEA pursuant to Section 615(k)(1)(G); and
        (ii) a school district, if school personnel believe
    	
that maintaining the current placement of the student is substantially likely to result in injury to the student or others pursuant to Section 615(k)(3)(A) of IDEA.
    (d) A school district shall make a request in writing to the State Board of Education and promptly mail a copy of the request to the parents or student (if at least 18 years of age or emancipated) at the parents' or student's last known address. A request made by the parent or student (if at least 18 years of age or emancipated) shall be made in writing to the superintendent of the school district in which the student resides, who shall forward the request to the State Board of Education within one business day of receipt of the request. Upon receipt of the request, the State Board of Education shall appoint a due process hearing officer using a rotating appointment system and shall notify the hearing officer of his or her appointment.
    (e) A request for an expedited hearing initiated by a district for the sole purpose of moving a student from his or her current placement to an interim alternative educational setting because of dangerous misconduct must be accompanied by all documentation that substantiates the district's position that maintaining the student in his or her current placement is substantially likely to result in injury to the student or to others. Also, the documentation shall include written statements of (1) whether the district is represented by legal counsel or intends to retain legal counsel; (2) the matters the district believes to be in dispute in the case and the specific relief being sought; and (3) the names of all witnesses the district intends to call to testify at the hearing.
    (f) An expedited hearing requested by the parent or student (if at least 18 years of age or emancipated) to challenge the removal of the student from his or her current placement to an interim alternative educational setting or a manifestation determination made by the district as described in IDEA shall include a written statement as to the reason the parent believes that the action taken by the district is not supported by substantial evidence and all relevant documentation in the parent's possession. Also, the documentation shall include written statements of (1) whether the parent is represented by legal counsel or intends to retain legal counsel; (2) the matters the parent believes to be in dispute in the case and the specific relief being sought; and (3) the names of all witnesses the parent intends to call to testify at the hearing.
    (g) Except as otherwise described in this subsection (g), the school district shall be required to convene the resolution meeting described in subsection (g-20) of Section 14-8.02a of this Code unless the parties choose to utilize mediation in place of the resolution meeting or waive the resolution meeting in accordance with procedures described in subsection (g-30) of Section 14-8.02a of this Code. The resolution meeting shall be convened within 7 days after the date that the expedited hearing request is received by the district.
    (h) The hearing officer shall not initiate or participate in any ex parte communications with the parties, except to arrange the date, time, and location of the expedited hearing. The hearing officer shall contact the parties within 5 days after appointment and set a hearing date which shall be no earlier than 15 calendar days following the school district's receipt of the expedited hearing request or upon completion of the resolution meeting, if earlier, and no later than 20 school days after receipt of the expedited hearing request. The hearing officer shall set a date no less than 2 business days prior to the date of the expedited hearing for the parties to exchange documentation and a list of witnesses. The non-requesting party shall not be required to submit a written response to the expedited hearing request. The parties may request mediation. The mediation shall not delay the timeline set by the hearing officer for conducting the expedited hearing. The length of the hearing shall not exceed 2 days unless good cause is shown. Good cause shall be determined by the hearing officer in his or her sole discretion and may include the unavailability of a party or witness to attend the scheduled hearing.
    (i) Any party to the hearing shall have the right to (1) be represented by counsel and be accompanied and advised by individuals with special knowledge or training with respect to the problems of children with disabilities, at the party's own expense; (2) present evidence and confront and cross-examine witnesses; (3) move for the exclusion of witnesses from the hearing until they are called to testify, provided, however, that this provision may not be invoked to exclude the individual designated by a party to assist that party or its representative in the presentation of the case; (4) in accord with the provisions of subsection (g-55) of Section 14-8.02a, obtain a written or electronic verbatim record of the proceedings; and (5) obtain a written decision, including findings of fact and conclusions of law, within 10 school days after the conclusion of the hearing.
    (j) The State Board of Education and the school district shall share equally the costs of providing a written or electronic verbatim record of the proceedings. Any party may request that the hearing officer issue a subpoena to compel the testimony of witnesses or the production of documents relevant to the resolution of the hearing. Whenever a person refuses to comply with any subpoena issued under this Section, the circuit court of the county in which that hearing is pending, on application of the impartial hearing officer or the party requesting the issuance of the subpoena, may compel compliance through the contempt powers of the court in the same manner as if the requirements of a subpoena issued by the court had been disobeyed.
    (k) The impartial hearing officer shall issue a final written decision, including findings of fact and conclusions of law, within 10 school days after the conclusion of the hearing and mail a copy of the decision to the parents or student (if the student requests the hearing), the school district, the director of special education, legal representatives of the parties, and the State Board of Education.
    (l) The hearing officer presiding over the expedited hearing shall hear only that issue or issues identified by IDEA as proper for expedited hearings, leaving all other issues to be heard under a separate request to be initiated and processed in accordance with the hearing procedures provided for in this Article and in accordance with the implementing regulations.
(Source: P.A. 94-1100, eff. 2-2-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-8.02c)
    Sec. 14-8.02c. Due process hearing officers.
    (a) The State Board of Education shall establish a corps of hearing officers in accordance with this Section and may, with the advice and approval of the Advisory Council on Education of Children with Disabilities, adopt rules consistent with this Section to establish the qualifications of and application process for hearing officers.
    (b) Hearing officers must, at a minimum, (i) possess a master's or doctor's degree in education or another field related to disability issues or a juris doctor degree; (ii) have knowledge of and the ability to understand the requirements of the federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, Article 14 of this Code, the implementation of rules or regulations of these federal and State statutes, and the legal interpretation of the statutes, rules, and regulations by federal and State courts; (iii) have the knowledge and ability to conduct hearings in accordance with appropriate, standard, legal practice; and (iv) have the knowledge and ability to render and write decisions in accordance with appropriate, standard, legal practice. Current employees of the State Board of Education, school districts, special education cooperatives, regional service areas or centers, regional educational cooperatives, State-operated elementary and secondary schools, or private providers of special education facilities or programs may not serve as hearing officers.
    (c) If, at any time, the State Board of Education determines that additional hearing officers are needed, the State Board of Education shall recruit hearing officer candidates who meet the criteria set forth in subsection (b) of this Section.
    (d) Candidates shall be screened by a 7-member Screening Committee consisting of the following: the Attorney General or his or her designee; the State Superintendent of Education or his or her designee; 3 members appointed by the State Superintendent of Education, one of whom shall be a parent of an individual who is or at one time was eligible to receive special education and related services in an Illinois school district, another of whom shall be a director of special education for an Illinois school district or special education joint agreement, and the other of whom shall be an adult with a disability; and 2 members appointed by the Attorney General, one of whom shall be a parent of an individual who is or at one time was eligible to receive special education and related services in an Illinois school district and the other of whom shall be an experienced special education hearing officer who is not a candidate for appointment under this Section. The chairperson of the Advisory Council on Education of Children with Disabilities or his or her designee shall serve on the Screening Committee as an ex-officio, non-voting member. Appointments and reappointments to the Screening Committee shall be for terms of 3 years. In the event that a member vacates a seat on the Screening Committee prior to the expiration of his or her term, a new member shall be appointed, shall serve the balance of the vacating member's term, and shall be eligible for subsequent reappointment. The Screening Committee shall elect a chairperson from among its voting members. Members of the Screening Committee shall serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed by the State Board of Education for their reasonable expenses. The Screening Committee shall review hearing officer applications and supporting information, interview candidates, and recommend candidates to the Advisory Council on Education of Children with Disabilities based upon objective criteria the Screening Committee develops and makes available to the public. All discussions and deliberations of the Screening Committee and Advisory Council referenced anywhere in this Section pertaining to the review of applications of hearing officer candidates, the interviewing of hearing officer candidates, the recommendation of hearing officer candidates for appointment, and the recommendation of hearing officers for reappointment are excepted from the requirements of the Open Meetings Act, pursuant to item (15) of subsection (c) of Section 2 of the Open Meetings Act.
    (e) All hearing officer candidates recommended to the Advisory Council on Education of Children with Disabilities shall successfully complete initial training, as established by the contract between the State Board of Education and the training entity, as described in subsection (f), in order to be eligible to serve as an impartial due process hearing officer. The training shall include, at a minimum, instruction in federal and State law, rules, and regulations, federal regulatory interpretations and State and federal court decisions regarding special education and relevant general educational issues, diagnostic procedures, information about disabilities, instruction on conducting effective and impartial hearings in accordance with appropriate, standard, legal practice (including without limitation the handling of amended requests), and instruction in rendering and writing hearing decisions in accordance with appropriate, standard, legal practice. The training must be conducted in an unbiased manner by educational and legal experts, including qualified individuals from outside the public educational system. Upon the completion of the initial training, the Advisory Council on Education of Children with Disabilities, applying objective selection criteria it has developed and made available to the public, shall go into executive session and select the number of hearing officers deemed necessary by the State Board of Education from those candidates who have successfully completed the initial training. Upon selecting the candidates, the Advisory Council shall forward its recommendations to the State Superintendent of Education for final selection. The hearing officers appointed by the State Superintendent of Education shall serve an initial term of one year, subject to any earlier permissible termination by the State Board of Education.
    (f) The State Board of Education shall, through a competitive application process, enter into a contract with an outside entity to establish and conduct mandatory training programs for hearing officers. The State Board of Education shall also, through a competitive application process, enter into a contract with an outside entity, other than the entity providing mandatory training, to conduct an annual evaluation of each hearing officer and to investigate complaints against hearing officers, in accordance with procedures established by the State Board of Education in consultation with the Screening Committee. The invitation for applications shall set forth minimum qualifications for eligible applicants. Each contract under this subsection (f) may be renewed on an annual basis, subject to appropriation. The State Board of Education shall conduct a new competitive application process at least once every 3 years after the initial contract is granted. The Screening Committee shall review the training proposals and evaluation and investigation proposals and forward them, with recommendations in rank order, to the State Board of Education.
    (g) The evaluation and investigation entity described in subsection (f) of this Section shall conduct an annual written evaluation of each hearing officer and provide the evaluation to the Screening Committee for its consideration in the reappointment process. The evaluation shall include a review of written decisions and any communications regarding a hearing officer's conduct and performance by participants in impartial due process hearings and their representatives. Each hearing officer shall be provided with a copy of his or her written evaluation report and shall have an opportunity, within 30 days after receipt, to review the evaluation with the evaluation and investigation entity and submit written comments. The annual evaluation of each hearing officer, along with the hearing officer's written comments, if any, shall be submitted to the Screening Committee for consideration no later than April 1 of each calendar year. The Screening Committee, based on objective criteria and any evaluation reports prepared by the training entity, shall, on an annual basis, recommend whether the hearing officer should be reappointed for a one-year term and shall forward its recommendations to the Advisory Council on Education of Children with Disabilities. The Advisory Council shall go into executive session and shall review the recommendations of the Screening Committee for the purpose of either ratifying or rejecting the recommendations of the Screening Committee. The Advisory Council shall then forward its list of ratified and rejected appointees to the State Superintendent of Education, who shall determine the final selection of hearing officers for reappointment. Each reappointed hearing officer shall serve a term of one year, subject to any earlier permissible termination by the State Board of Education.
    (h) Hearing officers shall receive a base annual stipend and per diem allowance for each hearing at a rate established by the State Board of Education. The State Board of Education shall provide hearing officers with access to relevant court decisions, impartial hearing officer decisions with child-specific identifying information deleted, statutory and regulatory changes, and federal regulatory interpretations. The State Board of Education shall index and maintain a reporting system of impartial due process hearing decisions and shall make these decisions available for review by the public after deleting child-specific identifying information.
    (i) A hearing officer may be terminated by the State Board of Education for just cause if, after written notice is provided to the hearing officer, appropriate timely corrective action is not taken. For purposes of this subsection (i), just cause shall be (1) the failure or refusal to accept assigned cases without good cause; (2) the failure or refusal to fulfill his or her duties as a hearing officer in a timely manner; (3) consistent disregard for applicable laws and rules in the conduct of hearings; (4) consistent failure to conduct himself or herself in a patient, dignified, and courteous manner to parties, witnesses, counsel, and other participants in hearings; (5) the failure to accord parties or their representatives a full and fair opportunity to be heard in matters coming before him or her; (6) violating applicable laws regarding privacy and confidentiality of records or information; (7) manifesting, by words or conduct, bias or prejudice based upon race, sex, religion, disability, or national origin; (8) failure to recuse himself or herself from a hearing in which he or she has a personal, professional, or financial conflict of interest that he or she knew or should have known existed at any time prior to or during the hearing; (9) conviction in any jurisdiction of any felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or (10) falsification of a material fact on his or her application to serve as a hearing officer. In addition, a hearing officer who, as a result of events occurring after appointment, no longer meets the minimum requirements set forth in this Section, shall be disqualified to complete the balance of his or her term.
(Source: P.A. 94-1100, eff. 2-2-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-8.02d)
    Sec. 14-8.02d. Evaluation of due process hearing system. The State Board of Education shall monitor, review, and evaluate the impartial due process hearing system on a regular basis by a process that includes a review of written decisions and evaluations by participants in impartial due process hearings and their representatives. In conjunction with the Annual State Report on Special Education Performance, the State Board of Education shall submit data on the performance of the due process hearing system, including data on timeliness of hearings and an analysis of the issues and disability categories underlying hearing requests during the period covered by the Annual State Report. The data provided for the Annual State Report must be submitted to the members of the State Board of Education, the State Superintendent of Education, the Advisory Council on Education of Children with Disabilities, and the Screening Committee established under Section 14-8.02c of this Code and must be made available to the public.
(Source: P.A. 94-1100, eff. 2-2-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-8.02e)
    Sec. 14-8.02e. State complaint procedures.
    (a) The State Board of Education shall adopt State complaint procedures, consistent with Sections 300.151, 300.152, and 300.153 of Title 34 of the Code of Federal Regulations. The State Board of Education, by rule, shall establish State complaint procedures consistent with this Section. A school district or other public entity shall be required to submit a written response to a complaint within the time prescribed by the State Board of Education following receipt of the complaint. A copy of the response and all documentation submitted by the respondent to the State Board of Education, including corrective action compliance documentation, must be simultaneously provided by the respondent to the complainant or to the attorney for the complainant. If the complaint was filed by an individual other than a parent of a child who is the subject of the complaint (or the child if the child has reached majority or is emancipated and has assumed responsibility for his or her own educational decisions) and the complaint is about a specific identifiable child or children, then appropriate written signed releases must be obtained prior to the release of any documentation or information to the complainant or the attorney representing the complainant.
    (b) For a complaint made under procedures authorized under this Section alleging a delay or denial of special education or related services in the 2016-2017 or 2017-2018 school year by a school district organized under Article 34 as a result of the adoption of policies and procedures identified by the State Board of Education as unlawful, the complaint must be filed on or before September 30, 2021. This filing deadline must be included in the written notification sent by the school district under subsection (b) of Section 14-8.02g.
(Source: P.A. 101-507, eff. 8-23-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-8.02f)
    Sec. 14-8.02f. Individualized education program meeting protections.
    (a) (Blank).
    (b) This subsection (b) applies only to a school district organized under Article 34. No later than 10 calendar days prior to a child's individualized education program meeting or as soon as possible if a meeting is scheduled within 10 calendar days with written parental consent, the school board or school personnel must provide the child's parent or guardian with a written notification of the services that require a specific data collection procedure from the school district for services related to the child's individualized education program. The notification must indicate, with a checkbox, whether specific data has been collected for the child's individualized education program services. For purposes of this subsection (b), individualized education program services must include, but are not limited to, paraprofessional support, an extended school year, transportation, therapeutic day school, and services for specific learning disabilities.
    (c) Beginning on July 1, 2020, no later than 3 school days prior to a meeting to determine a child's eligibility for special education and related services or to review a child's individualized education program, or as soon as possible if an individualized education program meeting is scheduled within 3 school days with the written consent of the child's parent or guardian, the local education agency must provide the child's parent or guardian copies of all written material that will be considered by the individualized education program team at the meeting so that the parent or guardian may participate in the meeting as a fully-informed team member. The parent or guardian shall have the option of choosing from the available methods of delivery, which must include regular mail and picking up the materials at school. For a meeting to determine the child's eligibility for special education, the written material must include all evaluations and collected data that will be considered at the meeting. For a child who is already eligible for special education and related services, the written material must include a copy of all individualized education program components that will be discussed by the individualized education program team, other than the components related to the educational and related service minutes proposed for the child and the child's placement. Parents shall also be informed of their right to review and copy their child's school student records prior to any special education eligibility or individualized education program review meeting, subject to the requirements of applicable federal and State law.
    (d) Local education agencies must make logs that record the delivery of related services administered under the child's individualized education program and the minutes of each type of related service that has been administered available to the child's parent or guardian at any time upon request of the child's parent or guardian. For purposes of this subsection (d), related services for which a log must be made are: speech and language services, occupational therapy services, physical therapy services, school social work services, school counseling services, school psychology services, and school nursing services. The local education agency must inform the child's parent or guardian within 20 school days from the beginning of the school year or upon establishment of an individualized education program of his or her ability to request those related service logs.
    (d-5) If, at a meeting to develop or revise a child's individualized education program, the individualized education program team determines that a certain service is required in order for the child to receive a free, appropriate public education and that service is not implemented within 10 school days after the service was to be initiated as set forth by the child's individualized education program, then the local education agency shall provide the child's parent or guardian with written notification that the service has not yet been implemented. The notification must be provided to the child's parent or guardian within 3 school days of the local education agency's non-compliance with the child's individualized education program and must inform the parent or guardian about the school district's procedures for requesting compensatory services. In this subsection (d-5), "school days" does not include days where a child is absent from school for reasons unrelated to a lack of individualized education program services or when the service is available, but the child is unavailable.
    (e) The State Board of Education may create a telephone hotline to address complaints regarding the special education services or lack of special education services of a school district subject to this Section. If a hotline is created, it must be available to all students enrolled in the school district, parents or guardians of those students, and school personnel. If a hotline is created, any complaints received through the hotline must be registered and recorded with the State Board's monitor of special education policies. No student, parent or guardian, or member of school personnel may be retaliated against for submitting a complaint through a telephone hotline created by the State Board under this subsection (e).
    (f) A school district subject to this Section may not use any measure that would prevent or delay an individualized education program team from adding a service to the program or create a time restriction in which a service is prohibited from being added to the program. The school district may not build functions into its computer software that would remove any services from a student's individualized education program without the approval of the program team and may not prohibit the program team from adding a service to the program.
(Source: P.A. 100-993, eff. 8-20-18; 101-515, eff. 8-23-19; 101-598, eff. 12-6-19; 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-8.02g)
    Sec. 14-8.02g. Written notification required for delays and denials of special education services.
    (a) This Section applies only to a school district organized under Article 34.
    (b) With respect to a student enrolled in the school district for or to whom appropriate special education or related services may have been delayed or denied in the 2016-2017 or 2017-2018 school year as a result of the adoption of policies and procedures identified by the State Board of Education as unlawful, the school district must provide a separate written notification no later than 30 days after the first school day of the 2019-2020 school year to (i) the parent or guardian of the student, (ii) a designated representative of the student, (iii) the student if he or she is an emancipated minor, or (iv) the student if he or she has reached the age of majority and does not have a designated representative that states that appropriate relief may be available through a State complaint procedure authorized under Section 14-8.02e, State-sponsored mediation, or an impartial due process hearing under Section 14-8.02a. The written notification must include contact information for the State Board of Education, a list of organizations that provide free or low-cost legal services, advocacy, and advice on special education matters, and the filing deadline under subsection (b) of Section 14-8.02e. The written notification must be posted on the home page of the school district's public website and must, at least once, be included with any written informational materials for parents sent home with the student.
(Source: P.A. 101-507, eff. 8-23-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-8.02h)
    Sec. 14-8.02h. Response to scientific, research-based intervention.
    (a) In this Section, "response to scientific, research-based intervention" or "multi-tiered system of support" means a tiered process of appropriate instruction and support that utilizes differentiated instructional strategies for students, provides students with an evidence-based curriculum and interventions aligned with State standards, continuously monitors student performance using scientific, research-based progress monitoring instruments, and makes data-driven educational decisions based on a student's response to the interventions. Response to scientific, research-based intervention or a multi-tiered system of support uses a problem-solving method to define the problem, analyzes the problem using data to determine why there is a discrepancy between what is expected and what is occurring, establishes one or more student performance goals, develops an intervention plan to address the performance goals, and delineates how the student's progress will be monitored and how implementation integrity will be ensured.
    (b) (Blank).
    (c) The response to scientific, research-based intervention or a multi-tiered system of support process should use a collaborative team approach and include the engagement of and regular communication with the child's parent or guardian. The parent or guardian of a child shall be provided with written notice of the school district's use of scientific, research-based intervention or a multi-tiered system of support for the child and may be part of the collaborative team approach at the discretion of the school district. The parent or guardian shall be provided all data collected and reviewed by the school district with regard to the child in the scientific, research-based intervention or multi-tiered system of support process. The State Board of Education may provide guidance to school districts and identify available resources related to facilitating parent or guardian engagement in the response to scientific, research-based intervention or a multi-tiered system of support process.
    (d) Nothing in this Section affects the responsibility of a school district to identify, locate, and evaluate children with disabilities who are in need of special education services in accordance with the federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, this Code, or any applicable federal or State rules.
(Source: P.A. 101-515, eff. 8-23-19; 101-598, eff. 12-6-19; 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-8.03) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-8.03)
    Sec. 14-8.03. Transition services.
    (a) For purposes of this Section, "transition services" means a coordinated set of activities for a child with a disability that (i) is designed to be within a results-oriented process that is focused on improving the academic and functional achievement of the child with a disability to facilitate the child's movement from school to post-school activities, including post-secondary education, vocational education, integrated employment (including supported employment), continuing and adult education, adult services, independent living, or community participation; (ii) is based on the individual child's needs, taking into account the child's strengths, preferences, and interests; and (iii) includes instruction, related services, community experiences, the development of employment and other post-school adult living objectives, and, if appropriate, acquisition of daily living skills, benefits planning, work incentives education, and the provision of a functional vocational evaluation. Transition services for a child with a disability may be special education, if provided as specially designed instruction, or a related service if required to assist a child with a disability to benefit from special education.
    (a-5) Beginning no later than the first individualized education plan (IEP) in effect when the student turns age 14 1/2 (or younger if determined appropriate by the IEP Team) and updated annually thereafter, the IEP must include (i) measurable post-secondary goals based upon age-appropriate transition assessments and other information available regarding the student that are related to training, education, employment, and independent living skills and (ii) the transition services needed to assist the student in reaching those goals, including courses of study.
    (b) Transition planning must be conducted as part of the IEP process and must be governed by the procedures applicable to the development, review, and revision of the IEP, including notices to the parents and student, parent and student participation, and annual review. To appropriately assess and develop IEP transition goals and transition services for a child with a disability, additional participants may be necessary and may be invited by the school district, parent, or student to participate in the transition planning process. Additional participants may include without limitation a representative from the Department of Human Services or another State agency, a case coordinator, or persons representing other public or community agencies or services, such as adult service providers or public community colleges. The IEP shall identify each person responsible for coordinating and delivering transition services. If the IEP team determines that the student requires transition services from a public or private entity outside of the school district, the IEP team shall identify potential outside resources, assign one or more IEP team members to contact the appropriate outside entities, make the necessary referrals, provide any information and documents necessary to complete the referral, follow up with the entity to ensure that the student has been successfully linked to the entity, and monitor the student's progress to determine if the student's IEP transition goals and benchmarks are being met. The student's IEP shall indicate one or more specific time periods during the school year when the IEP team shall review the services provided by the outside entity and the student's progress in such activities. The public school's responsibility for delivering educational services does not extend beyond the time the student leaves school or when the student's eligibility ends due to age under this Article.
    (c) A school district shall submit annually a summary of each eligible student's IEP transition goals and transition services resulting from the IEP Team meeting to the appropriate local Transition Planning Committee. If students with disabilities who are ineligible for special education services request transition services, local public school districts shall assist those students by identifying post-secondary school goals, delivering appropriate education services, and coordinating with other agencies and services for assistance.
(Source: P.A. 98-517, eff. 8-22-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-8.04) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-8.04)
    Sec. 14-8.04. Supported employment. The school board that is the governing body of any secondary school in this State that provides special education services and facilities for children with disabilities shall include, as part of preparing the transition planning for children with disabilities who are 16 years of age or more, consideration of a supported employment component with experiences in integrated community settings for those eligible children with disabilities who have been determined at an IEP meeting to be in need of participation in the supported employment services offered pursuant to this Section.
    Supported employment services made available as part of transition planning under this Section shall be designed and developed for school boards by the State Board of Education, in consultation with programs such as Project CHOICES (Children Have Opportunities In Integrated Community Environments), parents and advocates of children with disabilities, and the Departments of Central Management Services and Human Services.
(Source: P.A. 98-44, eff. 6-28-13; 99-143, eff. 7-27-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-8.05) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-8.05)
    Sec. 14-8.05. Behavioral intervention.
    (a) The General Assembly finds and declares that principals and teachers of students with disabilities require training and guidance that provide ways for working successfully with children who have difficulties conforming to acceptable behavioral patterns in order to provide an environment in which learning can occur. It is the intent of the General Assembly:
        (1) That when behavioral interventions are used, they
    	
be used in consideration of the pupil's physical freedom and social interaction, and be administered in a manner that respects human dignity and personal privacy and that ensures a pupil's right to placement in the least restrictive educational environment.
        (2) That behavioral management plans be developed and
    	
used, to the extent possible, in a consistent manner when a local educational agency has placed the pupil in a day or residential setting for education purposes.
        (3) That a statewide study be conducted of the use of
    	
behavioral interventions with students with disabilities receiving special education and related services.
        (4) That training programs be developed and
    	
implemented in institutions of higher education that train teachers, and that in-service training programs be made available as necessary in school districts, in educational service centers, and by regional superintendents of schools to assure that adequately trained staff are available to work effectively with the behavioral intervention needs of students with disabilities.
    (b) On or before September 30, 1993, the State Superintendent of Education shall conduct a statewide study of the use of behavioral interventions with students with disabilities receiving special education and related services. The study shall include, but not necessarily be limited to identification of the frequency in the use of behavioral interventions; the number of districts with policies in place for working with children exhibiting continuous serious behavioral problems; how policies, rules, or regulations within districts differ between emergency and routine behavioral interventions commonly practiced; the nature and extent of costs for training provided to personnel for implementing a program of nonaversive behavioral interventions; and the nature and extent of costs for training provided to parents of students with disabilities who would be receiving behavioral interventions. The scope of the study shall be developed by the State Board of Education, in consultation with individuals and groups representing parents, teachers, administrators, and advocates. On or before June 30, 1994, the State Board of Education shall issue guidelines based on the study's findings. The guidelines shall address, but not be limited to, the following: (i) appropriate behavioral interventions, and (ii) how to properly document the need for and use of behavioral interventions in the process of developing individualized education plans for students with disabilities. The guidelines shall be used as a reference to assist school boards in developing local policies and procedures in accordance with this Section. The State Board of Education, with the advice of parents of students with disabilities and other parents, teachers, administrators, advocates for persons with disabilities, and individuals with knowledge or expertise in the development and implementation of behavioral interventions for persons with disabilities, shall review its behavioral intervention guidelines at least once every 3 years to determine their continuing appropriateness and effectiveness and shall make such modifications in the guidelines as it deems necessary.
    (c) Each school board must establish and maintain a committee to develop policies and procedures on the use of behavioral interventions for students with disabilities who require behavioral intervention. The policies and procedures shall be adopted and implemented by school boards by January 1, 1996, shall be amended as necessary to comply with the rules established by the State Board of Education under Section 2-3.130 of this Code not later than one month after commencement of the school year after the State Board of Education's rules are adopted, and shall: (i) be developed with the advice of parents with students with disabilities and other parents, teachers, administrators, advocates for persons with disabilities, and individuals with knowledge or expertise in the development and implementation of behavioral interventions for persons with disabilities; (ii) emphasize positive interventions that are designed to develop and strengthen desirable behaviors; (iii) incorporate procedures and methods consistent with generally accepted practice in the field of behavioral intervention; (iv) include criteria for determining when a student with disabilities may require a behavioral intervention plan; (v) reflect that the guidelines of the State Board of Education have been reviewed and considered and provide the address of the State Board of Education so that copies of the State Board of Education behavioral guidelines may be requested; and (vi) include procedures for monitoring the use of restrictive behavioral interventions. Each school board shall (i) furnish a copy of its local policies and procedures to parents and guardians of all students with individualized education plans within 15 days after the policies and procedures have been adopted by the school board, or within 15 days after the school board has amended its policies and procedures, or at the time an individualized education plan is first implemented for the student, and (ii) require that each school inform its students of the existence of the policies and procedures annually. Provided, at the annual individualized education plan review, the school board shall (1) explain the local policies and procedures, (2) furnish a copy of the local policies to parents and guardians, and (3) make available, upon request of any parents and guardians, a copy of local procedures.
    (d) The State Superintendent of Education shall consult with representatives of institutions of higher education and the State Teacher Certification Board in regard to the current training requirements for teachers to ensure that sufficient training is available in appropriate behavioral interventions consistent with professionally accepted practices and standards for people entering the field of education.
(Source: P.A. 91-600, eff. 8-14-99; 92-16, eff. 6-28-01.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-9.01) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-9.01)
    Sec. 14-9.01. Qualifications of teachers, other professional personnel and necessary workers. No person shall be employed to teach any class or program authorized by this Article who does not hold a valid teacher's license as provided by law and unless he has had such special training as the State Board of Education may require. No special license or endorsement to a special license issued under Section 21B-30 of this Code shall be valid for teaching students with visual disabilities unless the person to whom the license or endorsement is issued has attained satisfactory performance on an examination that is designed to assess competency in Braille reading and writing skills according to standards that the State Board of Education may adopt. Evidence of successfully completing the examination of Braille reading and writing skills must be submitted to the State Board of Education prior to an applicant's taking of the content area test required under Section 21B-30 of this Code. In addition to other requirements, a candidate for a teaching license in the area of the deaf and hard of hearing granted by the Illinois State Board of Education for teaching deaf and hard of hearing students in grades pre-school through grade 12 must demonstrate a minimum proficiency in sign language as determined by the Illinois State Board of Education. All other professional personnel employed in any class, service, or program authorized by this Article shall hold such licenses and shall have had such special training as the State Board of Education may require; provided that in a school district organized under Article 34, the school district may employ speech and language pathologists who are licensed under the Illinois Speech-Language Pathology and Audiology Practice Act but who do not hold a license issued under this Code if the district certifies that a chronic shortage of certified personnel exists. Nothing contained in this Act prohibits the school board from employing necessary workers to assist the teacher with the special educational facilities, except that all such necessary workers must have had such training as the State Board of Education may require.
    No later than January 1, 1993, the State Board of Education shall develop, in consultation with the Advisory Council on the Education of Children with Disabilities and the Advisory Council on Bilingual Education, rules governing the qualifications for certification of teachers and school service personnel providing services to English learners receiving special education and related services.
    The employment of any teacher in a special education program provided for in Sections 14-1.01 to 14-14.01, inclusive, shall be subject to the provisions of Sections 24-11 to 24-16, inclusive. Any teacher employed in a special education program, prior to the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1987, in which 2 or more districts participate shall enter upon contractual continued service in each of the participating districts subject to the provisions of Sections 24-11 to 24-16, inclusive.
(Source: P.A. 99-30, eff. 7-10-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-10.01) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-10.01)
    Sec. 14-10.01. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 88-228, eff. 7-1-94.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-11.01) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-11.01)
    Sec. 14-11.01. Educational materials coordinating unit. The State Board of Education shall maintain or contract for an educational materials coordinating unit for children with disabilities to provide:
        (1) Staff and resources for the coordination,
    	
cataloging, standardizing, production, procurement, storage, and distribution of educational materials needed by children with visual disabilities and adults with disabilities.
        (2) Staff and resources of an instructional materials
    	
center to include library, audio-visual, programmed, and other types of instructional materials peculiarly adapted to the instruction of pupils with disabilities.
    The educational materials coordinating unit shall have as its major purpose the improvement of instructional programs for children with disabilities and the in-service training of all professional personnel associated with programs of special education and to these ends is authorized to operate under rules and regulations of the State Board of Education with the advice of the Advisory Council.
(Source: P.A. 99-143, eff. 7-27-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-11.02) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-11.02)
    Sec. 14-11.02. Notwithstanding any other Sections of this Article, the State Board of Education shall develop and operate or contract for the operation of a service center for persons who are deaf-blind. For the purpose of this Section, persons with deaf-blindness are persons who have both auditory and visual impairments, the combination of which causes such severe communication and other developmental, educational, vocational and rehabilitation problems that such persons cannot be properly accommodated in special education or vocational rehabilitation programs solely for persons with both hearing and visual disabilities.
    To be eligible for deaf-blind services, a person must have (i) a visual impairment and an auditory impairment, or (ii) a condition in which there is a progressive loss of hearing or vision or both that results in concomitant vision and hearing impairments and that adversely affects educational performance as determined by the multidisciplinary conference. For purposes of this paragraph and Section:
        (A) A visual impairment is defined to mean one or
    	
more of the following: (i) corrected visual acuity poorer than 20/70 in the better eye; (ii) restricted visual field of 20 degrees or less in the better eye; (iii) cortical blindness; (iv) does not appear to respond to visual stimulation, which adversely affects educational performance as determined by the multidisciplinary conference.
        (B) An auditory impairment is defined to mean one or
    	
more of the following: (i) a sensorineural or ongoing or chronic conductive hearing loss with aided sensitivity of 30dB HL or poorer; (ii) functional auditory behavior that is significantly discrepant from the person's present cognitive and/or developmental levels, which adversely affects educational performance as determined by the multidisciplinary conference.
    The State Board of Education is empowered to establish, maintain and operate or contract for the operation of a permanent state-wide service center known as the Philip J. Rock Center and School. The School serves eligible children between the ages of 3 and 21; the Center serves eligible persons of all ages. Services provided by the Center include, but are not limited to:
        (1) Identifying and case management of persons who
    	
are auditorily and visually impaired;
        (2) Providing families with appropriate counseling;
        (3) Referring persons who are deaf-blind to
    	
appropriate agencies for medical and diagnostic services;
        (4) Referring persons who are deaf-blind to
    	
appropriate agencies for educational, training and care services;
        (5) Developing and expanding services throughout the
    	
State to persons who are deaf-blind. This will include ancillary services, such as transportation so that the individuals can take advantage of the expanded services;
        (6) Maintaining a residential-educational training
    	
facility in the Chicago metropolitan area located in an area accessible to public transportation;
        (7) Receiving, dispensing, and monitoring State and
    	
Federal funds to the School and Center designated for services to persons who are deaf-blind;
        (8) Coordinating services to persons who are
    	
deaf-blind through all appropriate agencies, including the Department of Children and Family Services and the Department of Human Services;
        (9) Entering into contracts with other agencies to
    	
provide services to persons who are deaf-blind;
        (10) Operating on a no-reject basis. Any individual
    	
referred to the Center for service and diagnosed as deaf-blind, as defined in this Act, shall qualify for available services;
        (11) Serving as the referral clearinghouse for all
    	
persons who are deaf-blind, age 21 and older; and
        (12) Providing transition services for students of
    	
Philip J. Rock School who are deaf-blind and between the ages of 14 1/2 and 21.
    The Advisory Board for Services for Persons who are Deaf-Blind shall provide advice to the State Superintendent of Education, the Governor, and the General Assembly on all matters pertaining to policy concerning persons who are deaf-blind, including the implementation of legislation enacted on their behalf.
    Regarding the maintenance, operation and education functions of the Philip J. Rock Center and School, the Advisory Board shall also make recommendations pertaining to but not limited to the following matters:
        (1) Existing and proposed programs of all State
    	
agencies that provide services for persons who are deaf-blind;
        (2) The State program and financial plan for
    	
deaf-blind services and the system of priorities to be developed by the State Board of Education;
        (3) Standards for services in facilities serving
    	
persons who are deaf-blind;
        (4) Standards and rates for State payments for any
    	
services purchased for persons who are deaf-blind;
        (5) Services and research activities in the field of
    	
deaf-blindness, including evaluation of services; and
        (6) Planning for personnel/preparation, both
    	
preservice and inservice.
    The Advisory Board shall consist of 3 persons appointed by the Governor; 2 persons appointed by the State Superintendent of Education; 4 persons appointed by the Secretary of Human Services; and 2 persons appointed by the Director of Children and Family Services. The 3 appointments of the Governor shall consist of a senior citizen 60 years of age or older, a consumer who is deaf-blind, and a parent of a person who is deaf-blind; provided that if any gubernatorial appointee serving on the Advisory Board on the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1991 is not either a senior citizen 60 years of age or older or a consumer who is deaf-blind or a parent of a person who is deaf-blind, then whenever that appointee's term of office expires or a vacancy in that appointee's office sooner occurs, the Governor shall make the appointment to fill that office or vacancy in a manner that will result, at the earliest possible time, in the Governor's appointments to the Advisory Board being comprised of one senior citizen 60 years of age or older, one consumer who is deaf-blind, and one parent of a person who is deaf-blind. One person designated by each agency other than the Department of Human Services may be an employee of that agency. Two persons appointed by the Secretary of Human Services may be employees of the Department of Human Services. The appointments of each appointing authority other than the Governor shall include at least one parent of an individual who is deaf-blind or a person who is deaf-blind.
    Vacancies in terms shall be filled by the original appointing authority. After the original terms, all terms shall be for 3 years.
    Except for those members of the Advisory Board who are compensated for State service on a full-time basis, members shall be reimbursed for all actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. Each member who is not compensated for State service on a full-time basis shall be compensated at a rate of $50 per day which he spends on Advisory Board duties. The Advisory Board shall meet at least 4 times per year and not more than 12 times per year.
    The Advisory Board shall provide for its own organization.
    Six members of the Advisory Board shall constitute a quorum. The affirmative vote of a majority of all members of the Advisory Board shall be necessary for any action taken by the Advisory Board.
(Source: P.A. 88-670, eff. 12-2-94; 89-397, eff. 8-20-95; 89-507, eff. 7-1-97.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-11.03) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-11.03)
    Sec. 14-11.03. Illinois Service Resource Center. The State Board of Education shall maintain, subject to appropriations for such purpose, the Service Resource Center for children and adolescents through the age of 21 who are deaf or hard-of-hearing and have an emotional or behavioral disorder. For the purpose of this Section, "children and adolescents who are deaf or hard-of-hearing and have an emotional or behavioral disorder" have an auditory impairment that is serious enough to warrant an array of special services and special education programs in order to assist both educationally and socially and the behavior is seriously disruptive and unacceptable to peers, educational staff, and persons in the community, or presents a danger to self or others.
    The State Board shall operate or contract for the operation of the Illinois Service Resource Center for children and adolescents through the age of 21 who are deaf or hard-of-hearing and have an emotional or behavioral disorder. The Illinois Service Resource Center shall function as the initial point of contact for students, parents, and professionals. All existing and future services shall be coordinated through the Center.
    The Illinois Service Resource Center shall:
    (a) Develop and maintain a directory of public and private resources, including crisis intervention.
    (b) Establish and maintain a Statewide identification and tracking system.
    (c) Develop, obtain, and assure the consistency of screening instruments.
    (d) Perform case coordination, referral, and consultation services.
    (e) Provide technical assistance and training for existing programs and providers.
    (f) Track the allocation and expenditure of State and federal funds.
    (g) Monitor, evaluate, and assess Statewide resources, identification of services gaps, and the development and delivery of services.
    (h) Identify by geographical areas the need for establishing evaluation and crisis intervention services and establish a pilot in downstate Illinois. The Service Resource Center shall provide for the coordination of services for children who are deaf or hard-of-hearing and have an emotional or behavioral disorder throughout the State and shall pilot a service delivery model to identify the capacity and need for comprehensive evaluation, crisis management, stabilization, referral, transition, family intervention, and follow-up services.
    (i) Integrate the recommendations of the Interagency Board for Children who are Deaf or Hard-of-Hearing and have an Emotional or Behavioral Disorder regarding policies affecting children who are deaf or hard-of-hearing and have an emotional or behavioral disorder.
    (j) Provide limited direct services as required.
    The Center, if established, shall operate on a no-reject basis. Any child or adolescent diagnosed as deaf or hard-of-hearing and having an emotional or behavioral disorder under this Act who is referred to the Center for services shall qualify for services of the Center. The requirement of the no-reject basis shall be paramount in negotiating contracts and in supporting other agency services.
(Source: P.A. 88-663, eff. 9-16-94; 89-680, eff. 1-1-97.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-12.01) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-12.01)
    Sec. 14-12.01. Account of expenditures - Cost report - Reimbursement. Each school board shall keep an accurate, detailed and separate account of all monies paid out by it for the maintenance of each of the types of facilities, classes and schools authorized by this Article for the instruction and care of pupils attending them and for the cost of their transportation, and shall annually report thereon indicating the cost of each such elementary or high school pupil for the school year ending June 30.
    Applications for preapproval for reimbursement for costs of special education must be first submitted through the office of the regional superintendent of schools to the State Superintendent of Education on or before 30 days after a special class or service is started. Applications shall set forth a plan for special education established and maintained in accordance with this Article. Such applications shall be limited to the cost of construction and maintenance of special education facilities designed and utilized to house instructional programs, diagnostic services, other special education services for children with disabilities and reimbursement as provided in Section 14-13.01. Such application shall not include the cost of construction or maintenance of any administrative facility separated from special education facilities designed and utilized to house instructional programs, diagnostic services, and other special education services for children with disabilities. Reimbursement claims for special education shall be made as follows:
    Each district shall file its claim computed in accordance with rules prescribed by the State Board of Education for approval on forms prescribed by the State Superintendent of Education. Data used as a basis of reimbursement claims shall be for the school year ended on June 30 preceding. Each school district shall transmit to the State Superintendent of Education its claims on or before August 15. The State Superintendent of Education before approving any such claims shall determine their accuracy and whether they are based upon services and facilities provided under approved programs. Upon approval, vouchers for the amounts due the respective districts shall be prepared and submitted during each fiscal year as follows: the first 3 vouchers shall be prepared by the State Superintendent of Education and transmitted to the Comptroller on the 30th day of September, December and March, respectively, and the final voucher, no later than June 20. If, after preparation and transmittal of the September 30 vouchers, any claim has been redetermined by the State Superintendent of Education, subsequent vouchers shall be adjusted in amount to compensate for any overpayment or underpayment previously made. If the money appropriated by the General Assembly for such purpose for any year is insufficient, it shall be apportioned on the basis of the claims approved.
    Claims received at the State Board of Education after August 15 shall not be honored.
(Source: P.A. 94-1100, eff. 2-2-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-12.02)
    Sec. 14-12.02. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 85-1150. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-13.01) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-13.01)
    Sec. 14-13.01. Reimbursement payable by State; amounts for personnel and transportation.
    (a) Through fiscal year 2017, for staff working on behalf of children who have not been identified as eligible for special education and for eligible children with physical disabilities, including all eligible children whose placement has been determined under Section 14-8.02 in hospital or home instruction, 1/2 of the teacher's salary but not more than $1,000 annually per child or $9,000 per teacher, whichever is less.
    (a-5) A child qualifies for home or hospital instruction if it is anticipated that, due to a medical condition, the child will be unable to attend school, and instead must be instructed at home or in the hospital, for a period of 2 or more consecutive weeks or on an ongoing intermittent basis. For purposes of this Section, "ongoing intermittent basis" means that the child's medical condition is of such a nature or severity that it is anticipated that the child will be absent from school due to the medical condition for periods of at least 2 days at a time multiple times during the school year totaling at least 10 days or more of absences. There shall be no requirement that a child be absent from school a minimum number of days before the child qualifies for home or hospital instruction. In order to establish eligibility for home or hospital services, a student's parent or guardian must submit to the child's school district of residence a written statement from a physician licensed to practice medicine in all of its branches, a licensed physician assistant, or a licensed advanced practice registered nurse stating the existence of such medical condition, the impact on the child's ability to participate in education, and the anticipated duration or nature of the child's absence from school. Home or hospital instruction may commence upon receipt of a written physician's, physician assistant's, or advanced practice registered nurse's statement in accordance with this Section, but instruction shall commence not later than 5 school days after the school district receives the physician's, physician assistant's, or advanced practice registered nurse's statement. Special education and related services required by the child's IEP or services and accommodations required by the child's federal Section 504 plan must be implemented as part of the child's home or hospital instruction, unless the IEP team or federal Section 504 plan team determines that modifications are necessary during the home or hospital instruction due to the child's condition.
    (a-10) Through fiscal year 2017, eligible children to be included in any reimbursement under this paragraph must regularly receive a minimum of one hour of instruction each school day, or in lieu thereof of a minimum of 5 hours of instruction in each school week in order to qualify for full reimbursement under this Section. If the attending physician, physician assistant, or advanced practice registered nurse for such a child has certified that the child should not receive as many as 5 hours of instruction in a school week, however, reimbursement under this paragraph on account of that child shall be computed proportionate to the actual hours of instruction per week for that child divided by 5.
    (a-15) The State Board of Education shall establish rules governing the required qualifications of staff providing home or hospital instruction.
    (b) For children described in Section 14-1.02, 80% of the cost of transportation approved as a related service in the Individualized Education Program for each student in order to take advantage of special educational facilities. Transportation costs shall be determined in the same fashion as provided in Section 29-5 of this Code. For purposes of this subsection (b), the dates for processing claims specified in Section 29-5 shall apply.
    (c) Through fiscal year 2017, for each qualified worker, the annual sum of $9,000.
    (d) Through fiscal year 2017, for one full-time qualified director of the special education program of each school district which maintains a fully approved program of special education, the annual sum of $9,000. Districts participating in a joint agreement special education program shall not receive such reimbursement if reimbursement is made for a director of the joint agreement program.
    (e) (Blank).
    (f) (Blank).
    (g) Through fiscal year 2017, for readers working with blind or partially seeing children, 1/2 of their salary but not more than $400 annually per child. Readers may be employed to assist such children and shall not be required to be certified but prior to employment shall meet standards set up by the State Board of Education.
    (h) Through fiscal year 2017, for non-certified employees, as defined by rules promulgated by the State Board of Education, who deliver services to students with IEPs, 1/2 of the salary paid or $3,500 per employee, whichever is less.
    (i) The State Board of Education shall set standards and prescribe rules for determining the allocation of reimbursement under this section on less than a full time basis and for less than a school year.
    When any school district eligible for reimbursement under this Section operates a school or program approved by the State Superintendent of Education for a number of days in excess of the adopted school calendar but not to exceed 235 school days, such reimbursement shall be increased by 1/180 of the amount or rate paid hereunder for each day such school is operated in excess of 180 days per calendar year.
    Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any school district receiving a payment under this Section or under Section 14-7.02, 14-7.02b, or 29-5 of this Code may classify all or a portion of the funds that it receives in a particular fiscal year or from evidence-based funding pursuant to Section 18-8.15 of this Code as funds received in connection with any funding program for which it is entitled to receive funds from the State in that fiscal year (including, without limitation, any funding program referenced in this Section), regardless of the source or timing of the receipt. The district may not classify more funds as funds received in connection with the funding program than the district is entitled to receive in that fiscal year for that program. Any classification by a district must be made by a resolution of its board of education. The resolution must identify the amount of any payments or evidence-based funding to be classified under this paragraph and must specify the funding program to which the funds are to be treated as received in connection therewith. This resolution is controlling as to the classification of funds referenced therein. A certified copy of the resolution must be sent to the State Superintendent of Education. The resolution shall still take effect even though a copy of the resolution has not been sent to the State Superintendent of Education in a timely manner. No classification under this paragraph by a district shall affect the total amount or timing of money the district is entitled to receive under this Code. No classification under this paragraph by a district shall in any way relieve the district from or affect any requirements that otherwise would apply with respect to that funding program, including any accounting of funds by source, reporting expenditures by original source and purpose, reporting requirements, or requirements of providing services.
    No funding shall be provided to school districts under this Section after fiscal year 2017. In fiscal year 2018 and each fiscal year thereafter, all funding received by a school district from the State pursuant to Section 18-8.15 of this Code that is attributable to personnel reimbursements for special education pupils must be used for special education services authorized under this Code.
(Source: P.A. 100-443, eff. 8-25-17; 100-465, eff. 8-31-17; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-14.01) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-14.01)
    Sec. 14-14.01. Warrants for reimbursement. The State Comptroller shall draw his warrants on the State Treasurer on or before September 30 of each year for the respective sums for reimbursement for special education reported to him on presentation of vouchers approved by the State Superintendent of Education.
(Source: P.A. 83-729.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-15.01) (from Ch. 122, par. 14-15.01)
    Sec. 14-15.01. Community and Residential Services Authority.
    (a) (1) The Community and Residential Services Authority is hereby created and shall consist of the following members:
    A representative of the State Board of Education;
    Four representatives of the Department of Human Services appointed by the Secretary of Human Services, with one member from the Division of Community Health and Prevention, one member from the Division of Developmental Disabilities, one member from the Division of Mental Health, and one member from the Division of Rehabilitation Services;
    A representative of the Department of Children and Family Services;
    A representative of the Department of Juvenile Justice;
    A representative of the Department of Healthcare and Family Services;
    A representative of the Attorney General's Disability Rights Advocacy Division;
    The Chairperson and Minority Spokesperson of the House and Senate Committees on Elementary and Secondary Education or their designees; and
    Six persons appointed by the Governor. Five of such appointees shall be experienced or knowledgeable relative to provision of services for individuals with a behavior disorder or a severe emotional disturbance and shall include representatives of both the private and public sectors, except that no more than 2 of those 5 appointees may be from the public sector and at least 2 must be or have been directly involved in provision of services to such individuals. The remaining member appointed by the Governor shall be or shall have been a parent of an individual with a behavior disorder or a severe emotional disturbance, and that appointee may be from either the private or the public sector.
    (2) Members appointed by the Governor shall be appointed for terms of 4 years and shall continue to serve until their respective successors are appointed; provided that the terms of the original appointees shall expire on August 1, 1990. Any vacancy in the office of a member appointed by the Governor shall be filled by appointment of the Governor for the remainder of the term.
    A vacancy in the office of a member appointed by the Governor exists when one or more of the following events occur:
        (i) An appointee dies;
        (ii) An appointee files a written resignation with
    	
the Governor;
        (iii) An appointee ceases to be a legal resident of
    	
the State of Illinois; or
        (iv) An appointee fails to attend a majority of
    	
regularly scheduled Authority meetings in a fiscal year.
    Members who are representatives of an agency shall serve at the will of the agency head. Membership on the Authority shall cease immediately upon cessation of their affiliation with the agency. If such a vacancy occurs, the appropriate agency head shall appoint another person to represent the agency.
    If a legislative member of the Authority ceases to be Chairperson or Minority Spokesperson of the designated Committees, they shall automatically be replaced on the Authority by the person who assumes the position of Chairperson or Minority Spokesperson.
    (b) The Community and Residential Services Authority shall have the following powers and duties:
        (1) To conduct surveys to determine the extent of
    	
need, the degree to which documented need is currently being met and feasible alternatives for matching need with resources.
        (2) To develop policy statements for interagency
    	
cooperation to cover all aspects of service delivery, including laws, regulations and procedures, and clear guidelines for determining responsibility at all times.
        (3) To recommend policy statements and provide
    	
information regarding effective programs for delivery of services to all individuals under 22 years of age with a behavior disorder or a severe emotional disturbance in public or private situations.
        (4) To review the criteria for service eligibility,
    	
provision and availability established by the governmental agencies represented on this Authority, and to recommend changes, additions or deletions to such criteria.
        (5) To develop and submit to the Governor, the
    	
General Assembly, the Directors of the agencies represented on the Authority, and the State Board of Education a master plan for individuals under 22 years of age with a behavior disorder or a severe emotional disturbance, including detailed plans of service ranging from the least to the most restrictive options; and to assist local communities, upon request, in developing or strengthening collaborative interagency networks.
        (6) To develop a process for making determinations in
    	
situations where there is a dispute relative to a plan of service for individuals or funding for a plan of service.
        (7) To provide technical assistance to parents,
    	
service consumers, providers, and member agency personnel regarding statutory responsibilities of human service and educational agencies, and to provide such assistance as deemed necessary to appropriately access needed services.
    (c) (1) The members of the Authority shall receive no compensation for their services but shall be entitled to reimbursement of reasonable expenses incurred while performing their duties.
    (2) The Authority may appoint special study groups to operate under the direction of the Authority and persons appointed to such groups shall receive only reimbursement of reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
    (3) The Authority shall elect from its membership a chairperson, vice-chairperson and secretary.
    (4) The Authority may employ and fix the compensation of such employees and technical assistants as it deems necessary to carry out its powers and duties under this Act. Staff assistance for the Authority shall be provided by the State Board of Education.
    (5) Funds for the ordinary and contingent expenses of the Authority shall be appropriated to the State Board of Education in a separate line item.
    (d) (1) The Authority shall have power to promulgate rules and regulations to carry out its powers and duties under this Act.
    (2) The Authority may accept monetary gifts or grants from the federal government or any agency thereof, from any charitable foundation or professional association or from any other reputable source for implementation of any program necessary or desirable to the carrying out of the general purposes of the Authority. Such gifts and grants may be held in trust by the Authority and expended in the exercise of its powers and performance of its duties as prescribed by law.
    (3) The Authority shall submit an annual report of its activities and expenditures to the Governor, the General Assembly, the directors of agencies represented on the Authority, and the State Superintendent of Education.
(Source: P.A. 95-331, eff. 8-21-07; 95-793, eff. 1-1-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14-16)
    Sec. 14-16. Participation in graduation ceremony.
    (a) This Section may be referred to as Brittany's Law. The General Assembly finds the following:
        (1) Each year, school districts across this State
    	
celebrate their students' accomplishments through graduation ceremonies at which high school diplomas are bestowed upon students who have completed their high school requirements.
        (2) There are children with disabilities in this
    	
State who have finished 4 years of high school, but whose individualized education programs prescribe the continuation of special education, transition planning, transition services, or related services beyond the completion of 4 years of high school.
        (3) It is well-established that the awarding of a
    	
high school diploma to and the high school graduation of a child with a disability is tantamount to the termination of eligibility for special education and related services for the student under applicable federal law.
        (4) Many children with disabilities who will
    	
continue their public education in accordance with their individualized education programs after finishing 4 years of high school wish to celebrate their accomplishments by participating in a graduation ceremony with their classmates.
        (5) The opportunity for classmates with disabilities
    	
and those without disabilities to celebrate their accomplishments together only occurs once, and the opportunity to celebrate the receipt of a diploma several years after one's classmates have graduated diminishes the experience for students whose age peers have left high school several years earlier.
    (b) Beginning March 1, 2005, each school district that operates a high school must have a policy and procedures that allow a child with a disability who will have completed 4 years of high school at the end of a school year to participate in the graduation ceremony of the student's high school graduating class and receive a certificate of completion if the student's individualized education program prescribes special education, transition planning, transition services, or related services beyond the student's 4 years of high school. The policy and procedures must require timely and meaningful written notice to children with disabilities and their parents or guardians about the school district's policy and procedures adopted in accordance with this Section.
    (c) The State Board of Education shall monitor and enforce compliance with the provisions of this Section and is authorized to adopt rules for that purpose.
(Source: P.A. 93-1079, eff. 1-21-05.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 14A heading)
ARTICLE 14A. GIFTED AND TALENTED CHILDREN AND CHILDREN ELIGIBLE FOR ACCELERATED PLACEMENT
(Source: P.A. 100-421, eff. 7-1-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14A-5)
    Sec. 14A-5. Applicability. This Article applies beginning with the 2006-2007 school year.
(Source: P.A. 94-151, eff. 7-8-05; 94-410, eff. 8-2-05.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14A-10)
    Sec. 14A-10. Legislative findings. The General Assembly finds the following:
        (1) that gifted and talented children (i) exhibit
    	
high performance capabilities in intellectual, creative, and artistic areas, (ii) possess an exceptional leadership potential, (iii) excel in specific academic fields, and (iv) have the potential to be influential in business, government, health care, the arts, and other critical sectors of our economic and cultural environment;
        (2) that gifted and talented children require
    	
services and activities that are not ordinarily provided by schools;
        (3) that outstanding talents are present in children
    	
and youth from all cultural groups, across all economic strata, and in all areas of human endeavor; and
        (4) that inequitable access to advanced coursework
    	
and enrollment in accelerated placement programs exists between children enrolled in different school districts and even within the same school district and more must be done to eliminate the barriers to access to advanced coursework and enrollment in accelerated placement programs for all children.
(Source: P.A. 101-654, eff. 3-8-21.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14A-15)
    Sec. 14A-15. Purpose. The purpose of this Article is to provide encouragement, assistance, and guidance to school districts in the development and improvement of educational programs for gifted and talented children and children eligible for accelerated placement as defined in Sections 14A-20 and 14A-17 of this Code. School districts shall continue to have the authority and flexibility to design education programs for gifted and talented children in response to community needs, but these programs must comply with the requirements established in Section 14A-30 of this Code by no later than September 1, 2006 in order to merit approval by the State Board of Education in order to qualify for State funding for the education of gifted and talented children, should such funding become available.
(Source: P.A. 100-421, eff. 7-1-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14A-17)
    Sec. 14A-17. Accelerated placement. For purposes of this Article, "accelerated placement" means the placement of a child in an educational setting with curriculum that is usually reserved for children who are older or in higher grades than the child. "Accelerated placement" under this Article or other school district-adopted policies shall include, but need not be limited to, the following types of acceleration: early entrance to kindergarten or first grade, accelerating a child in a single subject, and grade acceleration.
(Source: P.A. 100-421, eff. 7-1-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14A-20)
    Sec. 14A-20. Gifted and talented children. For purposes of this Article, "gifted and talented children" means children and youth with outstanding talent who perform or show the potential for performing at remarkably high levels of accomplishment when compared with other children and youth of their age, experience, and environment. A child shall be considered gifted and talented in any area of aptitude, and, specifically, in language arts and mathematics, by scoring in the top 5% locally in that area of aptitude.
(Source: P.A. 94-151, eff. 7-8-05; 94-410, eff. 8-2-05.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14A-25)
    Sec. 14A-25. Non-discrimination. Eligibility for participation in programs established pursuant to this Article shall be determined solely through identification of a child as gifted, talented, or eligible for accelerated placement. No program or placement shall condition participation upon race, religion, sex, disability, or any factor other than the identification of the child as gifted, talented, or eligible for placement.
(Source: P.A. 100-421, eff. 7-1-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14A-30)
    Sec. 14A-30. Funding of local gifted education programs. A local program for the education of gifted and talented children may be approved for funding by the State Board of Education, pursuant to a request for proposals process, if funds for that purpose are available and, beginning with the beginning of the 2010-2011 academic year, if the local program submits an application for funds that includes a comprehensive plan (i) showing that the applicant is capable of meeting a portion of the following requirements, (ii) showing the program elements currently in place and a timeline for implementation of other elements, and (iii) demonstrating to the satisfaction of the State Board of Education that the applicant is capable of implementing a program of gifted education consistent with this Article:
        (1) The use of assessment instruments, such as
    	
nonverbal ability tests and tests in students' native languages, and a selection process that is equitable to and inclusive of underrepresented groups, including low-income students, minority students, students with disabilities, twice-exceptional students, and English learners.
        (2) A priority emphasis on language arts and
    	
mathematics.
        (3) The use of multiple valid assessments that assess
    	
both demonstrated achievement and potential for achievement, including cognitive ability tests and general or subject specific achievement tests, applied universally to all students, and appropriate for the content focus of the gifted services that will be provided. School districts and schools may add other local, valid assessments, such as portfolios. Assessments and selection processes must ensure multiple pathways into the program.
        (4) The use of score ranges on assessments that are
    	
appropriate for the school or district population, including the use of local norms for achievement to identify high potential students.
        (5) A process of identification of gifted and
    	
talented children that is of equal rigor in each area of aptitude addressed by the program.
        (6) The use of identification procedures that
    	
appropriately correspond with the planned programs, curricula, and services.
        (7) A fair and equitable decision-making process.
        (8) The availability of a fair and impartial appeal
    	
process within the school, school district, or cooperative of school districts operating a program for parents or guardians whose children are aggrieved by a decision of the school, school district, or cooperative of school districts regarding eligibility for participation in a program.
        (9) Procedures for annually informing the community
    	
at-large, including parents, about the program and the methods used for the identification of gifted and talented children.
        (10) Procedures for notifying parents or guardians of
    	
a child of a decision affecting that child's participation in a program.
        (11) A description of how gifted and talented
    	
children will be grouped and instructed in order to maximize the educational benefits the children derive from participation in the program, including curriculum modifications and options that accelerate and add depth and complexity to the curriculum content.
        (12) An explanation of how the program emphasizes
    	
higher-level skills attainment, including problem-solving, critical thinking, creative thinking, and research skills, as embedded within relevant content areas.
        (13) A methodology for measuring academic growth for
    	
gifted and talented children and a procedure for communicating a child's progress to his or her parents or guardian, including, but not limited to, a report card.
        (14) The collection of data on growth in learning for
    	
children in a program for gifted and talented children and the reporting of the data to the State Board of Education.
        (15) The designation of a supervisor responsible for
    	
overseeing the educational program for gifted and talented children.
        (16) A showing that the certified teachers who are
    	
assigned to teach gifted and talented children understand the characteristics and educational needs of children and are able to differentiate the curriculum and apply instructional methods to meet the needs of the children.
        (17) Plans for the continuation of professional
    	
development for staff assigned to the program serving gifted and talented children.
(Source: P.A. 99-706, eff. 7-29-16.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14A-32)
    Sec. 14A-32. Accelerated placement; school district responsibilities.
    (a) Each school district shall have a policy that allows for accelerated placement that includes or incorporates by reference the following components:
        (1) a provision that provides that participation in
    	
accelerated placement is not limited to those children who have been identified as gifted and talented, but rather is open to all children who demonstrate high ability and who may benefit from accelerated placement;
        (2) a fair and equitable decision-making process that
    	
involves multiple persons and includes a student's parents or guardians;
        (3) procedures for notifying parents or guardians of
    	
a child of a decision affecting that child's participation in an accelerated placement program; and
        (4) an assessment process that includes multiple
    	
valid, reliable indicators.
    (a-5) By no later than the beginning of the 2023-2024 school year, a school district's accelerated placement policy shall allow for the automatic enrollment, in the following school term, of a student into the next most rigorous level of advanced coursework offered by the high school if the student meets or exceeds State standards in English language arts, mathematics, or science on a State assessment administered under Section 2-3.64a-5 as follows:
        (1) A student who meets or exceeds State standards in
    	
English language arts shall be automatically enrolled into the next most rigorous level of advanced coursework in English, social studies, humanities, or related subjects.
        (2) A student who meets or exceeds State standards in
    	
mathematics shall be automatically enrolled into the next most rigorous level of advanced coursework in mathematics.
        (3) A student who meets or exceeds State standards in
    	
science shall be automatically enrolled into the next most rigorous level of advanced coursework in science.
    The next most rigorous level of advanced coursework under this subsection (a-5) may include a dual credit course, as defined in the Dual Credit Quality Act, an Advanced Placement course as defined in Section 10 of the College and Career Success for All Students Act, an International Baccalaureate course, an honors class, an enrichment opportunity, a gifted program, or another program offered by the district.
    A school district may use the student's most recent State assessment results to determine whether a student meets or exceeds State standards. For a student entering grade 9, results from the State assessment taken in grades 6 through 8 may be used. For other high school grades, the results from a locally selected, nationally normed assessment may be used instead of the State assessment if those results are the most recent.
    A school district must provide the parent or guardian of a student eligible for automatic enrollment under this subsection (a-5) with the option to instead have the student enroll in alternative coursework that better aligns with the student's postsecondary education or career goals.
    Nothing in this subsection (a-5) may be interpreted to preclude other students from enrolling in advanced coursework per the policy of a school district.
    (b) Further, a school district's accelerated placement policy may include or incorporate by reference, but need not be limited to, the following components:
        (1) procedures for annually informing the community
    	
at-large, including parents or guardians, community-based organizations, and providers of out-of-school programs, about the accelerated placement program and the methods used for the identification of children eligible for accelerated placement, including strategies to reach groups of students and families who have been historically underrepresented in accelerated placement programs and advanced coursework;
        (2) a process for referral that allows for multiple
    	
referrers, including a child's parents or guardians; other referrers may include licensed education professionals, the child, with the written consent of a parent or guardian, a peer, through a licensed education professional who has knowledge of the referred child's abilities, or, in case of possible early entrance, a preschool educator, pediatrician, or psychologist who knows the child;
        (3) a provision that provides that children
    	
participating in an accelerated placement program and their parents or guardians will be provided a written plan detailing the type of acceleration the child will receive and strategies to support the child;
        (4) procedures to provide support and promote success
    	
for students who are newly enrolled in an accelerated placement program; and
        (5) a process for the school district to review and
    	
utilize disaggregated data on participation in an accelerated placement program to address gaps among demographic groups in accelerated placement opportunities.
    (c) The State Board of Education shall adopt rules to determine data to be collected and disaggregated by demographic group regarding accelerated placement, including the rates of students who participate in and successfully complete advanced coursework, and a method of making the information available to the public.
    (d) On or before November 1, 2022, following a review of disaggregated data on the participation and successful completion rates of students enrolled in an accelerated placement program, each school district shall develop a plan to expand access to its accelerated placement program and to ensure the teaching capacity necessary to meet the increased demand.
(Source: P.A. 100-421, eff. 7-1-18; 101-654, eff. 3-8-21.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14A-35)
    Sec. 14A-35. Administrative functions of the State Board of Education for gifted and talented children programs.
    (a) The State Board of Education must designate a staff person who shall be in charge of educational programs for gifted and talented children. This staff person shall, at a minimum, (i) be responsible for developing an approval process for educational programs for gifted and talented children by no later than September 1, 2006, (ii) receive and maintain the written descriptions of all programs for gifted and talented children in the State, (iii) collect and maintain the annual growth in learning data submitted by a school, school district, or cooperative of school districts, (iv) identify potential funding sources for the education of gifted and talented children, and (v) serve as the main contact person at the State Board of Education for program supervisors and other school officials, parents, and other stakeholders regarding the education of gifted and talented children.
    (b) Subject to the availability of funds for these purposes, the State Board of Education may perform a variety of additional administrative functions with respect to the education of gifted and talented children, including, but not limited to, supervision, quality assurance, compliance monitoring, and oversight of local programs, analysis of performance outcome data submitted by local educational agencies, the establishment of personnel standards, and a program of personnel development for teachers and administrative personnel in the education of gifted and talented children.
(Source: P.A. 100-421, eff. 7-1-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14A-40)
    Sec. 14A-40. Advisory Council. There is hereby created an Advisory Council on the Education of Gifted and Talented Children to consist of 7 members appointed by the State Superintendent of Education. Upon initial appointment, 4 members of the Advisory Council shall serve terms through January 1, 2007 and 3 members shall serve terms through January 1, 2009. Thereafter, members shall serve 4-year terms. Upon the expiration of the term of a member, that member shall continue to serve until a replacement is appointed. The Council shall meet at least 3 times each year. The Council shall organize with a chairperson selected by the State Superintendent of Education. Members of the Council shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for their travel to and from meetings and other reasonable expenses in connection with meetings if approved by the State Board of Education.
    The State Board of Education shall consider recommendations for membership on the Council from organizations of educators and parents of gifted and talented children and other groups with an interest in the education of gifted and talented children. The members appointed shall be residents of the State and be selected on the basis of their knowledge of, or experience in, programs and problems of the education of gifted and talented children.
    The State Superintendent of Education shall seek the advice of the Council regarding all rules and policies to be adopted by the State Board relating to the education of gifted and talented children. The staff person designated pursuant to subsection (a) of Section 14A-35 of this Code shall serve as the State Board of Education's liaison to the Council. The State Board of Education shall provide necessary clerical support and assistance in order to facilitate meetings of the Council.
(Source: P.A. 94-151, eff. 7-8-05; 94-410, eff. 8-2-05.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14A-45)
    Sec. 14A-45. Grants for services and materials. Subject to the availability of categorical grant funding or other funding appropriated for such purposes, the State Board of Education shall make grants available to fund educational programs for gifted and talented children. A request-for-proposal process shall be used in awarding grants for services and materials, with carry over to the next fiscal year, under this Section. A proposal may be submitted to the State Board of Education by a school district, 2 or more cooperating school districts, a county, 2 or more cooperating counties, an established professional organization in gifted education, or a regional office of education. The proposals shall include a statement of the qualifications and duties of the personnel required in the field of diagnostic, counseling, and consultative services and the educational materials necessary. Upon receipt, the State Board of Education shall evaluate the proposals in accordance with criteria developed by the State Board of Education that is consistent with this Article and shall award grants to the extent funding is available. Educational programs for gifted and talented children may be offered during the regular school term and may include optional summer programs. As a condition for State funding, a grantee must comply with the requirements of this Article.
(Source: P.A. 96-1152, eff. 7-21-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14A-50)
    Sec. 14A-50. Contracts for experimental projects and institutes. Subject to the availability of funds, the State Board of Education shall have the authority to enter into and monitor contracts with school districts, regional offices of education, colleges, universities, and professional organizations for the conduct of experimental projects and institutes, including summer institutes, in the field of education of gifted and talented children as defined in Section 14A-20 of this Code. These projects and institutes shall be established in accordance with rules adopted by the State Board of Education. Prior to entering into a contract, the State Board of Education shall evaluate the proposal as to the soundness of the design of the project or institute, the probability of obtaining productive outcomes, the adequacy of resources to conduct the proposed project or institute, and the relationship of the project or institute to other projects and institutes already completed or in progress. The contents of these projects and institutes must be designed based on standards adopted by professional organizations for gifted and talented children.
(Source: P.A. 94-151, eff. 7-8-05; 94-410, eff. 8-2-05.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14A-55)
    Sec. 14A-55. Rulemaking. The State Board of Education shall have the authority to adopt all rules necessary to implement and regulate the provisions of this Article.
(Source: P.A. 94-151, eff. 7-8-05; 94-410, eff. 8-2-05; 95-331, eff. 8-21-07.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 14B heading)
ARTICLE 14B. EDUCATIONALLY DISADVANTAGED CHILDREN
(Repealed)
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 96-734, eff. 8-25-09.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 14C heading)
ARTICLE 14C. TRANSITIONAL BILINGUAL EDUCATION

    (105 ILCS 5/14C-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 14C-1)
    Sec. 14C-1. The General Assembly finds that there are large numbers of children in this State who come from environments where the primary language is other than English. Experience has shown that public school classes in which instruction is given only in English are often inadequate for the education of children whose native tongue is another language. The General Assembly believes that a program of transitional bilingual education can meet the needs of these children and facilitate their integration into the regular public school curriculum. Therefore, pursuant to the policy of this State to ensure equal educational opportunity to every child, and in recognition of the educational needs of English learners, it is the purpose of this Act to provide for the establishment of transitional bilingual education programs in the public schools, to provide supplemental financial assistance through fiscal year 2017 to help local school districts meet the extra costs of such programs, and to allow this State through the State Board of Education to directly or indirectly provide technical assistance and professional development to support transitional bilingual education or a transitional program of instruction statewide through contractual services by a not-for-profit entity for technical assistance, professional development, and other support to school districts and educators for services for English learner pupils. In no case may aggregate funding for contractual services by a not-for-profit entity for support to school districts and educators for services for English learner pupils be less than the aggregate amount expended for such purposes in Fiscal Year 2017. Not-for-profit entities providing support to school districts and educators for services for English learner pupils must have experience providing those services in a school district having a population exceeding 500,000; one or more school districts in any of the counties of Lake, McHenry, DuPage, Kane, and Will; and one or more school districts elsewhere in this State. Funding for not-for-profit entities providing support to school districts and educators for services for English learner pupils may be increased subject to an agreement with the State Board of Education. Funding for not-for-profit entities providing support to school districts and educators for services for English learner pupils shall come from funds allocated pursuant to Section 18-8.15 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 99-30, eff. 7-10-15; 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14C-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 14C-2)
    Sec. 14C-2. Definitions. Unless the context indicates otherwise, the terms used in this Article have the following meanings:
    (a) "State Board" means the State Board of Education.
    (b) "Certification Board" means the State Teacher Certification Board.
    (c) "School District" means any school district established under this Code.
    (d) "English learners" means (1) all children in grades pre-K through 12 who were not born in the United States, whose native tongue is a language other than English, and who are incapable of performing ordinary classwork in English; and (2) all children in grades pre-K through 12 who were born in the United States of parents possessing no or limited English-speaking ability and who are incapable of performing ordinary classwork in English.
    (e) "Teacher of transitional bilingual education" means a teacher with a speaking and reading ability in a language other than English in which transitional bilingual education is offered and with communicative skills in English.
    (f) "Program in transitional bilingual education" means a full-time program of instruction (1) in all those courses or subjects which a child is required by law to receive and which are required by the child's school district, which shall be given in the native language of English learners who are enrolled in the program and also in English, (2) in the reading and writing of the native language of English learners who are enrolled in the program and in the oral language (listening and speaking), reading, and writing of English, and (3) in the history and culture of the country, territory, or geographic area which is the native land of the parents of English learners who are enrolled in the program and in the history and culture of the United States; or a part-time program of instruction based on the educational needs of those English learners who do not need a full-time program of instruction.
(Source: P.A. 98-972, eff. 8-15-14; 99-30, eff. 7-10-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14C-2.1)
    Sec. 14C-2.1. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 78-727. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14C-3) (from Ch. 122, par. 14C-3)
    Sec. 14C-3. Language classification of children; establishment of program; period of participation; examination. Each school district shall ascertain, not later than the first day of March, under regulations prescribed by the State Board, the number of English learners within the school district, and shall classify them according to the language of which they possess a primary speaking ability, and their grade level, age or achievement level.
    When, at the beginning of any school year, there is within an attendance center of a school district, not including children who are enrolled in existing private school systems, 20 or more English learners in any such language classification, the school district shall establish, for each classification, a program in transitional bilingual education for the children therein. A school district may establish a program in transitional bilingual education with respect to any classification with less than 20 children therein, but should a school district decide not to establish such a program, the school district shall provide a locally determined transitional program of instruction which, based upon an individual student language assessment, provides content area instruction in a language other than English to the extent necessary to ensure that each student can benefit from educational instruction and achieve an early and effective transition into the regular school curriculum.
    Every school-age English learner not enrolled in existing private school systems shall be enrolled and participate in the program in transitional bilingual education established for the classification to which he belongs by the school district in which he resides for a period of 3 years or until such time as he achieves a level of English language skills which will enable him to perform successfully in classes in which instruction is given only in English, whichever shall first occur.
    An English learner enrolled in a program in transitional bilingual education may, in the discretion of the school district and subject to the approval of the child's parent or legal guardian, continue in that program for a period longer than 3 years.
    An examination in the oral language (listening and speaking), reading, and writing of English, as prescribed by the State Board, shall be administered annually to all English learners enrolled and participating in a program in transitional bilingual education. No school district shall transfer an English learner out of a program in transitional bilingual education prior to his third year of enrollment therein unless the parents of the child approve the transfer in writing, and unless the child has received a score on said examination which, in the determination of the State Board, reflects a level of English language skills appropriate to his or her grade level.
    If later evidence suggests that a child so transferred is still disabled by an inadequate command of English, he may be re-enrolled in the program for a length of time equal to that which remained at the time he was transferred.
(Source: P.A. 98-972, eff. 8-15-14; 99-30, eff. 7-10-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14C-4) (from Ch. 122, par. 14C-4)
    Sec. 14C-4. Notice of enrollment; content; rights of parents.
    No later than 30 days after the beginning of the school year or 14 days after the enrollment of any child in a program in transitional bilingual education during the middle of a school year, the school district in which the child resides shall notify by mail the parents or legal guardian of the child of the fact that their child has been enrolled in a program in transitional bilingual education. The notice shall contain all of the following information in simple, nontechnical language:
        (1) The reasons why the child has been placed in and
    	
needs the services of the program.
        (2) The child's level of English proficiency, how
    	
this level was assessed, and the child's current level of academic achievement.
        (3) The method of instruction used in the program and
    	
in other available offerings of the district, including how the program differs from those other offerings in content, instructional goals, and the use of English and native language instruction.
        (4) How the program will meet the educational
    	
strengths and needs of the child.
        (5) How the program will specifically help the child
    	
to learn English and to meet academic achievement standards for grade promotion and graduation.
        (6) The specific exit requirements for the program,
    	
the expected rate of transition from the program into the regular curriculum, and the expected graduation rate for children in the program if the program is offered at the secondary level.
        (7) How the program meets the objectives of the
    	
child's individual educational program (IEP), if applicable.
        (8) The right of the parents to decline to enroll the
    	
child in the program or to choose another program or method of instruction, if available.
        (9) The right of the parents to have the child
    	
immediately removed from the program upon request.
        (10) The right of the parents to visit transitional
    	
bilingual education classes in which their child is enrolled and to come to the school for a conference to explain the nature of transitional bilingual education.
    The notice shall be in writing in English and in the language of which the child of the parents so notified possesses a primary speaking ability.
    Any parent whose child has been enrolled in a program in transitional bilingual education shall have the absolute right to immediately withdraw his child from said program by providing written notice of such desire to the school authorities of the school in which his child is enrolled or to the school district in which his child resides.
(Source: P.A. 92-604, eff. 7-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14C-5) (from Ch. 122, par. 14C-5)
    Sec. 14C-5. Nonresident children; enrollment and tuition; joint programs. A school district may allow a nonresident English learner to enroll in or attend its program in transitional bilingual education, and the tuition for such a child shall be paid by the district in which he resides.
    Any school district may join with any other school district or districts to provide the programs in transitional bilingual education required or permitted by this Article.
(Source: P.A. 99-30, eff. 7-10-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14C-6) (from Ch. 122, par. 14C-6)
    Sec. 14C-6. Placement of children. Children enrolled in a program of transitional bilingual education whenever possible shall be placed in classes with children of approximately the same age and level of educational attainment. If children of different age groups or educational levels are combined, the school district so combining shall ensure that the instruction given each child is appropriate to his or her level of educational attainment and the school districts shall keep adequate records of the educational level and progress of each child enrolled in a program. The maximum student-teacher ratio shall be set by the State Board and shall reflect the special educational needs of children enrolled in programs in transitional bilingual education. Programs in transitional bilingual education shall, whenever feasible, be located in the regular public schools of the district rather than separate facilities.
(Source: P.A. 81-1508.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14C-7) (from Ch. 122, par. 14C-7)
    Sec. 14C-7. Participation in extracurricular activities of public schools. Instruction in courses of subjects included in a program of transitional bilingual education which are not mandatory may be given in a language other than English. In those courses or subjects in which verbalization is not essential to an understanding of the subject matter, including but not necessarily limited to art, music and physical education, English learners shall participate fully with their English-speaking contemporaries in the regular public school classes provided for said subjects. Each school district shall ensure to children enrolled in a program in transitional bilingual education practical and meaningful opportunity to participate fully in the extracurricular activities of the regular public schools in the district.
(Source: P.A. 99-30, eff. 7-10-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14C-8) (from Ch. 122, par. 14C-8)
    Sec. 14C-8. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11. Repealed internally, eff. 6-30-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14C-9) (from Ch. 122, par. 14C-9)
    Sec. 14C-9. Tenure; minimum salaries. Any person employed as a teacher of transitional bilingual education whose teaching certificate was issued pursuant to Section 14C-8 (now repealed) of this Code shall have such employment credited to him or her for the purposes of determining under the provisions of this Code eligibility to enter upon contractual continued service; provided that such employment immediately precedes and is consecutive with the year in which such person becomes certified under Article 21 of this Code or licensed under Article 21B of this Code.
    For the purposes of determining the minimum salaries payable to persons certified under Section 14C-8 (now repealed) of this Code, such persons shall be deemed to have been trained at a recognized institution of higher learning.
(Source: P.A. 99-30, eff. 7-10-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14C-10) (from Ch. 122, par. 14C-10)
    Sec. 14C-10. Parent and community participation. School districts shall provide for the maximum practical involvement of parents of children in transitional bilingual education programs. Each school district shall, accordingly, establish a parent advisory committee which affords parents the opportunity effectively to express their views and which ensures that such programs are planned, operated, and evaluated with the involvement of, and in consultation with, parents of children served by the programs. Such committees shall be composed of parents of children enrolled in transitional bilingual education programs, transitional bilingual education teachers, counselors, and representatives from community groups; provided, however, that a majority of each committee shall be parents of children enrolled in the transitional bilingual education program. Once established, these committees shall autonomously carry out their affairs, including the election of officers and the establishment of internal rules, guidelines, and procedures.
(Source: P.A. 97-915, eff. 1-1-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14C-11) (from Ch. 122, par. 14C-11)
    Sec. 14C-11. Preschool or summer school programs. A school district may establish, on a full or part-time basis, preschool or summer school programs in transitional bilingual education for English learners or join with the other school districts in establishing such preschool or summer programs. Preschool or summer programs in transitional bilingual education shall not substitute for programs in transitional bilingual education required to be provided during the regular school year.
(Source: P.A. 99-30, eff. 7-10-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14C-12) (from Ch. 122, par. 14C-12)
    Sec. 14C-12. Account of expenditures; Cost report; Reimbursement. Each school district with at least one English learner shall keep an accurate, detailed and separate account of all monies paid out by it for the programs in transitional bilingual education required or permitted by this Article, including transportation costs, and shall annually report thereon for the school year ending June 30 indicating the average per pupil expenditure. Through fiscal year 2017, each school district shall be reimbursed for the amount by which such costs exceed the average per pupil expenditure by such school district for the education of children of comparable age who are not in any special education program. No funding shall be provided to school districts under this Section after fiscal year 2017. In fiscal year 2018 and each fiscal year thereafter, all funding received by a school district from the State pursuant to Section 18-8.15 of this Code that is attributable to instructions, supports, and interventions for English learner pupils must be used for programs and services authorized under this Article. At least 60% of transitional bilingual education funding received from the State must be used for the instructional costs of programs and services authorized under this Article.
    Applications for preapproval for costs of transitional bilingual education programs must be submitted to the State Superintendent of Education at least 60 days before a transitional bilingual education program is started, unless a justifiable exception is granted by the State Superintendent of Education. Applications shall set forth a plan for transitional bilingual education established and maintained in accordance with this Article.
    Through fiscal year 2017, reimbursement claims for transitional bilingual education programs shall be made as follows:
    Each school district shall claim reimbursement on a current basis for the first 3 quarters of the fiscal year and file a final adjusted claim for the school year ended June 30 preceding computed in accordance with rules prescribed by the State Superintendent's Office. The State Superintendent of Education before approving any such claims shall determine their accuracy and whether they are based upon services and facilities provided under approved programs. Upon approval he shall transmit to the Comptroller the vouchers showing the amounts due for school district reimbursement claims. Upon receipt of the final adjusted claims the State Superintendent of Education shall make a final determination of the accuracy of such claims. If the money appropriated by the General Assembly for such purpose for any year is insufficient, it shall be apportioned on the basis of the claims approved.
    Failure on the part of the school district to prepare and certify the final adjusted claims due under this Section may constitute a forfeiture by the school district of its right to be reimbursed by the State under this Section.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/14C-13) (from Ch. 122, par. 14C-13)
    Sec. 14C-13. Advisory Council.
    (a) There is created an Advisory Council on Bilingual Education, consisting of 17 members appointed by the State Superintendent of Education and selected, as nearly as possible, on the basis of experience in or knowledge of the various programs of bilingual education. The Council shall advise the State Superintendent on policy and rules pertaining to bilingual education. The Council shall establish such sub-committees as it deems appropriate to review bilingual education issues including but not limited to certification, finance and special education.
    Initial appointees shall serve terms determined by lot as follows: 6 for one year, 6 for 2 years and 5 for 3 years. Successors shall serve 3-year terms. Members annually shall select a chairman from among their number. Members shall receive no compensation but may be reimbursed for necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
    By no later than December 1, 2011, the Council shall submit a report to the State Superintendent of Education, the Governor, and the General Assembly addressing, at a minimum, the following questions:
        (1) whether and how the 20 child per attendance
    	
center minimum in Section 14C-3 of this Code should be modified;
        (2) whether and how educator certification
    	
requirements in this Article 14C and applicable State Board of Education rules should be modified;
        (3) whether and how bilingual education requirements
    	
in this Article 14C and applicable State Board of Education rules should be modified to address differences between elementary and secondary schools; and
        (4) whether and how to allow school districts to
    	
administer alternative bilingual education programs instead of transitional bilingual education programs.
    By no later than January 1, 2013, the Council shall submit a report to the State Superintendent of Education, the Governor, and the General Assembly addressing, at a minimum, the following questions:
        (i) whether and how bilingual education programs
    	
should be modified to be more flexible and achieve a higher success rate among Hispanic students in the classroom and on State assessments;
        (ii) whether and how bilingual education programs
    	
should be modified to increase parental involvement including the use of parent academies;
        (iii) whether and how bilingual education programs
    	
should be modified to increase cultural competency through a cultural competency program among bilingual teaching staff; and
        (iv) whether and how the bilingual parent advisory
    	
committees within school districts can be supported in order to increase the opportunities for parents to effectively express their views concerning the planning, operation, and evaluation of bilingual education programs.
    (b) For the purpose of this Section:
    "Parent academies" means a series of parent development opportunities delivered throughout the school year to increase parents' ability to successfully navigate the education system and monitor their children's education. Parent academies are specifically designed for parents of students who are enrolled in any of the English Language Learner programs and are to be provided after work hours in the parents' native language. At a minimum, parent academies shall allow participants to do the following:
        (1) understand and use their children's standardized
    	
tests to effectively advocate for their children's academic success;
        (2) learn home strategies to increase their
    	
children's reading proficiency;
        (3) promote homework completion as a successful daily
    	
routine;
        (4) establish a positive and productive connection
    	
with their children's schools and teachers; and
        (5) build the character traits that lead to academic
    	
success, such as responsibility, persistence, a hard-work ethic, and the ability to delay gratification.
    "Cultural competency program" means a staff development opportunity to increase the school staffs' ability to meet the social, emotional, and academic needs of culturally and linguistically diverse students and, at a minimum, allows participants to do the following:
        (i) discuss the impact that our constantly changing,
    	
highly technological and globalist society is having on Illinois' public education system;
        (ii) analyze international, national, State, county,
    	
district, and local students' performance data and the achievement gaps that persistently exist between groups;
        (iii) realize the benefits and challenges of reaching
    	
proficiency in cultural competency;
        (iv) engage in conversations that lead to
    	
self-awareness and greater insight regarding diversity; and
        (v) learn strategies for building student-teacher
    	
relationships and making instruction more comprehensible and relevant for all students.
(Source: P.A. 97-305, eff. 1-1-12; 97-915, eff. 1-1-13.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 15 heading)
ARTICLE 15. COMMON SCHOOL LANDS

    (105 ILCS 5/15-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 15-1)
    Sec. 15-1. Lands constituting.
    Section 16 in every township, the sections and parts of sections granted in lieu of all or part of such section, shall be held as common school lands.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/15-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 15-2)
    Sec. 15-2. Place of transacting business. All the business of a township relating to common school lands shall be transacted in the county which contains all or the greater portion of such lands.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/15-3) (from Ch. 122, par. 15-3)
    Sec. 15-3. Leases-Pooling agreements-Railroad rights of way and depot grounds.
    The township land commissioners or trustees of schools in townships in which Section 16, or lands granted in lieu thereof, remain unsold, or which have title to any other school lands or real estate, may lease them for an annual cash rent or for an annual grain rent or a combination of cash and grain rent, or may lease them for drilling for oil and gas upon a royalty basis. The lease shall be made by the president and the clerk, under the direction of the township land commissioners or trustees of schools, with the lessee or lessees, shall be in writing, shall be filed with the records of the board, and a copy shall be transmitted to the county superintendent. In case of default in the payment of rent the township land commissioners or trustees shall at once proceed to collect it as may be provided by law for the collection of rents by landlords. No lease under the provisions of this Act shall be for a longer period than 5 years except when lands are leased for the purpose of having permanent improvements made thereon, as in cities and villages, and except when leased for oil and gas development and drilling. The township land commissioners or trustees of schools which have title to any school real estate or lands, whether the lands or real estate are being used by any school district for school purposes or not, may lease such real estate or lands, or any part thereof, for drilling for oil and gas upon such terms as may be agreed upon. Where such a lease is made for drilling for oil and gas, the township land commissioners or trustees of schools may also enter into pooling agreements with the owners of adjacent lands so that the township land commissioners or trustees of schools will participate in royalties in proportion to their acreage ownership as to all oil produced from any of the lands in the pooling agreements. This section does not apply to cities having a population of over one hundred thousand inhabitants.
    The township land commissioners or trustees of schools of any township may sell and convey to any railroad company a right of way across any school lands of the township, and necessary depot grounds.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/15-4) (from Ch. 122, par. 15-4)
    Sec. 15-4. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1965, p. 3739. Repealed by P.A. 89-159, eff. 1-1-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/15-5) (from Ch. 122, par. 15-5)
    Sec. 15-5. Penalty for trespass.
    Every trespasser upon common school lands is guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined 3 times the amount of the injury occasioned by the trespass.
(Source: P.A. 77-2267.)

    (105 ILCS 5/15-6) (from Ch. 122, par. 15-6)
    Sec. 15-6. Disposition of penalties and fines. All penalties and fines collected under the provisions of Sections 15-4 and 15-5 shall be paid to the school treasurer and added to the principal of the township fund.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/15-7) (from Ch. 122, par. 15-7)
    Sec. 15-7. Sale of common school lands - Petition - Referendum. When the inhabitants of any township desire the sale of the common school lands thereof they shall present to the county superintendent of the county in which the school lands of the township, or the greater part thereof lie, a petition for their sale. The petition shall be signed by at least two-thirds of the voters of the township in the presence of at least 2 adult citizens of the township, after the meaning and purpose thereof have been explained, and an affidavit must be affixed thereto by the citizens witnessing the signing, which affidavit shall state the number of inhabitants of the township 18 years of age and over, and the petition so verified shall be delivered to the regional superintendent for his action thereon. In townships having a population of more than 10,000 inhabitants, the petition shall be signed by at least 1/10 of the voters thereof and be delivered to the regional superintendent. Upon the filing of any such petition with the regional superintendent he shall treat the petition in the manner provided by the general election law, and shall certify the proposition to the proper election authorities for submission to the voters of the township at a regular scheduled election the proposition to sell common school lands of the township. In addition to the requirements of the general election law the notice may be in the following form:
REFERENDUM FOR SALE OF COMMON
SCHOOL LANDS
    Notice is hereby given that on.... the.... day of...., 1...., a referendum will be held at.... for the purpose of voting "for" or "against" the proposition to sell common school lands of the township, to-wit: (here insert description of the lands). The polls will be opened at.... and closed at.... o'clock,.... M.
Regional Superintendent
    If two-thirds of the votes upon the proposition are in favor of the sale, the county superintendent shall act thereon. No section shall be sold in any township containing fewer than 200 inhabitants. Common school lands in fractional townships may be sold when the number of acres are in, or above, a ratio of 200 to 640 but not before, provided, that where the lands sought to be sold are swamp or overflow lands, and are located in a township containing less than 200 inhabitants, a petition signed by at least two-thirds of the voters in the township shall be sufficient to cause the regional superintendent to act thereon. All other proceedings shall be the same as provided in this section. This section does not prohibit the transfer of school land belonging to a city in trust for the use of schools under the provisions of "An Act in relation to the transfer of real estate owned by municipalities", approved July 2, 1925, as amended, when the board of education of a city having a population exceeding 100,000 inhabitants desires to convey such land to the city comprising the school district of such board of education; and in case of such transfer the limitations as to the size of the lot or tract of land that may be conveyed contained in Sections 15-9 through 15-12, shall not apply.
(Source: P.A. 81-1489.)

    (105 ILCS 5/15-8) (from Ch. 122, par. 15-8)
    Sec. 15-8. Fractional townships united to adjacent township.
    Any fractional township not having the requisite number of inhabitants to petition for the sale of school lands, which has not heretofore been united with any township for school purposes, and which does not contain a sufficient number of inhabitants to maintain a free school, is hereby attached for school purposes to the adjacent congressional township having the longest territorial line bordering on such fractional township, and all the provisions of this Article shall apply to such united townships the same as though they were 1 township.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/15-9) (from Ch. 122, par. 15-9)
    Sec. 15-9. Notice to trustees-Subdivision of land-Plat, roads, streets and alleys.
    When the petition and affidavits are delivered to the county superintendent, and the requisite number of votes are in favor of a sale, he shall notify the trustees of the township or township land commissioners, who shall immediately divide the land into tracts or lots of such form and quantity as will produce the largest sum of money, and cause a plat thereof to be made with each lot numbered and defined so that its boundaries may be forever ascertained.
    In subdividing common school lands, no lot shall contain more than 80 acres and the division may be into town or village lots, with roads, streets or alleys between and through them. All such divisions are hereby declared legal and all such roads, streets and alleys are declared to be public highways.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/15-10) (from Ch. 122, par. 15-10)
    Sec. 15-10. Value fixed-Certification of plat-Plat and certificate to govern.
    After the school lands have been subdivided and platted, the trustees of schools or township land commissioners shall fix the value of each lot and certify to the correctness of the plat, stating in the certificate the value of each lot and describing it so that it may be identified. The plat and certificate shall be delivered to the county superintendent and shall govern him in advertising and selling such lands.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/15-11) (from Ch. 122, par. 15-11)
    Sec. 15-11. Notice of sale.
    Upon receipt of the plat and certificate of valuation the county superintendent shall advertise the sale of such land in lots, as divided and platted, by publishing notice thereof once each week for 3 successive weeks prior to the date of the sale in a newspaper published in the county describing the land and stating the time, place and terms of the sale, and shall be in the following form:
NOTICE OF SALE
    Notice is hereby given that on the .... day of .... 1 ...., between the hours of 10:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M., the undersigned superintendent of schools of .... county, will sell at public sale to the highest bidder, at the .... door of the court house in ....(or on the premises), the following described real estate, the same being school lands of township No. .... range No. ...., as divided, and platted by the (township land commissioners) (trustees of schools of said township), to-wit: (here insert full and complete description of said premises). Said lands will be sold for cash in hand, with the privilege to any purchaser of borrowing from the undersigned the whole or part of the payment of his bid, for not less than 1 nor more than 5 years, upon his paying interest and giving security as required in case of a loan obtained from the township fund.
    Dated this .... day of .... 1 .....
A .... B ....
County Superintendent
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/15-12) (from Ch. 122, par. 15-12)
    Sec. 15-12. Conduct of sale.
    Upon the day of sale, the county superintendent shall make sales by beginning at the lowest numbered lot and proceeding regularly to the highest numbered until they are all sold or offered. No lot shall be sold for less than its valuation. The sale may continue from day to day. Each lot shall be sold separately and offered long enough to enable any person present to bid who so desires.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/15-13) (from Ch. 122, par. 15-13)
    Sec. 15-13. Payment of purchase price.
    At the close of each day's sale the purchasers shall pay or secure the payment of the purchase money. In case of a failure to do so by 10 a. m. the succeeding day, the lot purchased shall again be offered at public sale, on the terms as before. Regardless of whether or not the sale is made the former purchaser shall be required to pay the difference between his bid and the valuation of the lot, and if he fails to make such payment, the county superintendent may forthwith institute a civil action in his name, as superintendent, for the use of the inhabitants of the township where the land lies, for the required sum; and upon making proof, shall be entitled to judgment, with costs of suit which, when collected, shall be added to the principal of the township fund.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/15-14) (from Ch. 122, par. 15-14)
    Sec. 15-14. Unsold lands subject to sale thereafter. All lands not sold at public sale, as herein provided for, shall be subject to sale at any time hereafter, at the valuation as provided in Section 15-10, and the county superintendents shall, if possible, sell all such lands at private sale, upon the terms at which they were offered at public sale.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/15-15) (from Ch. 122, par. 15-15)
    Sec. 15-15. Valuation of unsold land. Where common school lands have been valued under Section 15-10 and have remained unsold for 2 years after having been offered for sale in conformity to this Article, the trustees of schools or township land commissioners where the lands are situated may, without any petition having been filed, vacate the valuation thereof by an order entered in Book A of the county superintendent, and make a new valuation. They shall make a new valuation in the same manner as the former, and shall deliver to the county superintendent a plat of the land at such new valuation with the order of vacation, whereupon the county superintendent shall offer the land for sale as if no former valuation has been made.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/15-16) (from Ch. 122, par. 15-16)
    Sec. 15-16. Certificate of purchase.
    Upon the completion of every sale the county superintendent shall deliver to the purchaser a certificate of purchase including the name and residence of the purchaser and the price and description of the land.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/15-17) (from Ch. 122, par. 15-17)
    Sec. 15-17. Patents.
    Every purchaser of common school lands shall be entitled to a patent from the State, conveying and assuring the title. Patents shall be issued by the Secretary of State from returns made to him by the county superintendent, township land commissioners or county board of school trustees as the case may be. They shall contain a description of the land granted and shall be in the name of and signed by the Governor, with the great seal of State affixed thereto by the Secretary of State, and shall operate to vest in the purchaser a title in fee simple. When patents are so executed the Secretary of State shall note on the list of sales the date of each patent in such manner as to perpetuate the evidence of its date and delivery and thereupon transmit it to the county superintendent of the proper county, to be by him delivered to the patentee, his heirs, or assigns, upon the return of the original certificate of purchase, which certificate, when returned, shall be filed and preserved by the county superintendent. All such patents for school lands, or certified copies thereof from any record legally made, shall, after 10 years from the date of the patent, and such sale having been acquiesced in for 10 years by the inhabitants of the township in which the land so conveyed is situated, be conclusive evidence as to the legality of the sale, and that the title to such land was, at the date of patent, legally vested in the patentee.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/15-18) (from Ch. 122, par. 15-18)
    Sec. 15-18. Copies of lost certificates or patents.
    Purchasers of common school lands, and their heirs or assigns, may obtain certified copies or certificates of purchase and patents upon filing an affidavit with the county superintendent in respect to certificates and with the Secretary of State in respect to patents, proving the loss or destruction of the originals, which copies shall have the effect of originals.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/15-19) (from Ch. 122, par. 15-19)
    Sec. 15-19. Dedication of streets and highways.
    The trustees of schools or township land commissioners may dedicate to public use for street and highway purposes as much of the unimproved common school lands as may be necessary to open or extend any street or highway which may be ordered by the municipal authorities to be opened or extended, if they are of the opinion that the benefit to accrue from the opening or extending of such street or highway will compensate for the strip so dedicated. It is unlawful for any street or other railroad company to lay tracks on any strip of the common school lands so dedicated, or use them or any part thereof for railroad or street railroad purposes, except upon the purchase or lease thereof from the proper authorities or upon payment to the school fund of the township of the value of such use or land the same as if no street or highway had been laid out thereon, to be determined by condemnation proceedings. This section does not affect existing leases or contracts for the lease or purchase of common school lands.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/15-20) (from Ch. 122, par. 15-20)
    Sec. 15-20. Books to be kept.
    The county superintendent shall keep 3 books, to be known and designated by the letters A, B, and C. In book A he shall record at length all petitions presented to him for the sale of common school lands, the plats and certificates of valuation made by or under the direction of the trustees of schools, or the township land commissioners, and the affidavits in relation to the same. In book B he shall keep an account of all sales of common school lands, including the date of sale, name of purchaser, description of land sold and the selling price. In book C he shall keep a regular account of all moneys received or paid out; from whom received, on what account, showing whether it is principal or interest, the rate of interest, and a description of the real estate taken as security; if paid out, to whom, when, and on what account, the amount of the sales and the account of each township fund to be kept separate.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/15-21) (from Ch. 122, par. 15-21)
    Sec. 15-21. Statements to be presented.
    At the regular meeting of the county board in each year the county superintendent shall present, first, a statement showing the sales of school lands made subsequent to the first regular term of the previous year, which shall be a copy of the sale book (book B); second, a statement of the amount of money received, paid, and in hand, belonging to each township or fund under his control, the statement of each fund to be separate; third, a statement copied from his loan book (book C), showing all the facts in regard to loans which are required to be stated in the loan book.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/15-22) (from Ch. 122, par. 15-22)
    Sec. 15-22. Record of report and statement.
    The county clerk shall record and preserve the report of the county superintendent made to the county board at its first regular meeting in each year relating to the sale of school lands, the amount of money received, paid, loaned out and on hand, belonging to each township fund in his control, and the statement copied from the loan book of such county superintendent, showing all the facts in regard to loans which are required to be stated in the loan book.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/15-23) (from Ch. 122, par. 15-23)
    Sec. 15-23. Common school lands. The provisions of Sections 15-1 through 15-19, of this Article shall have no application to the sale of any of the common school lands of any township to a school district located within the township for use as a schoolhouse site, and the trustees of schools or township land commissioners in any township in which Section 16 or land granted in lieu thereof remains unsold may sell to the governing body of any such school district any tract of said common school lands where such tract has been legally selected as a schoolhouse site for said district.
    Where any tract of the common school lands of the township has been legally selected as a schoolhouse site by the voters of any school district within the township, the governing body of such school district may adopt a resolution reciting the fact that the voters have legally selected such tract as a schoolhouse site, describing it, setting forth the date of the election and the fact that a majority of the voters voting at the election selected the said tract as a schoolhouse site, and requesting the trustees of schools, or township land commissioners upon payment to them of not to exceed the sum authorized by the voters to be paid for any such tract, to execute an instrument indicating that said trustees of schools or township land commissioners of the township hold title to said tract for the use and benefit of such school district. A certified copy of such resolution shall be filed with the Clerk of the trustees of schools or township land commissioners, and it shall be the duty of said trustees of schools or township land commissioners of such township upon the filing of a certified copy of such resolution with the Clerk of the trustees of schools, or township land commissioners to execute an instrument of conveyance or an instrument of declaration, indicating that they hold title to such property for the use and benefit of said school district, which shall be filed of record in the office of the recorder. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Section, if the school district is a school district located in a Class I county school unit, or if the school district is a school district that has withdrawn from the jurisdiction and authority of the trustees of schools of a township and the township treasurer under subsection (b) of Section 5-1, the resolution of the school board shall request the trustees of schools, township land commissioners, regional board of school trustees, or other school officials having title to the property, upon payment to them of not to exceed the sum authorized by the voters, to deliver to the school board a deed, executed by their president and their clerk or secretary, conveying good legal title to the property selected as a schoolhouse site to the school board of the school district.
(Source: P.A. 88-155.)

    (105 ILCS 5/15-24) (from Ch. 122, par. 15-24)
    Sec. 15-24. Management of permanent funds. The common school lands and township loanable funds in Class I counties shall be managed and operated by township land commissioners who shall receive no salary. In counties of fewer than 220,000 inhabitants, there shall be 3 land commissioners, who shall be elected in the same manner as provided for the election of school directors, who shall serve the same terms as school directors and shall be organized in the same manner as school directors. In counties having 220,000 inhabitants or more but fewer than 2,000,000 inhabitants, the members of the regional board of school trustees shall be the township land commissioners, except that township land commissioners elected in any such county prior to the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1963 shall continue to serve until the end of the term for which they were elected. The township land commissioners shall hold title to, manage and operate all common school lands and township loanable funds of such township and receive the rents, issues and profits therefrom. Elections shall be conducted in accordance with the general election law. The land commissioners shall appoint a treasurer for a term of 2 years and fix his salary which shall not be changed during such term. The proceeds of the rents, issues and profits from such land and fund shall be promptly deposited with him upon its receipt by the land commissioners. After the payment of the necessary expenses incidental to the operation of such land and fund by orders drawn on the treasurer and signed by the president and secretary of the land commissioners, including actual expenses of the land commissioners, the net income from such land and fund including accumulated income undistributed at the effective date of this Act shall, upon an order drawn by such treasurer and signed by the president and secretary of such township land commissioners be distributed annually on or before February 1 as provided in this Act.
(Source: P.A. 86-225.)

    (105 ILCS 5/15-25) (from Ch. 122, par. 15-25)
    Sec. 15-25. Reports of treasurer.
    The treasurer of the township land commissioners shall with respect to the common school lands and township loanable fund held by them make the reports to them required to be made by township treasurers to township school trustees, give bond as required of township treasurers, and perform the duties and exercise the powers of township treasurers.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/15-26) (from Ch. 122, par. 15-26)
    Sec. 15-26. Liquidation of permanent fund. Upon a petition signed by at least one hundred voters of any school township filed with the regional superintendent of schools asking that the permanent funds of such township be liquidated and distributed to the schools of said township, said regional superintendent of schools shall certify the proposition to the proper election authorities for submission to the electorate at a regular scheduled election in said township the proposition to liquidate such permanent funds and distribute the proceeds thereof to the schools of the said school township. Such funds may be deposited by the district either in the educational or operations and maintenance fund, or in both in such proportion as the school board shall determine. If the said proposition receives a majority of the votes cast upon such proposition the township land commissioners shall proceed to sell the lands included in the assets of the permanent fund and liquidate the permanent funds of said school township and distribute same in the manner provided in this Article; if the average income from the permanent funds of any school township for a period of three years amounts to less than $2500 the regional board of school trustees or the township land commissioners shall proceed forthwith to liquidate such funds and sell the lands included in the assets of the permanent fund without any petition or election.
    The expenses of liquidation shall be paid out of the moneys obtained from the liquidation. Upon completion of every sale of lands the township land commissioners or the regional board of school trustees, as the case may be, shall deliver to the purchaser a certificate of purchase including the name and residence of the purchaser and the price and description of the land.
(Source: P.A. 86-970.)

    (105 ILCS 5/15-27) (from Ch. 122, par. 15-27)
    Sec. 15-27. Audit. In the month of July of each year and at such other times as they may think necessary the township land commissioners shall cause an audit to be made by a public accountant of all funds under their jurisdiction. A certified copy of such annual audit shall be filed with the regional superintendent of schools and the State Board of Education by October 15 each year.
(Source: P.A. 81-1508.)

    (105 ILCS 5/15-28) (from Ch. 122, par. 15-28)
    Sec. 15-28. Township land commissioners successors to trustees of schools. The township land commissioners elected under the provisions of this Article shall be the successors to the trustees of schools elected under "An Act in relation to the establishment, operation and maintenance of public schools, providing for the transportation of and scholarships in institutions of higher learning for students of all schools, and to repeal certain acts herein named", approved March 18, 1961, as amended with respect to the common school lands and township loanable fund of the township. All rights of property of the common school lands and causes of action existing or vested in the trustees of schools elected under such Act as amended shall vest in the township land commissioners as successors in as complete a manner as they were vested in the trustees of schools elected under such Act as amended. All records, moneys, securities and other assets of the common school lands of the several school townships in the county and any obligations owing to such school townships shall be transferred by the several boards of township trustees to the township land commissioners. Such township land commissioners are empowered to receive such records and assets. All assets so received shall be credited to the respective school township from which they were received.
    The township land commissioners shall designate a depositary for their treasurer in the manner provided in Section 8-7 of this Act insofar as applicable.
(Source: Laws 1967, p. 509.)

    (105 ILCS 5/15-29) (from Ch. 122, par. 15-29)
    Sec. 15-29. Bond.
    It shall be the duty of the township land commissioners to examine the bond of its treasurer and if found to be in proper form in the proper amount with good and sufficient securities to approve same. If at any time the said township land commissioners deem it necessary it shall require its treasurer to execute a new bond but the execution of such new bond shall not affect the old bond or the liabilities of the sureties thereon.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/15-30) (from Ch. 122, par. 15-30)
    Sec. 15-30. Liability of township land commissioners.
    If the township land commissioners fail to observe the provisions of this Act in reference to the distribution of funds and property, they shall be individually and jointly liable to the district interested in a civil action to the full amount of the damages sustained by the district aggrieved.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/15-31) (from Ch. 122, par. 15-31)
    Sec. 15-31. Disposition of funds upon liquidation of permanent funds. Any funds received as the result of the liquidation of the permanent funds belonging to any school township shall after the payment of the necessary expenses connected therewith be apportioned and distributed to the school districts or parts of districts of such township -- including, in the case of the liquidation of the permanent funds belonging to any school township in a Class II county school unit, any school district located in such township which theretofore withdrew from the jurisdiction and authority of the trustees of schools of that township and from the jurisdiction and authority of the township treasurer as provided in subsection (b) of Section 5-1 -- in which schools have been kept as required by law during the preceding year ending June 30 according to the number of pupils in average daily attendance in grades one to eight, each inclusive, and upon the completion of such liquidation and distribution and the submission of all reports required by law the office of township land commissioners and their treasurer in such township shall terminate.
(Source: P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 16 heading)
ARTICLE 16. GIFTS--USE OF SITES--PLAYGROUNDS

    (105 ILCS 5/16-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 16-1)
    Sec. 16-1. Gifts - Vested in school board. Whenever any grant, gift, donation or legacy of real or personal property has been or shall be, directly or indirectly, made to or for the use of any public school district or attendance center and the deed, will or other instrument by which such grant, gift, donation, or legacy is made declares in terms or in substance that such property shall be held, managed, improved and invested or otherwise disposed of for the use and benefit of the public schools in such district or an individual attendance center, the title to such property shall be vested in the school board of such district for use in whatever manner the board shall choose and shall be held, managed, improved, invested or disposed of by such board in such manner as the board, in its discretion, sees fit; provided, however, when the person making such a grant, gift, donation, or legacy expresses in the instrument by which it was made an intention that it shall be used for a certain purpose, the school board shall promote and carry into effect such intention until the board determines in its discretion that it is no longer possible, practical or prudent to do so.
    This Section does not apply in any case where the deed, will or other instrument effectively vests the title and control of such property in a trustee or grantee named in such instrument unless the trustee or grantee is incapable of taking or administering the trust, or refuses or fails to accept the trust, in which case the title and control thereof shall vest as provided in the preceding paragraph.
    This Section does not validate any legacy which but for this enactment would have been invalid.
(Source: P.A. 86-171.)

    (105 ILCS 5/16-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 16-2)
    Sec. 16-2. Joint use of site and building. Whenever the school boards of two or more school districts have agreed upon the joint use of any school site and compensation to be paid therefor, and any such site has been selected in the manner required by law, it is lawful for such districts to use the same school site and after payment of the compensation, the trustees of schools of the township or regional board of school trustees, as the case may be, by proper instrument in writing shall declare that title to such site is held for the joint use of such districts according to the terms of such agreement, and such districts shall be further authorized to construct, maintain and use a building jointly for the benefit of the inhabitants thereof. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Section:
    (1) If legal title to the selected site is held in the name of the school board of a school district that has agreed to the joint use of the site with any other school districts, and if those other school districts are also districts whose school boards, under subsection (a) of Section 10-22.35B of this Code, are to hold legal title to school buildings and school sites of the district, then upon the execution of the agreement and payment of the compensation in accordance with the terms of the agreement the school boards of the districts shall be deemed to hold legal title to the site as tenants in common, and the required deed or deeds of conveyance shall be executed and delivered by the president and secretary or clerk of the school boards to reflect that legal title to the selected site is held in that manner.
    (2) If one more but not all of the school boards that are party to the agreement are school boards that, under subsection (a) of Section 10-22.35B of this Code, are to hold legal title to the school buildings and school sites of the district, the interest in the selected site of each school board that is to hold legal title to the school buildings and school sites of the district shall be that of a tenant in common; and the required deed or deeds of conveyance shall be executed and delivered by the president and secretary or clerk of the trustees of schools of the township, regional board of school trustees, township land commissioners, or school boards, as the case may be, to reflect that tenancy in common interest of the appropriate school board or school boards with the trustees of schools of the township, regional board of school trustees or township land commissioners, as the case may be, in the legal title to the selected site.
(Source: P.A. 100-374, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/16-3) (from Ch. 122, par. 16-3)
    Sec. 16-3. Transfer of site to purchasing district. Whenever the school board of any school district determines that any schoolhouse site with or without a building thereon is of no further use to the district and agrees with the school board of any other school district, within or adjacent to the boundaries of which the site is situated, upon the sale thereof to such district and the price to be paid therefor, and such sites are selected by the purchasing district in the manner prescribed by law, after the payment of the compensation the trustees of schools of the township, regional board of school trustees, township land commissioners, or school board having legal title to the site shall, by proper deed of conveyance or instrument in writing, convey legal title to, or transfer the use of the site to, the purchasing district in accordance with applicable provisions of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 88-155.)

    (105 ILCS 5/16-4) (from Ch. 122, par. 16-4)
    Sec. 16-4. Building jointly used - Sale of interest - Additions and enlargements. Whenever two school districts situated adjacent to one another or comprising the same or partly the same territory have a school site with buildings thereon, owned by one of the districts but used under agreement by both, the district owning the site and buildings may sell to the other, and the other district has the right to purchase, an equal or any other interest in the site and buildings under an agreement between the two; and upon the execution of the agreement and the acquiring the title to the interest by the purchasing district, the two districts shall be deemed to hold title to the premises as tenants in common; and thereafter the school districts, or either of them, may, under appropriate terms in the first agreement, or under a new agreement entered into by them, add to and enlarge any parts of the buildings, if deemed necessary for the uses of the districts or either of them, and by such sole or mutual expenditure of funds as may be nominated by the terms of the agreement between the districts, and the expenditures shall in no way change the individual interests of the districts in the premises unless otherwise expressly so provided by the terms of the agreement.
(Source: P.A. 81-1541.)

    (105 ILCS 5/16-5) (from Ch. 122, par. 16-5)
    Sec. 16-5. Agreement for joint use of property.
    Prior to the third Saturday of August of any year the school board of any district which does not by itself maintain a high school may enter into an agreement with any township high school board of education or the school board of any other high school district, by which agreement grade school or high school property, real or personal, owned by or held for the use of either district within territory included in both districts may be used jointly for school purposes by both such districts in the manner provided in the agreement. If such school district has a population of 1000 or more, and if legal title to any real property affected by the agreement is not held by the school board of a school district that is party to the agreement, the agreement shall be invalid unless prior to such third Saturday of August the written consent of the trustees of schools of the township or townships, regional board of school trustees, or township land commissioners holding legal title to the property affected by the agreement is first obtained.
(Source: P.A. 88-155.)

    (105 ILCS 5/16-6) (from Ch. 122, par. 16-6)
    Sec. 16-6. Compensation determined under eminent domain.
    Whenever any lot or parcel of land is needed by any university, college, township high school or other educational institution established and supported by this State or by a township therein, or by a school district, as a site for a building or for any educational purpose, including sites purchased under authority of Section 10-22.31b, and compensation for the lot or parcel of land cannot be agreed upon between the owners thereof and the trustees, board of education, or other corporate authority of the educational institution, or school district, the corporate authority of the educational institution or school district may have the compensation determined in the manner provided by law for the exercise of the right of eminent domain. In Class I counties and in any school district which is situated in a Class II county school unit but which no longer is subject to the jurisdiction and authority of a township treasurer or trustees of schools of a township because the district has withdrawn from the jurisdiction and authority of the township treasurer and trustees of schools of the township or because those offices have been abolished as provided in subsection (b) or (c) of Section 5-1, the school board shall engage counsel, pay all expenses and institute suit without any authorization by the regional board of school trustees; and the proceedings shall be in the name of the school board for the use of the school district. But no tract of land outside the limits of any incorporated city or village and within 40 rods of the dwelling of the owner of the land shall be taken by the board of directors created in Section 10-1 of this Act without the owner's consent: provided, however, that a tract of land outside the limits of any incorporated city or village lying not less than 200 feet from the dwelling of the owner of the land which adjoins and is adjacent to a school site being used for school purposes may be taken by the board in the manner provided by law for the exercise of the right of eminent domain for the purpose of enlarging such school site for educational and recreational purposes.
(Source: P.A. 87-473; 88-155.)

    (105 ILCS 5/16-7) (from Ch. 122, par. 16-7)
    Sec. 16-7. Playgrounds, recreation grounds and athletic fields. Any school district organized and existing under the general law or by special charter having a population of not more than 500,000 inhabitants may acquire real estate by gift, donation, legacy, purchase or otherwise and hold it for the purpose of establishing playgrounds, recreation grounds and athletic fields, and may equip, operate and maintain such playgrounds, recreation grounds and athletic fields, the cost of such acquiring and equipping to be paid either from the proceeds of bonds issued for that purpose or out of the operations and maintenance fund, and the cost of such maintaining and operating to be paid from the educational fund, of the district. Such real estate need not be contiguous to any other school property or real estate owned by the school district.
(Source: P.A. 86-970.)

    (105 ILCS 5/16-8) (from Ch. 122, par. 16-8)
    Sec. 16-8. Supervision - Personnel - Police control. The school board of any such school district acquiring real estate and equipping, operating and maintaining it for the purposes provided in Section 16-7 shall have supervision over such playgrounds, recreation grounds or athletic fields, may employ play leaders, playground directors, supervisors, recreation superintendents or athletic directors therefor, and may take such steps to provide for the protection, sanitation, care and management thereof as it deems appropriate.
    If real estate and improvements thereon, including buildings, parking lots, other improvements and equipment so acquired lies partly or wholly outside and within 1 mile of the corporate limits of any city, village or incorporated town situated in such district, such city, village or incorporated town may exercise police control and protection over such real estate and improvements thereon, including buildings, parking lots, other improvements and equipment in the same manner and to the same extent that such city, village or incorporated town would exercise police control and protection thereover if such real estate and improvements thereon, including buildings, parking lots, other improvements and equipment were situated within the corporate limits thereof.
(Source: P.A. 86-1304.)

    (105 ILCS 5/16-9) (from Ch. 122, par. 16-9)
    Sec. 16-9. Transfers to municipal corporations.
    School districts and boards of education may also transfer real estate in accordance with the provisions of "An Act in relation to the transfer of real estate owned by municipalities", approved July 2, 1925, as amended, title approved May 8, 1947.
(Source: Laws 1967, p. 506.)

    (105 ILCS 5/16-10) (from Ch. 122, par. 16-10)
    Sec. 16-10. Fire protection.
    If the location of any public school building is not within any municipality or fire protection district, fire protection service for such building shall be provided by that municipality or fire protection district which maintains the facility for fire fighting equipment which lies closest to such building. The school district shall pay to the municipality or fire protection district, as the case may be, the reasonable cost of such service. If the respective corporate authorities of the school district and of the municipality or fire protection district are unable to agree on the cost of such service, the cost shall be determined by a civil action in the circuit court of the circuit in which the school building is located.
(Source: P.A. 76-1790.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 17 heading)
ARTICLE 17. BUDGETS--TAX RATES--TAX WARRANTS

    (105 ILCS 5/17-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 17-1)
    Sec. 17-1. Annual budget. The board of education of each school district under 500,000 inhabitants shall, within or before the first quarter of each fiscal year, adopt and file with the State Board of Education an annual balanced budget which it deems necessary to defray all necessary expenses and liabilities of the district, and in such annual budget shall specify the objects and purposes of each item and amount needed for each object or purpose.
    The budget shall be entered upon a School District Budget form prepared and provided by the State Board of Education and therein shall contain a statement of the cash on hand at the beginning of the fiscal year, an estimate of the cash expected to be received during such fiscal year from all sources, an estimate of the expenditures contemplated for such fiscal year, and a statement of the estimated cash expected to be on hand at the end of such year. The estimate of taxes to be received may be based upon the amount of actual cash receipts that may reasonably be expected by the district during such fiscal year, estimated from the experience of the district in prior years and with due regard for other circumstances that may substantially affect such receipts. Nothing in this Section shall be construed as requiring any district to change or preventing any district from changing from a cash basis of financing to a surplus or deficit basis of financing; or as requiring any district to change or preventing any district from changing its system of accounting. The budget shall conform to the requirements adopted by the State Board of Education pursuant to Section 2-3.28 of this Code.
    To the extent that a school district's budget is not balanced, the district shall also adopt and file with the State Board of Education a deficit reduction plan to balance the district's budget within 3 years. The deficit reduction plan must be filed at the same time as the budget, but the State Superintendent of Education may extend this deadline if the situation warrants.
    If, as the result of an audit performed in compliance with Section 3-7 of this Code, the resulting Annual Financial Report required to be submitted pursuant to Section 3-15.1 of this Code reflects a deficit as defined for purposes of the preceding paragraph, then the district shall, within 30 days after acceptance of such audit report, submit a deficit reduction plan.
    The board of education of each district shall fix a fiscal year therefor. If the beginning of the fiscal year of a district is subsequent to the time that the tax levy due to be made in such fiscal year shall be made, then such annual budget shall be adopted prior to the time such tax levy shall be made. The failure by a board of education of any district to adopt an annual budget, or to comply in any respect with the provisions of this Section, shall not affect the validity of any tax levy of the district otherwise in conformity with the law. With respect to taxes levied either before, on, or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 91st General Assembly, (i) a tax levy is made for the fiscal year in which the levy is due to be made regardless of which fiscal year the proceeds of the levy are expended or are intended to be expended, and (ii) except as otherwise provided by law, a board of education's adoption of an annual budget in conformity with this Section is not a prerequisite to the adoption of a valid tax levy and is not a limit on the amount of the levy.
    Such budget shall be prepared in tentative form by some person or persons designated by the board, and in such tentative form shall be made conveniently available to public inspection for at least 30 days prior to final action thereon. At least 1 public hearing shall be held as to such budget prior to final action thereon. Notice of availability for public inspection and of such public hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper published in such district, at least 30 days prior to the time of such hearing. If there is no newspaper published in such district, notice of such public hearing shall be given by posting notices thereof in 5 of the most public places in such district. It shall be the duty of the secretary of such board to make such tentative budget available to public inspection, and to arrange for such public hearing. The board may from time to time make transfers between the various items in any fund not exceeding in the aggregate 10% of the total of such fund as set forth in the budget. The board may from time to time amend such budget by the same procedure as is herein provided for its original adoption.
    Beginning July 1, 1976, the board of education, or regional superintendent, or governing board responsible for the administration of a joint agreement shall, by September 1 of each fiscal year thereafter, adopt an annual budget for the joint agreement in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as are provided in this Section.
    The State Board of Education shall exercise powers and duties relating to budgets as provided in Section 2-3.27 of this Code and shall require school districts to submit their annual budgets, deficit reduction plans, and other financial information, including revenue and expenditure reports and borrowing and interfund transfer plans, in such form and within the timelines designated by the State Board of Education.
    By fiscal year 1982 all school districts shall use the Program Budget Accounting System.
    In the case of a school district receiving emergency State financial assistance under Article 1B, the school board shall also be subject to the requirements established under Article 1B with respect to the annual budget.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-1.1)
    Sec. 17-1.1. Shared service reporting and fiscal efficiency.
    (a) Annually, each school district shall complete a report developed by the State Board of Education, to accompany the annual financial report and to be published on the State Board of Education's Internet website, that summarizes district attempts to improve fiscal efficiency through shared services or outsourcing in the prior fiscal year. The report must be primarily in checklist form and approximately one page in length. It shall include, but shall not be limited to, the incidence of the following shared service options: insurance; employee benefits; transportation; personnel recruitment; shared personnel; technology services; energy purchasing; supply and equipment purchasing; food services; legal services; investment pools; special education cooperatives, vocational cooperatives, and other shared educational programs; curriculum planning; professional development; custodial services; maintenance services; grounds maintenance services; food services; grant writing; and science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) program offerings. The report shall also include a list of potential shared services or outsourcing the district may consider or investigate for the next fiscal year and any anticipated barriers to implementation. This report must be approved by the school board and published on the Internet website of the school district, if any.
    (b) Based on data supplied by school districts through the annual financial report, regional superintendents of schools shall publish annually a regional report summarizing district attempts to improve fiscal efficiency through shared services or outsourcing within the educational service region. This report shall include a list of all joint purchasing initiatives, joint agreements between districts, attempts to reduce or eliminate duplication of services and duplicative expenditures, and identification of any overlapping regional service delivery systems.
    (c) For school districts required to develop and submit to the State Board of Education a deficit reduction plan under Section 17-1 of this Code, the regional superintendent of schools and the school district shall jointly prepare a shared services and outsourcing plan that considers actions that may improve the district's fiscal efficiency and how future savings associated with shared services or outsourcing are to be utilized.
(Source: P.A. 97-357, eff. 1-1-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-1.2)
    Sec. 17-1.2. Post annual budget on web site. If a school district has an Internet web site, the school district shall post its current annual budget, itemized by receipts and expenditures, on the district's Internet web site. The budget shall include information conforming to the rules adopted by the State Board of Education pursuant to Section 2-3.28 of this Code. The school district shall notify the parents or guardians of its students that the budget has been posted on the district's web site and what the web site's address is.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-1.5)
    Sec. 17-1.5. Limitation of administrative costs.
    (a) It is the purpose of this Section to establish limitations on the growth of administrative expenditures in order to maximize the proportion of school district resources available for the instructional program, building maintenance, and safety services for the students of each district.
    (b) Definitions. For the purposes of this Section:
    "Administrative expenditures" mean the annual expenditures of school districts properly attributable to expenditure functions defined by the rules of the State Board of Education as: 2320 (Executive Administration Services); 2330 (Special Area Administration Services); 2490 (Other Support Services - School Administration); 2510 (Direction of Business Support Services); 2570 (Internal Services); and 2610 (Direction of Central Support Services); provided, however, that "administrative expenditures" shall not include early retirement or other pension system obligations required by State law.
    "School district" means all school districts having a population of less than 500,000.
    (c) For the 1998-99 school year and each school year thereafter, each school district shall undertake budgetary and expenditure control actions so that the increase in administrative expenditures for that school year over the prior school year does not exceed 5%. School districts with administrative expenditures per pupil in the 25th percentile and below for all districts of the same type, as defined by the State Board of Education, may waive the limitation imposed under this Section for any year following a public hearing and with the affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of the members of the school board of the district. Any district waiving the limitation shall notify the State Board within 45 days of such action.
    (d) School districts shall file with the State Board of Education by November 15, 1998 and by each November 15th thereafter a one-page report that lists (i) the actual administrative expenditures for the prior year from the district's audited Annual Financial Report, and (ii) the projected administrative expenditures for the current year from the budget adopted by the school board pursuant to Section 17-1 of this Code.
    If a school district that is ineligible to waive the limitation imposed by subsection (c) of this Section by board action exceeds the limitation solely because of circumstances beyond the control of the district and the district has exhausted all available and reasonable remedies to comply with the limitation, the district may request a waiver pursuant to Section 2-3.25g. The waiver application shall specify the amount, nature, and reason for the relief requested, as well as all remedies the district has exhausted to comply with the limitation. Any emergency relief so requested shall apply only to the specific school year for which the request is made. The State Board of Education shall analyze all such waivers submitted and shall recommend that the General Assembly disapprove any such waiver requested that is not due solely to circumstances beyond the control of the district and for which the district has not exhausted all available and reasonable remedies to comply with the limitation. The State Superintendent shall have no authority to impose any sanctions pursuant to this Section for any expenditures for which a waiver has been requested until such waiver has been reviewed by the General Assembly.
    If the report and information required under this subsection (d) are not provided by the school district in a timely manner, or are subsequently determined by the State Superintendent of Education to be incomplete or inaccurate, the State Superintendent shall notify the district in writing of reporting deficiencies. The school district shall, within 60 days of the notice, address the reporting deficiencies identified.
    (e) If the State Superintendent determines that a school district has failed to comply with the administrative expenditure limitation imposed in subsection (c) of this Section, the State Superintendent shall notify the district of the violation and direct the district to undertake corrective action to bring the district's budget into compliance with the administrative expenditure limitation. The district shall, within 60 days of the notice, provide adequate assurance to the State Superintendent that appropriate corrective actions have been or will be taken. If the district fails to provide adequate assurance or fails to undertake the necessary corrective actions, the State Superintendent may impose progressive sanctions against the district that may culminate in withholding all subsequent payments of general State aid due the district under Section 18-8.05 of this Code or evidence-based funding due the district under Section 18-8.15 of this Code until the assurance is provided or the corrective actions taken.
    (f) The State Superintendent shall publish a list each year of the school districts that violate the limitation imposed by subsection (c) of this Section and a list of the districts that waive the limitation by board action as provided in subsection (c) of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 17-2)
    Sec. 17-2. Tax levies; purposes; rates. Except as otherwise provided in Articles 12 and 13 of this Act, and except as provided in Section 17-2.2e of this Act, the following maximum rates shall apply to all taxes levied after August 10, 1965, in districts having a population of less than 500,000 inhabitants, including those districts organized under Article 11 of the School Code. The school board of any district having a population of less than 500,000 inhabitants may levy a tax annually, at not to exceed the maximum rates and for the specified purposes, upon all the taxable property of the district at the value, as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue as follows:
        (1) districts maintaining only grades 1 through 8,
    	
.92% for educational purposes and .25% for operations and maintenance purposes;
        (2) districts maintaining only grades 9 through 12,
    	
.92% for educational purposes and .25% for operations and maintenance purposes;
        (3) districts maintaining grades 1 through 12, 1.63%
    	
for the 1985-86 school year, 1.68% for the 1986-87 school year, 1.75% for the 1987-88 school year and 1.84% for the 1988-89 school year and thereafter for educational purposes and .405% for the 1989-90 school year, .435% for the 1990-91 school year, .465% for the 1991-92 school year, and .50% for the 1992-93 school year and thereafter for operations and maintenance purposes;
        (4) all districts, 0.75% for capital improvement
    	
purposes (which is in addition to the levy for operations and maintenance purposes), which tax is to be levied, accumulated for not more than 6 years, and spent for capital improvement purposes (including but not limited to the construction of a new school building or buildings or the purchase of school grounds on which any new school building is to be constructed or located, or both) only in accordance with Section 17-2.3 of this Act;
        (5) districts maintaining only grades 1 through 8,
    	
.12% for transportation purposes, provided that districts maintaining only grades kindergarten through 8 which have an enrollment of at least 2600 students may levy, subject to Section 17-2.2, at not to exceed a maximum rate of .20% for transportation purposes for any school year in which the number of students requiring transportation in the district exceeds by at least 2% the number of students requiring transportation in the district during the preceding school year, as verified in the district's claim for pupil transportation and reimbursement and as certified by the State Board of Education to the county clerk of the county in which such district is located not later than November 15 following the submission of such claim; districts maintaining only grades 9 through 12, .12% for transportation purposes; and districts maintaining grades 1 through 12, .14% for the 1985-86 school year, .16% for the 1986-87 school year, .18% for the 1987-88 school year and .20% for the 1988-89 school year and thereafter, for transportation purposes;
        (6) districts providing summer classes, .15% for
    	
educational purposes, subject to Section 17-2.1 of this Act.
    Whenever any special charter school district operating grades 1 through 12, has organized or shall organize under the general school law, the district so organized may continue to levy taxes at not to exceed the rate at which taxes were last actually extended by the special charter district, except that if such rate at which taxes were last actually extended by such special charter district was less than the maximum rate for districts maintaining grades 1 through 12 authorized under this Section, such special charter district nevertheless may levy taxes at a rate not to exceed the maximum rate for districts maintaining grades 1 through 12 authorized under this Section, and except that if any such district maintains only grades 1 through 8, the board may levy, for educational purposes, at a rate not to exceed the maximum rate for elementary districts authorized under this Section.
    Maximum rates before or after established in excess of those prescribed shall not be affected by the amendatory Act of 1965.
(Source: P.A. 99-908, eff. 12-16-16.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-2.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 17-2.1)
    Sec. 17-2.1. Tax for summer school purposes. The school board in any district having a population of less than 500,000 inhabitants may, by proper resolution, cause a proposition to authorize an annual tax, as prescribed in Section 17-2, for summer school educational purposes to be submitted to the voters of such district at a regular scheduled election.
    If a majority of the votes cast on the proposition is in favor thereof, the school board may thereafter levy the tax as authorized.
(Source: P.A. 81-1489.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-2.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 17-2.2)
    Sec. 17-2.2. Back door referendum. Whenever any school district first levies a tax at a rate within the limit prescribed by paragraph (3) of Section 17-2 but in excess of the maximum permissible on July 9, 1957, or within the limit prescribed by paragraph (1) or (2) of Section 17-2 but in excess of the maximum permissible on June 30, 1965, or whenever after August 3, 1989 any school district maintaining only grades kindergarten through 8 first levies a tax for transportation purposes for any school year which is within the limit prescribed for that school year by paragraph (5) of Section 17-2 but in excess of the maximum authorized to be levied for such purposes for the 1988-89 school year, or whenever after August 3, 1989 any school district first levies a tax for operations and maintenance purposes for any school year which is within the limit prescribed for that school year by paragraph (3) of Section 17-2 but in excess of the maximum authorized to be levied for such purposes for the immediately preceding school year, the district shall cause to be published such resolution in at least one or more newspapers published in the district, within 10 days after such levy is made. The publication of the resolution shall include a notice of (1) the specific number of voters required to sign a petition requesting that the question of the adoption of the tax levy be submitted to the voters of the district; (2) the time in which the petition must be filed; and (3) the date of the prospective referendum. The district Secretary shall provide a petition form to any individual requesting one. Any taxpayer in such district may, within 30 days after such levy is made, file with the Secretary of the board of education a petition signed by the voters of the district equal to 10% or more of the registered voters of the district requesting the submission to a referendum of the following proposition:
    "Shall school district No..... be authorized to levy a tax for (state purposes) in excess of.... but not to exceed.... as authorized in Section 17-2 of the School Code?" The secretary of the board of education shall certify the proposition to the proper election authorities for submission to the electorate at a regular scheduled election in accordance with the general election law.
    If a majority of the voters voting on the proposition vote in favor thereof, such increased tax shall thereafter be authorized; if a majority of the vote is against such proposition, the previous maximum rate authorized shall remain in effect until changed by law.
(Source: P.A. 86-128; 86-134; 86-1028; 86-1334; 87-767.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-2.2a) (from Ch. 122, par. 17-2.2a)
    Sec. 17-2.2a. Tax for special education programs.
    (a) The school board of any district having a population of less than 500,000 inhabitants may, by proper resolution, levy an annual tax upon the value as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue, for special education purposes, including the purposes authorized by Section 10-22.31b as follows:
        (1) districts maintaining only grades kindergarten
    	
through 8, and prior to July 1, 1970, districts maintaining only grades 1 through 8, .02%;
        (2) districts maintaining only grades 9 through 12,
    	
.02%;
        (3) districts maintaining only grades kindergarten
    	
through 12, and prior to July 1, 1970, districts maintaining only grades 1 through 12, .04%.
    The revenue raised by such tax shall be used only for special education purposes, including the construction and maintenance of special education facilities.
    Upon proper resolution of the school board, the school district may accumulate such funds for special education building purposes for a period of 8 years.
    Buildings constructed under the provisions of this Section shall comply with the building code authorized under Section 2-3.12.
    If it is no longer feasible or economical to utilize classroom facilities constructed with revenues raised and accumulated by the tax for special education building purposes, the district, or cooperative district by unanimous consent, may with the approval of the regional superintendent of schools and the State Superintendent of Education use such facilities for regular school purposes. The district or cooperative of districts shall make comparable facilities available for special education purposes at another attendance center which is in a more practical location due to the proximity of the students served.
    (b) If the school board of any district that has levied the tax authorized by this Section determines that the accumulated funds from such tax and from the $1,000 State reimbursement per professional worker received under Section 14-13.02 are no longer required for special education building purposes, the board may by proper resolution transfer such funds to any other fund to be used for any special education purposes authorized by Article 14. Such transfer shall not be made until after the regional superintendent has certified to the State Superintendent of Education that adequate housing provisions have been made for all children with disabilities residing in the school district.
    (c) The tax rate limits specified in this Section may be increased to .40% by districts maintaining only grades kindergarten through 8 or only grades 9 through 12, and to .80% by districts maintaining grades kindergarten through 12, upon the approval of a proposition to effect such increase by a majority of the electors voting on such proposition at a regular scheduled election. The proposition may be initiated by resolution of the school board and shall be certified by the secretary to the proper election authorities for submission in accordance with the general election law. If at such election a majority of the votes cast on the proposition is in favor thereof, the school board may thereafter until such authority is revoked in like manner levy annually the tax so authorized.
    (d) The tax rate limits specified in this Section may also be increased as provided in Section 17-2.2e.
(Source: P.A. 99-908, eff. 12-16-16.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-2.2b)
    Sec. 17-2.2b. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 87-767. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-2.2c) (from Ch. 122, par. 17-2.2c)
    Sec. 17-2.2c. Tax for leasing educational facilities or computer technology or both, and for temporary relocation expense purposes. The school board of any district, by proper resolution, may levy an annual tax, in addition to any other taxes and not subject to the limitations specified elsewhere in this Article, not to exceed .05% upon the value of the taxable property as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue, for the purpose of leasing educational facilities or computer technology or both, and, in order to repay the State all moneys distributed to it for temporary relocation expenses of the district, may levy an annual tax not to exceed .05% upon the value of the taxable property as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue for a period not to exceed 7 years for the purpose of providing for the repayment of moneys distributed for temporary relocation expenses of the school district pursuant to Section 2-3.77.
    The tax rate limit specified by this Section with respect to an annual tax levied for the purpose of leasing educational facilities or computer technology or both may be increased to .10% upon the approval of a proposition to effect such increase by a majority of the electors voting on that proposition at a regular scheduled election. Such proposition may be initiated by resolution of the school board and shall be certified by the secretary to the proper election authorities for submission in accordance with the general election law.
    The tax rate limit specified in this Section may also be increased as provided in Section 17-2.2e.
    The district is authorized to pledge any tax levied pursuant to this Section for the purpose of leasing educational facilities or computer technology or both to secure the payment of any lease, lease-purchase agreement, or installment purchase agreement entered into by the district for such purpose.
    For the purposes of this Section, "leasing of educational facilities or computer technology or both" includes any payment with respect to a lease, lease-purchase agreement, or installment purchase agreement to acquire or use buildings, rooms, grounds, and appurtenances to be used by the district for the use of schools or for school administration purposes and all equipment, fixtures, renovations, and improvements to existing facilities of the district necessary to accommodate computers, as well as computer hardware and software.
    Any school district may abolish or abate its fund for leasing educational facilities or computer technology or both and for temporary relocation expense purposes upon the adoption of a resolution so providing and upon a determination by the school board that the moneys in the fund are no longer needed for leasing educational facilities or computer technology or both or for temporary relocation expense purposes. The resolution shall direct the transfer of any balance in the fund to another school district fund or funds immediately upon the resolution taking effect. Thereafter, any outstanding taxes of the school district levied pursuant to this Section shall be collected and paid into the fund or funds as directed by the school board. Nothing in this Section shall prevent a school district that has abolished or abated the fund from again creating a fund for leasing educational facilities and for temporary relocation expense purposes in the manner provided in this Section.
(Source: P.A. 99-908, eff. 12-16-16.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-2.2d)
    Sec. 17-2.2d. Special taxing and bonding for temporary relocation expense and emergency replacement purposes.
    (a) In addition to any other taxes and notwithstanding any limitation imposed by the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law or any other limitations specified in this Code or any other law, the school board of any district subject to this Code that meets the criteria specified in subsection (c) of this Section, may, by proper resolution, levy an annual tax not to exceed 0.05% upon the value of the taxable property as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue for a period not to exceed 7 years for the purpose of providing for the repayment of moneys paid to the district for temporary relocation expenses of the district pursuant to Section 2-3.77 of this Code.
    (b) The school board of any district that meets the criteria specified in subsection (c) of this Section may repair, reconstruct, or replace a condemned building without seeking referendum approval for the repair, reconstruction, or replacement.
    (c) In order for this Section to apply, the school district must (i) be located in a county subject to the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law and (ii) have had a school building condemned within 10 years after the building's initial occupancy.
    (d) Notwithstanding any limitation imposed by the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law or any other limitations specified in this Code or any other law, the school board of any district that meets the criteria specified in subsection (c) of this Section, may, by proper resolution, issue bonds, without referendum, in an amount sufficient to finance the total cost of repair, reconstruction, or replacement of the condemned building, including the costs of providing for the payment of any obligations heretofore or hereafter entered into for such purposes. Any premium and all interest earnings on the proceeds of the bonds so issued shall be used for the purposes for which the bonds were issued. The proceeds of any bonds issued under this Section shall be deposited and accounted for separately within the district's site and construction/capital improvements fund. The recording officer of the board shall file in the office of the county clerk of each county in which a portion of the district is situated a certified copy of the resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds and levy of a tax without limit as to rate or amount to pay the bonds. Bonds issued under this Section and any bonds issued to refund those bonds are not subject to any debt limitation imposed by this Code or any other law.
    (e) The school board, as an express condition to receiving a temporary relocation loan under Section 2-3.77 of this Code, must agree to levy the tax provided in this Section at the maximum rate permitted and to pay to the State of Illinois for deposit into the Temporary Relocation Expenses Revolving Grant Fund (i) all proceeds of the tax attributable to the first year and succeeding years for which the tax is levied after moneys appropriated for purposes of Section 2-3.77 have been distributed to the school district and (ii) all insurance proceeds that become payable to the district under those provisions of any contract or policy of insurance that provide reimbursement for or other coverage against loss with respect to any temporary relocation expenses of the district or proceeds of any legal judgment or settlement regarding the temporary relocation expenses incurred by the district, provided that the aggregate of any tax and insurance or other proceeds paid by the district to the State pursuant to this subsection (e) shall not exceed in amount the moneys distributed to the district pursuant to Section 2-3.77 as a loan or grant.
    (f) If bonds under this Section have been issued by the school district and the purposes for which the bonds have been issued are accomplished and paid for in full and there remain funds on hand from the proceeds of the bonds or interest earnings or premiums, then the school board, by resolution, shall transfer those excess funds to the district's bond and interest fund for the purpose of abating taxes to pay debt service on the bonds or for defeasance of the debt or both.
    (g) If the school district receives a construction grant under the School Construction Law or any other law and the purposes for which the grant was issued are accomplished and paid for in full and there remains funds on hand from the grant or interest earnings thereon, then the excess funds shall be paid to the State of Illinois for deposit into the School Construction Fund or other State fund from which the construction grant was paid.
    (h) All insurance proceeds that become payable to the school district under those provisions of a contract or policy of insurance that provide reimbursement for or other coverage against losses other than with respect to any temporary relocation expenses of the district or proceeds of any legal judgment or settlement regarding the repair, reconstruction, or replacement of the condemned building shall be applied to the repair, reconstruction, or replacement. If the project is completed and, therefore, all costs have been paid for in full and there remain funds on hand, including any interest earnings thereon, from the insurance coverage, legal judgment, or settlement, then a portion of those excess funds equal to the State's share of the construction cost of the project shall be paid to the State of Illinois for deposit into the School Construction Fund or other State fund from which the construction grant was paid, and the remainder of the excess funds shall be transferred to the district's bond and interest fund for the purpose of abating taxes to pay debt service on the bonds or for defeasance of the debt or both. If no debt service remains to be paid, then the excess may be transferred to whichever fund that, as determined by the school board, is most in need of the funds.
(Source: P.A. 93-690, eff. 7-1-04; 94-690, eff. 11-2-05.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-2.2e)
    Sec. 17-2.2e. Maximum tax rates. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, beginning in levy year 2016, a school district that contains a federal military installation and is eligible to receive impact aid under Section 8003(b) of the federal Elementary and Secondary Education Act or any successor program may, subject to the restrictions set forth in this Section, levy taxes for any of the following purposes at a rate that exceeds the maximum rate set forth in Section 17-2, Section 17-2.2a, or Section 17-2.2c, as applicable:
        (1) for educational purposes;
        (2) for operations and maintenance purposes;
        (3) for special education programs;
        (4) for leasing educational facilities or computer
    	
technology or both; or
        (5) for transportation purposes.
    If the school district levies a tax for any of the purposes set forth in items (1) through (5) that exceeds the maximum rate set forth for that purpose, it shall first adopt an ordinance setting forth the preliminary tax rates for all purposes for the taxable year and submit those extensions and rates to the county clerk. The tax rates for items (1) through (5), as provided in that ordinance, may not exceed the maximum rates for those purposes set forth in Section 17-2, Section 17-2.2a, or Section 17-2.2c. Upon receiving the tax levy confirmation with the extensions and rates from the county clerk, the district may, at a public hearing, adopt an ordinance adjusting those preliminary tax rates. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided in the form and manner set forth in Sections 18-75 and 18-80 of the Property Tax Code not more than 14 days nor less than 7 days prior to the date of the public hearing. The adjusted tax rates for items (1) through (5) may exceed the maximum rates, provided that the adjusted aggregate tax rate for all purposes may not exceed the aggregate tax rate for all purposes set forth in the ordinance setting forth the preliminary tax rates.
(Source: P.A. 99-908, eff. 12-16-16.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-2.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 17-2.3)
    Sec. 17-2.3. Capital improvement purposes; referendum. The school board of any district desiring to levy and accumulate for not more than 6 years the capital improvements purposes tax provided for in paragraph (4) of Section 17-2 of this Act shall pass a resolution for the levy of said tax, and in such resolution shall describe the capital improvements for which the tax is to be levied and the funds derived therefrom are to be spent. As used in this Section and in paragraph (4) of Section 17-2, capital improvements include but are not limited to the construction of a new school building or buildings or the purchase of school grounds on which any new school building is to be constructed or located, or both. The resolution shall cause the proposition for the levy of the tax provided for in paragraph (4) of Section 17-2 of this Act to be certified to the proper election authorities for submission to the electors of the district at a regular scheduled election in accordance with the general election law. The proposition shall generally describe the capital improvements for which the tax is to be levied and the funds derived therefrom are to be spent.
    If the proposition is approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon, the school district may thereafter levy such capital improvement purposes tax and accumulate funds for not more than 6 years for the capital improvements described in the resolution and on the ballot. Such school district shall also invest such accumulated funds until spent for the capital improvements described in the resolution and on the ballot in accordance with the provisions of the Public Funds Investment Act.
    Any proceeds derived from a capital improvements tax or the accumulation of monies for capital improvements described in the resolution and on the ballot shall be accounted for separately within the Site and Construction/Capital Improvement Fund.
(Source: P.A. 87-984; 87-1023; 88-45.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-2.4) (from Ch. 122, par. 17-2.4)
    Sec. 17-2.4. Tax for area vocational education building programs. The school board of any district having a population of less than 500,000 inhabitants may, by proper resolution, levy an annual tax of not more than .05% upon the value as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue for such purpose, and may accumulate such tax for not more than 5 years, for area vocational education building purposes, including the purposes authorized by Section 10-22.31b of this Act, upon condition that there are not sufficient funds available in the operations and maintenance fund of the district to pay the cost thereof. Such tax shall not be levied without prior approval of the State Superintendent of Education and prior approval by a majority of the electors voting upon the proposition at an election, the proposition having been certified by the secretary of the school board to the proper election authorities for submission to the electorate in accordance with the general election law.
    When the school boards of two or more districts enter into a joint agreement for an area vocational education building program under Section 10-22.31b their agreement may provide, or may be amended to provide, that the question of the levy of the tax authorized by this Section shall be certified to the proper election authorities, for submission to the voters of all of the participating districts in accordance with the general election law, in the same election and that the approval of that levy by a majority of the electors voting upon the proposition in the area comprised of the participating districts, considered as a whole, shall be deemed to authorize that levy in each participating district without regard to the passage or failure of the proposition in any district considered separately. However, the school board of any district may withdraw from the joint agreement by reason of the failure of the electors of that district to approve the proposed levy.
(Source: P.A. 86-970.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-2.5) (from Ch. 122, par. 17-2.5)
    Sec. 17-2.5. Tax for tort immunity. The school board of any district may by proper resolution levy an annual tax upon the value of the taxable property within its territory as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue at a rate that will produce a sum sufficient (i) to pay the cost of settlements or judgments under Section 9-102 of the Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act, (ii) to pay the cost of settlements or judgments under the federal Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 and the Environmental Protection Act, but only until December 31, 2010, (iii) to pay the costs of protecting itself or its employees against liability, property damage or loss, including all costs and reserves of being a member of an insurance pool, under Section 9-103 of the Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act, (iv) to pay the costs of and principal and interest on bonds issued under Section 9-105 of the Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act, (v) to pay tort judgments or settlements under Section 9-104 of the Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act to the extent necessary to discharge such obligations, and (vi) to pay the cost of risk care management programs in accordance with Section 9-107 of the Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act.
(Source: P.A. 95-244, eff. 8-17-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-2.6)
    Sec. 17-2.6. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 86-668. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-2.11) (from Ch. 122, par. 17-2.11)
    Sec. 17-2.11. School board power to levy a tax or to borrow money and issue bonds for fire prevention, safety, energy conservation, accessibility, school security, and specified repair purposes.
    (a) Whenever, as a result of any lawful order of any agency, other than a school board, having authority to enforce any school building code applicable to any facility that houses students, or any law or regulation for the protection and safety of the environment, pursuant to the Environmental Protection Act, any school district having a population of less than 500,000 inhabitants is required to alter or reconstruct any school building or permanent, fixed equipment; the district may, by proper resolution, levy a tax for the purpose of making such alteration or reconstruction, based on a survey report by an architect or engineer licensed in this State, upon all of the taxable property of the district at the value as assessed by the Department of Revenue and at a rate not to exceed 0.05% per year for a period sufficient to finance such alteration or reconstruction, upon the following conditions:
        (1) When there are not sufficient funds available in
    	
the operations and maintenance fund of the school district, the school facility occupation tax fund of the district, or the fire prevention and safety fund of the district, as determined by the district on the basis of rules adopted by the State Board of Education, to make such alteration or reconstruction or to purchase and install such permanent, fixed equipment so ordered or determined as necessary. Appropriate school district records must be made available to the State Superintendent of Education, upon request, to confirm this insufficiency.
        (2) When a certified estimate of an architect or
    	
engineer licensed in this State stating the estimated amount necessary to make the alteration or reconstruction or to purchase and install the equipment so ordered has been secured by the school district, and the estimate has been approved by the regional superintendent of schools having jurisdiction over the district and the State Superintendent of Education. Approval must not be granted for any work that has already started without the prior express authorization of the State Superintendent of Education. If the estimate is not approved or is denied approval by the regional superintendent of schools within 3 months after the date on which it is submitted to him or her, the school board of the district may submit the estimate directly to the State Superintendent of Education for approval or denial.
    In the case of an emergency situation, where the estimated cost to effectuate emergency repairs is less than the amount specified in Section 10-20.21 of this Code, the school district may proceed with such repairs prior to approval by the State Superintendent of Education, but shall comply with the provisions of subdivision (2) of this subsection (a) as soon thereafter as may be as well as Section 10-20.21 of this Code. If the estimated cost to effectuate emergency repairs is greater than the amount specified in Section 10-20.21 of this Code, then the school district shall proceed in conformity with Section 10-20.21 of this Code and with rules established by the State Board of Education to address such situations. The rules adopted by the State Board of Education to deal with these situations shall stipulate that emergency situations must be expedited and given priority consideration. For purposes of this paragraph, an emergency is a situation that presents an imminent and continuing threat to the health and safety of students or other occupants of a facility, requires complete or partial evacuation of a building or part of a building, or consumes one or more of the 5 emergency days built into the adopted calendar of the school or schools or would otherwise be expected to cause such school or schools to fall short of the minimum school calendar requirements.
    (b) Whenever any such district determines that it is necessary for energy conservation purposes that any school building or permanent, fixed equipment should be altered or reconstructed and that such alterations or reconstruction will be made with funds not necessary for the completion of approved and recommended projects contained in any safety survey report or amendments thereto authorized by Section 2-3.12 of this Act; the district may levy a tax or issue bonds as provided in subsection (a) of this Section.
    (c) Whenever any such district determines that it is necessary for accessibility purposes and to comply with the school building code that any school building or equipment should be altered or reconstructed and that such alterations or reconstruction will be made with funds not necessary for the completion of approved and recommended projects contained in any safety survey report or amendments thereto authorized under Section 2-3.12 of this Act, the district may levy a tax or issue bonds as provided in subsection (a) of this Section.
    (d) Whenever any such district determines that it is necessary for school security purposes and the related protection and safety of pupils and school personnel that any school building or property should be altered or reconstructed or that security systems and equipment (including but not limited to intercom, early detection and warning, access control and television monitoring systems) should be purchased and installed, and that such alterations, reconstruction or purchase and installation of equipment will be made with funds not necessary for the completion of approved and recommended projects contained in any safety survey report or amendment thereto authorized by Section 2-3.12 of this Act and will deter and prevent unauthorized entry or activities upon school property by unknown or dangerous persons, assure early detection and advance warning of any such actual or attempted unauthorized entry or activities and help assure the continued safety of pupils and school staff if any such unauthorized entry or activity is attempted or occurs; the district may levy a tax or issue bonds as provided in subsection (a) of this Section.
    If such a school district determines that it is necessary for school security purposes and the related protection and safety of pupils and school staff to hire a school resource officer or that personnel costs for school counselors, mental health experts, or school resource officers are necessary and the district determines that it does not need funds for any of the other purposes set forth in this Section, then the district may levy a tax or issue bonds as provided in subsection (a).
    (e) If a school district does not need funds for other fire prevention and safety projects, including the completion of approved and recommended projects contained in any safety survey report or amendments thereto authorized by Section 2-3.12 of this Act, and it is determined after a public hearing (which is preceded by at least one published notice (i) occurring at least 7 days prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the school district and (ii) setting forth the time, date, place, and general subject matter of the hearing) that there is a substantial, immediate, and otherwise unavoidable threat to the health, safety, or welfare of pupils due to disrepair of school sidewalks, playgrounds, parking lots, or school bus turnarounds and repairs must be made; then the district may levy a tax or issue bonds as provided in subsection (a) of this Section.
    (f) For purposes of this Section a school district may replace a school building or build additions to replace portions of a building when it is determined that the effectuation of the recommendations for the existing building will cost more than the replacement costs. Such determination shall be based on a comparison of estimated costs made by an architect or engineer licensed in the State of Illinois. The new building or addition shall be equivalent in area (square feet) and comparable in purpose and grades served and may be on the same site or another site. Such replacement may only be done upon order of the regional superintendent of schools and the approval of the State Superintendent of Education.
    (g) The filing of a certified copy of the resolution levying the tax when accompanied by the certificates of the regional superintendent of schools and State Superintendent of Education shall be the authority of the county clerk to extend such tax.
    (h) The county clerk of the county in which any school district levying a tax under the authority of this Section is located, in reducing raised levies, shall not consider any such tax as a part of the general levy for school purposes and shall not include the same in the limitation of any other tax rate which may be extended.
    Such tax shall be levied and collected in like manner as all other taxes of school districts, subject to the provisions contained in this Section.
    (i) The tax rate limit specified in this Section may be increased to .10% upon the approval of a proposition to effect such increase by a majority of the electors voting on that proposition at a regular scheduled election. Such proposition may be initiated by resolution of the school board and shall be certified by the secretary to the proper election authorities for submission in accordance with the general election law.
    (j) When taxes are levied by any school district for fire prevention, safety, energy conservation, and school security purposes as specified in this Section, and the purposes for which the taxes have been levied are accomplished and paid in full, and there remain funds on hand in the Fire Prevention and Safety Fund from the proceeds of the taxes levied, including interest earnings thereon, the school board by resolution shall use such excess and other board restricted funds, excluding bond proceeds and earnings from such proceeds, as follows:
        (1) for other authorized fire prevention, safety,
    	
energy conservation, required safety inspections, school security purposes, sampling for lead in drinking water in schools, and for repair and mitigation due to lead levels in the drinking water supply; or
        (2) for transfer to the Operations and Maintenance
    	
Fund for the purpose of abating an equal amount of operations and maintenance purposes taxes.
Notwithstanding subdivision (2) of this subsection (j) and subsection (k) of this Section, through June 30, 2021, the school board may, by proper resolution following a public hearing set by the school board or the president of the school board (that is preceded (i) by at least one published notice over the name of the clerk or secretary of the board, occurring at least 7 days and not more than 30 days prior to the hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation within the school district and (ii) by posted notice over the name of the clerk or secretary of the board, at least 48 hours before the hearing, at the principal office of the school board or at the building where the hearing is to be held if a principal office does not exist, with both notices setting forth the time, date, place, and subject matter of the hearing), transfer surplus life safety taxes and interest earnings thereon to the Operations and Maintenance Fund for building repair work.
    (k) If any transfer is made to the Operation and Maintenance Fund, the secretary of the school board shall within 30 days notify the county clerk of the amount of that transfer and direct the clerk to abate the taxes to be extended for the purposes of operations and maintenance authorized under Section 17-2 of this Act by an amount equal to such transfer.
    (l) If the proceeds from the tax levy authorized by this Section are insufficient to complete the work approved under this Section, the school board is authorized to sell bonds without referendum under the provisions of this Section in an amount that, when added to the proceeds of the tax levy authorized by this Section, will allow completion of the approved work.
    (m) Any bonds issued pursuant to this Section shall bear interest at a rate not to exceed the maximum rate authorized by law at the time of the making of the contract, shall mature within 20 years from date, and shall be signed by the president of the school board and the treasurer of the school district.
    (n) In order to authorize and issue such bonds, the school board shall adopt a resolution fixing the amount of bonds, the date thereof, the maturities thereof, rates of interest thereof, place of payment and denomination, which shall be in denominations of not less than $100 and not more than $5,000, and provide for the levy and collection of a direct annual tax upon all the taxable property in the school district sufficient to pay the principal and interest on such bonds to maturity. Upon the filing in the office of the county clerk of the county in which the school district is located of a certified copy of the resolution, it is the duty of the county clerk to extend the tax therefor in addition to and in excess of all other taxes heretofore or hereafter authorized to be levied by such school district.
    (o) After the time such bonds are issued as provided for by this Section, if additional alterations or reconstructions are required to be made because of surveys conducted by an architect or engineer licensed in the State of Illinois, the district may levy a tax at a rate not to exceed .05% per year upon all the taxable property of the district or issue additional bonds, whichever action shall be the most feasible.
    (p) This Section is cumulative and constitutes complete authority for the issuance of bonds as provided in this Section notwithstanding any other statute or law to the contrary.
    (q) With respect to instruments for the payment of money issued under this Section either before, on, or after the effective date of Public Act 86-004 (June 6, 1989), it is, and always has been, the intention of the General Assembly (i) that the Omnibus Bond Acts are, and always have been, supplementary grants of power to issue instruments in accordance with the Omnibus Bond Acts, regardless of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts, (ii) that the provisions of this Section are not a limitation on the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts, and (iii) that instruments issued under this Section within the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts are not invalid because of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts.
    (r) When the purposes for which the bonds are issued have been accomplished and paid for in full and there remain funds on hand from the proceeds of the bond sale and interest earnings therefrom, the board shall, by resolution, use such excess funds in accordance with the provisions of Section 10-22.14 of this Act.
    (s) Whenever any tax is levied or bonds issued for fire prevention, safety, energy conservation, and school security purposes, such proceeds shall be deposited and accounted for separately within the Fire Prevention and Safety Fund.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17; 101-455, eff. 8-23-19; 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-2.11b)
    Sec. 17-2.11b. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 90-566, eff. 1-2-98. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-2.11c)
    Sec. 17-2.11c. Validation; St. Joseph Ogden Community High School District 305. If, prior to the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 96th General Assembly, St. Joseph Ogden Community High School District 305 has levied and the county clerk has extended taxes for the purposes described in Section 17-2.11 of this Code without the certificates of the regional superintendent of schools and the State Superintendent of Education required by Section 17-2.11, then the tax levies and extensions and the expenditures by the school district of the extended amounts are hereby validated for all purposes to the same extent as if the district had received and filed the necessary certifications prior to the tax levies and extensions and had expended the funds in full compliance with Section 17-2.11.
(Source: P.A. 96-258, eff. 8-11-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-2A) (from Ch. 122, par. 17-2A)
    Sec. 17-2A. Interfund transfers.
    (a) The school board of any district having a population of less than 500,000 inhabitants may, by proper resolution following a public hearing set by the school board or the president of the school board (that is preceded (i) by at least one published notice over the name of the clerk or secretary of the board, occurring at least 7 days and not more than 30 days prior to the hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation within the school district and (ii) by posted notice over the name of the clerk or secretary of the board, at least 48 hours before the hearing, at the principal office of the school board or at the building where the hearing is to be held if a principal office does not exist, with both notices setting forth the time, date, place, and subject matter of the hearing), transfer money from (1) the Educational Fund to the Operations and Maintenance Fund or the Transportation Fund, (2) the Operations and Maintenance Fund to the Educational Fund or the Transportation Fund, (3) the Transportation Fund to the Educational Fund or the Operations and Maintenance Fund, or (4) the Tort Immunity Fund to the Operations and Maintenance Fund of said district, provided that, except during the period from July 1, 2003 through June 30, 2021, such transfer is made solely for the purpose of meeting one-time, non-recurring expenses. Except during the period from July 1, 2003 through June 30, 2021 and except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this Section, any other permanent interfund transfers authorized by any provision or judicial interpretation of this Code for which the transferee fund is not precisely and specifically set forth in the provision of this Code authorizing such transfer shall be made to the fund of the school district most in need of the funds being transferred, as determined by resolution of the school board.
    (b) (Blank).
    (c) Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this Section or any other provision of this Code to the contrary, the school board of any school district (i) that is subject to the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law, (ii) that is an elementary district servicing students in grades K through 8, (iii) whose territory is in one county, (iv) that is eligible for Section 7002 Federal Impact Aid, and (v) that has no more than $81,000 in funds remaining from refinancing bonds that were refinanced a minimum of 5 years prior to January 20, 2017 (the effective date of Public Act 99-926) may make a one-time transfer of the funds remaining from the refinancing bonds to the Operations and Maintenance Fund of the district by proper resolution following a public hearing set by the school board or the president of the school board, with notice as provided in subsection (a) of this Section, so long as the district meets the qualifications set forth in this subsection (c) on January 20, 2017 (the effective date of Public Act 99-926).
    (d) Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this Section or any other provision of this Code to the contrary, the school board of any school district (i) that is subject to the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law, (ii) that is a community unit school district servicing students in grades K through 12, (iii) whose territory is in one county, (iv) that owns property designated by the United States as a Superfund site pursuant to the federal Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9601 et seq.), and (v) that has an excess accumulation of funds in its bond fund, including funds accumulated prior to July 1, 2000, may make a one-time transfer of those excess funds accumulated prior to July 1, 2000 to the Operations and Maintenance Fund of the district by proper resolution following a public hearing set by the school board or the president of the school board, with notice as provided in subsection (a) of this Section, so long as the district meets the qualifications set forth in this subsection (d) on August 4, 2017 (the effective date of Public Act 100-32).
(Source: P.A. 100-32, eff. 8-4-17; 100-465, eff. 8-31-17; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18; 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-2B) (from Ch. 122, par. 17-2B)
    Sec. 17-2B. Transfer from operations and maintenance fund to educational fund. In counties having a population in excess of 600,000 and less than 2,000,000 inhabitants, the school board of an elementary school district maintaining only grades kindergarten through 8 and having an enrollment of less than 800 students may, by proper resolution, cause a proposition to transfer moneys accumulated in its operations and maintenance fund to its educational fund to be submitted to the voters of the school district at a regular scheduled election held in accordance with Article 9 and the general election law of the State; provided, however, that no such resolution, referendum or transfer shall be adopted, held or approved pursuant to this Section unless at the time such resolution is adopted by the school board: (i) the school district has no bonded indebtedness outstanding, has in excess of $1,000,000 accumulated in its operations and maintenance fund and has in each of the 16 years preceding adoption of the resolution levied taxes for both educational purposes and for operations and maintenance purposes at the maximum rates from time to time permitted by law to be levied by such district; and (ii) the voters of the district have not at any time previously by referendum approved or refused to approve the transfer of any moneys from the operations and maintenance fund to the educational purposes fund.
    If a majority of the votes cast on the proposition at a referendum authorized by this Section is in favor of the proposition, the school board may thereafter transfer the moneys from the operations and maintenance fund to the educational fund as approved by the voters of the school district.
(Source: P.A. 86-225; 86-970; 86-1028; 86-1334.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-2C)
    Sec. 17-2C. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 91-357, eff. 7-29-99. Repealed by P.A. 94-234, eff. 7-1-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-3) (from Ch. 122, par. 17-3)
    Sec. 17-3. Additional levies-Submission to voters.
    (a) The school board in any district having a population of less than 500,000 inhabitants may, by proper resolution, cause a proposition to increase, for a limited period of not less than 3 nor more than 10 years or for an unlimited period, the annual tax rate for educational purposes to be submitted to the voters of such district at a regular scheduled election as follows:
        (1) in districts maintaining grades 1 through 8, or
    	
grades 9 through 12, the maximum rate for educational purposes shall not exceed 3.5% of the value as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue;
        (2) in districts maintaining grades 1 through 12 the
    	
maximum rate for educational purposes shall not exceed 4.00% of the value as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue except that if a single elementary district and a secondary district having boundaries that are coterminous form a community unit district on or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 94th General Assembly and the actual combined rate of the elementary district and secondary district prior to the formation of the community unit district is greater than 4.00%, then the maximum rate for educational purposes for such district shall be the following:
            (A) For 2 years following the formation of the
        	
community unit district, the maximum rate shall equal the actual combined rate of the previous elementary district and secondary district.
            (B) In each subsequent year, the maximum rate
        	
shall be reduced by 0.10% or reduced to 4.00%, whichever reduction is less. The school board may, by proper resolution, cause a proposition to increase the reduced rate, not to exceed the maximum rate in clause (A), to be submitted to the voters of the district at a regular scheduled election as provided under this Section. Nothing in this Section shall require that the maximum rate for educational purpose for a district maintaining grades one through 12 be reduced below 4.00%.
    If the resolution of the school board seeks to increase the annual tax rate for educational purposes for a limited period of not less than 3 nor more than 10 years, the proposition shall so state and shall identify the years for which the tax increase is sought.
    If a majority of the votes cast on the proposition is in favor thereof at an election for which the election authorities have given notice either (i) in accordance with Section 12-5 of the Election Code or (ii) by publication of a true and legible copy of the specimen ballot label containing the proposition in the form in which it appeared or will appear on the official ballot label on the day of the election at least 5 days before the day of the election in at least one newspaper published in and having a general circulation in the district, the school board may thereafter, until such authority is revoked in like manner, levy annually the tax so authorized; provided that if the proposition as approved limits the increase in the annual tax rate of the district for educational purposes to a period of not less than 3 nor more than 10 years, the district may, unless such authority is sooner revoked in like manner, levy annually the tax so authorized for the limited number of years approved by a majority of the votes cast on the proposition. Upon expiration of that limited period, the rate at which the district may annually levy its tax for educational purposes shall be the rate provided under Section 17-2, or the rate at which the district last levied its tax for educational purposes prior to approval of the proposition authorizing the levy of that tax at an increased rate, whichever is greater.
    The school board shall certify the proposition to the proper election authorities in accordance with the general election law.
    The provisions of this Section concerning notice of the tax rate increase referendum apply only to consolidated primary elections held prior to January 1, 2002 at which not less than 55% of the voters voting on the tax rate increase proposition voted in favor of the tax rate increase proposition.
    (b) Beginning on the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 97th General Assembly, if a unit district is being established from an elementary district or districts and a high school district, pursuant to Article 11E of this Code, and the combined rate of the elementary district or districts and the high school district prior to the formation of the unit district is greater than 4.00% for educational purposes, then the maximum rate for educational purposes for the unit district shall be the following:
        (1) For the first year following the formation of the
    	
new unit district, the maximum rate shall equal the lesser of the actual combined rate of the previous highest elementary district rate and the high school district rate or 6.40%.
        (2) For the second year after the formation of the
    	
new unit district, the maximum rate shall equal the lesser of the actual combined rate of the previous highest elementary district rate and the high school district rate or 5.80%.
        (3) For the third year after the formation of the new
    	
unit district, the maximum rate shall equal the lesser of the actual combined rate of the previous highest elementary district rate and the high school district rate or 5.20%.
        (4) For the fourth year after the formation of the
    	
new unit district, the maximum rate shall equal the lesser of the actual combined rate of the previous highest elementary district rate and the high school district rate or 4.60%.
        (5) For the fifth year after the formation of the new
    	
unit district and thereafter, the maximum rate shall be no greater than 4.00%.
(Source: P.A. 97-1022, eff. 1-1-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-3.1)
    Sec. 17-3.1. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 81-1489. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-3.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 17-3.2)
    Sec. 17-3.2. Additional or supplemental budget. Whenever the voters of a school district have voted in favor of an increase in the annual tax rate for educational or operations and maintenance purposes or both at an election held after the adoption of the annual school budget for any fiscal year, the board may adopt or pass during that fiscal year an additional or supplemental budget under the sole authority of this Section by a vote of a majority of the full membership of the board, any other provision of this Article to the contrary notwithstanding, in and by which such additional or supplemental budget the board shall appropriate such additional sums of money as it may find necessary to defray expenses and liabilities of that district to be incurred for educational or operations and maintenance purposes or both of the district during that fiscal year, but not in excess of the additional funds estimated to be available by virtue of such voted increase in the annual tax rate for educational or operations and maintenance purposes or both. Such additional or supplemental budget shall be regarded as an amendment of the annual school budget for the fiscal year in which it is adopted, and the board may levy the additional tax for educational or operations and maintenance purposes or both to equal the amount of the additional sums of money appropriated in that additional or supplemental budget, immediately.
(Source: P.A. 86-1334.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-3.3)
    Sec. 17-3.3. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 77-504. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-3.4) (from Ch. 122, par. 17-3.4)
    Sec. 17-3.4. Form of ballot and notice. Except as otherwise provided under subsection (d) of Section 17-6.1, whenever any proposition to authorize or to levy an annual tax, or to increase the annual rate of tax levied by any school district, for any school purpose is submitted to the voters of such district at any election, each required notice or other publication of the election or referendum and the form of ballot shall contain, in addition to any other matters required by law:
    (a) the geographic or other common name of the school district by which that district is commonly known and referred to, as well as the number of the district;
    (b) the maximum rate at which such tax may be levied if the proposition is approved;
    (c) the total dollar amount of the most recently approved annual budget of the school district, what the total dollar amount of that annual budget would be if increased by the amount of additional tax which may be levied if the proposition is approved, and what would be the percentage of increase in the total dollar amount of the most recently approved annual budget of the school district if such total dollar amount were increased by the amount of additional tax which may be levied if the proposition is approved; and
    (d) if the proposition is to increase the annual rate of an existing tax levied by the school district, then in addition to the matters set forth in (a), (b) and (c) above, the annual rate at which such existing tax currently is levied and the percentage of increase between the maximum rate at which such tax may be levied if the proposition is approved and the annual rate at which such tax currently is levied.
(Source: P.A. 86-579; 86-1318.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-3.5)
    Sec. 17-3.5. Maximum-authorized district educational purposes tax rate. If, at any election held prior to March 19, 2004, the voters of a school district having a population of less than 500,000 inhabitants approved the proposition to increase the educational purposes tax rate of the district and the proposition to increase the rate set forth as the existing maximum-authorized educational purposes tax rate of the district the tax rate most recently extended for educational purposes, then, for the purposes of this Code and the Property Tax Code, the maximum-authorized educational purposes tax rate of the district shall be calculated as follows:
        (1) for the first tax year affected by the results of
    	
the referendum, the district's tax rates shall be calculated based upon the rates set forth in the proposition; and
        (2) for each tax year thereafter, the district's
    	
maximum-authorized educational purposes tax rate approved at the referendum shall be equal to the sum of the district's maximum-authorized educational purposes tax rate immediately preceding the referendum plus the difference between the rates set forth in the proposition submitted to the voters of the district at the referendum.
    Within 10 days after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 93rd General Assembly, the school board of any school district affected by this subsection (a) may, notwithstanding the requirements of any other law to the contrary, amend its certificate of tax levy for any year for which its equalized assessed valuation has not yet been certified by the county clerk. The amended certificate of tax levy shall be filed with the county clerk within the 10-day period after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 93rd General Assembly.
(Source: P.A. 93-1059, eff. 12-8-04.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-3.6)
    Sec. 17-3.6. Educational purposes tax rate for school districts subject to Property Tax Extension Limitation Law. Notwithstanding the provisions, requirements, or limitations of this Code or any other law, any tax levied for educational purposes by a school district subject to the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law for the 2016 levy year or any subsequent levy year may be extended at a rate exceeding the rate established for educational purposes by referendum or this Code, provided that the rate does not cause the school district to exceed the limiting rate applicable to the school district under the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law for that levy year.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-3A)
    Sec. 17-3A. Apportionment; tax objections; court decisions; adjustments of levies and refunds to tax objectors. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, if a court, in any tax objection based on the apportionment of an overlapping taxing district under Section 18-155 of the Property Tax Code, for any year prior to the year of the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 92nd General Assembly, enters a final judgment that there was an over extension or under extension of taxes for an overlapping taxing district based on the apportionment under Section 18-155 of the Property Tax Code for the year for which the objection was filed, the county clerks of each county in which there was an under extension of a levy of a school district shall proportionately increase the levy of that school district by an amount specified in the court order in that county in the subsequent year or in any subsequent year following the final judgment of the court. The increase in the levy of the school district, when extended, shall be set forth as a separate item on the tax bills of affected taxpayers. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the increase in the levy and the extension thereof shall not be subject to any limitations on levies or extensions imposed by this Code or the Property Tax Code. The funds collected pursuant to a levy increase authorized by this Section and Section 18-155 of the Property Tax Code shall be delivered to the county collector of each county in which there was an over extension for distribution to the tax objectors in accordance with the court order.
(Source: P.A. 92-377, eff. 8-16-01.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-4) (from Ch. 122, par. 17-4)
    Sec. 17-4. Increase tax rate for transportation. The school board of any district having a population of less than 500,000 inhabitants may, by proper resolution, cause a proposition to increase the annual tax rate for transportation purposes to be submitted to the voters of such district at a regular scheduled election. The board shall certify the proposition to the proper election authority for submission in accordance with the general election law. If at such election a majority of the votes cast on the proposition is in favor thereof the school board may thereafter until such authority is revoked in like manner levy annually the tax so authorized.
(Source: P.A. 82-461.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-5) (from Ch. 122, par. 17-5)
    Sec. 17-5. Increase tax rates for operations and maintenance purposes-Maximum.
    (a) The school board in any district having a population of less than 500,000 inhabitants may, by proper resolution, cause a proposition to increase the annual tax rate for operations and maintenance purposes to be submitted to the voters of the district at a regular scheduled election. The board shall certify the proposition to the proper election authority for submission to the elector in accordance with the general election law. In districts maintaining grades 1 through 8, or grades 9 through 12, the maximum rate for operations and maintenance purposes shall not exceed .55%; and in districts maintaining grades 1 through 12, the maximum rates for operations and maintenance purposes shall not exceed .75%, except that if a single elementary district and a secondary district having boundaries that are coterminous on the effective date of this amendatory Act form a community unit district as authorized under Section 11-6, the maximum rate for operation and maintenance purposes for such district shall not exceed 1.10% of the value as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue; and in such district maintaining grades 1 through 12, funds may, subject to the provisions of Section 17-5.1 accumulate to not more than 5% of the equalized assessed valuation of the district. No such accumulation shall ever be transferred or used for any other purpose. If a majority of the votes cast on the proposition is in favor thereof, the school board may thereafter, until such authority is revoked in like manner, levy annually a tax as authorized.
    (b) Beginning on the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 97th General Assembly, if a unit district is being established from an elementary district or districts and a high school district, pursuant to Article 11E of this Code, and the combined rate of the elementary district or districts and the high school district prior to the formation of the unit district is greater than 0.75% for operations and maintenance purposes, then the maximum rate for operations and maintenance purposes for the unit district shall be the following:
        (1) For the first year following formation of the new
    	
unit district, the maximum rate shall equal the lesser of the actual combined rate of the previous highest elementary district rate and the high school district rate or 1.03%.
        (2) For the second year after formation of the new
    	
unit district, the maximum rate shall equal the lesser of the actual combined rate of the previous highest elementary district rate and the high school district rate or 0.96%.
        (3) For the third year after the formation of the new
    	
unit district, the maximum rate shall equal the lesser of the actual combined rate of the previous highest elementary district rate and the high school district rate or 0.89%.
        (4) For the fourth year after the formation of the
    	
new unit district, the maximum rate shall equal the lesser of the actual combined rate of the previous highest elementary district rate and the high school district rate or 0.82%.
        (5) For the fifth year after the formation of the new
    	
unit district and thereafter, the maximum rate shall be no greater than 0.75%.
(Source: P.A. 97-1022, eff. 1-1-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-5.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 17-5.1)
    Sec. 17-5.1. Referendum for accumulation of operations and maintenance funds. No tax for operations and maintenance purposes and the purchase of school grounds as provided in Section 11-9 and no tax for operations and maintenance purposes as provided in Section 17-5 shall be levied at a rate sufficient to accumulate funds nor shall funds for such purposes be accumulated as authorized in said sections until the board of education or school board has by resolution ordered the submission of the proposition of accumulating funds for such purpose to the electors of the district at a regular scheduled election and the proposition has been approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon. The board shall certify the proposition to the proper election authorities for submission in accordance with the general election law.
    If a majority of the electors voting upon the proposition vote in favor thereof, the board of education or school board may accumulate funds for operations and maintenance purposes and the purchase of school grounds or for operations and maintenance purposes and may annually levy a tax for such purposes in excess of current requirements but subject to the tax rate limitations for such purposes provided by law.
(Source: P.A. 86-970; 86-1334.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-6.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 17-6.1)
    Sec. 17-6.1. Educational purposes and operations, building and maintenance purposes concurrent equal increase and decrease in maximum authorized tax rate.
    (a) The school board of any school district having a population of less than 500,000 inhabitants may, by proper resolution, cause to be submitted to the voters of the school district at a regular scheduled election the proposition of whether the maximum authorized annual tax rate for either educational purposes or operations, building and maintenance purposes may be increased with an equal corresponding tax rate decrease being effected in the maximum authorized tax rate for the other fund.
    (b) The proposition shall be in substantially the following form:
        Shall the maximum authorized annual tax rate for
    	
....... purposes of School District Number ...., ........ County, Illinois (commonly known as .......) be increased from ....% to ....% and the maximum authorized annual tax rate for ....... purposes be decreased concurrently from ....% to ....%?
    (c) The rate amount of the proposed tax rate decrease must be the same as the rate amount of the proposed tax rate increase. No maximum tax rate secured hereunder may exceed the maximum rate specified for the particular fund in Section 17-3 and 17-5.
    (d) The requirements of Section 17-3.4 shall not apply to the proposition provided for in this Section.
    (e) If at the election a majority of the votes cast on the proposition is in favor thereof, the school board may thereafter annually levy the taxes as authorized.
(Source: P.A. 86-1318.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-7) (from Ch. 122, par. 17-7)
    Sec. 17-7. Payments from tax levied. Any sum expended or obligations incurred for the improvement, maintenance, repair or benefit of school buildings and property, including the cost of interior decorating and the installation, improvement, repair, replacement and maintenance of building fixtures, for the rental of buildings and property for school purposes, or for the payment of all premiums for insurance upon school buildings and school building fixtures or for the purchase or equipment to be used in the school lunch program shall be paid from the tax levied for operations and maintenance purposes and the purchase of school grounds. The board may provide by resolution that the payment of all salaries of janitors, engineers or other custodial employees and all costs of fuel, lights, gas, water, telephone service, and custodial supplies and equipment or the cost of a professional survey of the conditions of school buildings as provided in Section 2-3.12, or any one or more of the preceding items shall be paid from the tax levied for operations and maintenance purposes and the purchase of school grounds in which event such salaries or specified costs, or both, shall be so paid until the next fiscal year after the repeal of such resolution. Expenditures for all purposes not specified in Sections 17-7 or 17-8 or other provisions of this Act shall be made from the educational fund.
(Source: P.A. 86-1334; 87-984.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-8) (from Ch. 122, par. 17-8)
    Sec. 17-8. Transportation costs paid from transportation fund. Any transportation operating costs incurred for transporting pupils to and from school and school sponsored activities and the costs of acquiring equipment shall be paid from a transportation fund to consist of moneys received from any tax levy for such purpose, state reimbursement for transportation, except as provided in Section 29-5, all funds received from other districts for transporting pupils and any charges for transportation services rendered to individuals or auxiliary enterprises of the school.
    For the purpose of this Act "transportation operating cost" shall include all costs of transportation except interest and rental of building facilities.
(Source: P.A. 85-581.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-8.01)
    Sec. 17-8.01. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 82-622. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-9) (from Ch. 122, par. 17-9)
    Sec. 17-9. Extension of taxes by county clerk-Separate tax for payment of bonds.
    When the county clerk determines the amount of taxes to be extended upon all the taxable property in any school district having a population of less than 500,000 inhabitants, he shall determine from the certified copies of bond resolutions filed in his office the amount necessary to pay the maturing principal of and interest on any bonds of the district and shall extend a separate tax sufficient to pay all principal and interest thereon which matures prior to the first delinquent date of taxes to be realized from the next succeeding tax extension or all interest and sinking fund requirements for the payment of principal which must be extended prior to said date. The separate tax shall be extended without limitation as to rate or amount. No deduction shall be made in the rate which may be extended for educational or operations, building and maintenance purposes by reason of any rate extended for payment of principal or interest of bonds, except as provided in this section, nor by reason of any tax required to be extended pursuant to the exercise of the power conferred in Section 10-22.12.
(Source: P.A. 77-2744.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-9.01)
    Sec. 17-9.01. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 86-1334. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-9.02)
    Sec. 17-9.02. Supplemental tax levy for Ford Heights School District 169.
    (a) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Article and in addition to the methods provided by other Sections of this Article for increasing the rate of tax levied for any school purpose, Ford Heights School District 169 may levy a supplemental tax for the 2006, 2007, and 2008 taxable years.
    (b) The supplemental tax authorized by this Section is levied upon all the taxable property of the school district at its value as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue for each of the years in which the levy is made. The supplemental tax is in addition to all other taxes that the district may levy for any school purpose for the years in which the levy is made.
    (c) For each year that it is levied, the supplemental tax must be levied at a rate not exceeding that which, when applied to the equalized assessed value of all taxable property in the district for that year in which the levy is made, is sufficient to yield that amount of tax revenue that is equal to $1,067,000 for a total of $3,201,000 for all taxable years that the tax is levied.
    (d) The supplemental tax authorized by this Section must be levied by proper resolution of the school board and without referendum. A certified copy of the resolution levying the supplemental tax, signed by the president and clerk or secretary of the school board, must be filed in the office of the county clerk, and it is, then, the duty of the county clerk to extend the supplemental tax. The supplemental tax must be extended and collected in like manner as all other taxes of the school district, but the supplemental tax must be separately identified by the collectors.
    (e) Ford Heights School District 169 may use the proceeds from the supplemental tax for any purpose for which the district is authorized to make expenditures.
(Source: P.A. 94-1078, eff. 1-9-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-10) (from Ch. 122, par. 17-10)
    Sec. 17-10. Certificate of last ascertained equalized value-Tax books-Notice to school treasurers.
    The county clerk shall furnish the school board of any school district, upon request, a certificate showing the last ascertained full, fair cash value of the taxable property of the district.
    When a school district lies partly in two or more counties, the county clerk of each county in which any part of such district lies shall furnish, upon request, to the school board of the district, a certificate showing the last ascertained full, fair cash value of the taxable property in that part of the district lying in such county.
    When making out the tax books for the collector, the county clerk shall compute each taxable person's tax in each school district upon the total amount of taxable property for that year, located in such district, whether belonging to residents or non-residents, upon the valuation produced by the equalization and assessment of property by the county board of review, and all property originally assessed by the Department of Revenue. Such computation shall be made so as to realize the amount of money required to be raised in such district, as shown in the certificate of tax levy, made out by the governing body of such district, and filed with the county clerk as required by this Act. The county clerk shall cause each person's tax, so computed, to be set upon the tax book to be delivered to the collector for that year, in a separate column against each taxpayer's name, or parcel of taxable property, as it appears in the collector's books, to be collected in the same manner, and at the same time, and by the same person, as State and county taxes are collected. He shall number the school districts on the maps in his office to correspond with the numbers of districts as returned to him by the county superintendent of schools, and in making up the tax books to be delivered to the collector of taxes, the county clerk shall copy therein the number of the school districts set opposite each person's assessment of personal property by the assessor making the assessment of such person, and shall extend the school tax on each person's assessment of personal property. The computation of each person's tax and the extension made by the clerk shall be final and conclusive. The rate shall be uniform, and shall not exceed that required by the amount certified by the school board. The county clerk, before delivering the tax book to the collector, shall make and send by mail to each school treasurer of the county a certificate of the amount due his district or districts from the tax so extended and placed on the tax books.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-11) (from Ch. 122, par. 17-11)
    Sec. 17-11. Certificate of tax levy.
    (a) The school board of each district, other than a school district subject to the authority of a Financial Oversight Panel pursuant to Article 1H of this Code, shall ascertain, as near as practicable, annually, how much money must be raised by special tax for transportation purposes if any and for educational and for operations and maintenance purposes for the next ensuing year. In school districts with a population of less than 500,000, these amounts shall be certified and returned to each county clerk on or before the last Tuesday in December, annually. The certificate shall be signed by the president and clerk or secretary, and may be in the following form:
CERTIFICATE OF TAX LEVY
    We hereby certify that we require the sum of ...... dollars, to be levied as a special tax for transportation purposes and the sum of ...... dollars to be levied as a special tax for educational purposes, and the sum ...... dollars to be levied as a special tax for operations and maintenance purposes, and the sum of ...... to be levied as a special tax for a working cash fund, on the equalized assessed value of the taxable property of our district, for the year (insert year).
    Signed on (insert date).
    A ........... B ............., President
    C ........... D............., Clerk (Secretary)
    Dist. No. .........., ............ County
 
    (b) A failure by the school board to file the certificate with the county clerk in the time required shall not vitiate the assessment.
    (c) A school district subject to the authority of a Financial Oversight Panel pursuant to Article 1H of this Code shall file a certificate of tax levy as otherwise provided by this Section, except that such certificate shall be certified and returned to each county clerk on or before the first Tuesday in November annually. If, for whatever reason, the district fails to certify and return the certificate of tax levy to each county clerk on or before the first Tuesday in November annually, then the Financial Oversight Panel for such school district shall proceed to adopt, certify, and return a certificate of tax levy for such school district to each county clerk on or before the last Tuesday in December annually.
(Source: P.A. 97-429, eff. 8-16-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-11.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 17-11.1)
    Sec. 17-11.1. Amended Tax Certificate. When a school board has authority to levy taxes at the maximum permissive tax rate allowed by law or the maximum tax rate allowed by voter approved referendum and, after the certificate of tax levy has been filed, a change in the assessed valuation resulting from the application of the equalization multiplier by the Department of Revenue causes the school district's tax extensions to be less than the maximum permissive tax rate allowed by law or the maximum tax rate allowed by voter approved referendum, the school board may, within 20 days of such change, amend the certificate of tax levy to provide for the maximum amount of tax extensions provided by the permissive tax rate or by the voter approved referendum, as limited by the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law.
(Source: P.A. 91-850, eff. 6-22-00.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-11.2)
    Sec. 17-11.2. Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, any levy adopted by a School Finance Authority created under Article 1F of this Code is valid and shall be extended by the county clerk if it is certified to the county clerk by the Authority in sufficient time to allow the county clerk to include the levy in the extension for the taxable year.
(Source: P.A. 92-855, eff. 12-6-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-12) (from Ch. 122, par. 17-12)
    Sec. 17-12. Districts in two or more counties. When a district lies partly in two or more counties the school board shall ascertain, as near as practicable, the amount to be raised by special tax for educational and operations and maintenance purposes and shall prepare a certificate for each county in which the district lies and shall deliver one of such certificates to each of the county clerks of the counties in which a part of the district is situated. On the first Monday following the delivery of the certificate, or as soon thereafter as may be practicable, each county clerk shall ascertain the total equalized valuation of all the taxable property in that part of the district as lies in his county, and certify the amount thereof to the county clerk of each of the other counties in which any part of the district lies. From the aggregate of such equalized valuation and from the certificate of the amount so required to be levied, such clerk shall ascertain the rate per cent required to produce in the district the amount of such levy, and at that rate shall extend the special tax to be levied for educational and operations and maintenance purposes in that part of the district lying in his respective county.
(Source: P.A. 86-1334.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-13)
    Sec. 17-13. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-14) (from Ch. 122, par. 17-14)
    Sec. 17-14. Payments by collector to treasurer-Statement of uncollected taxes.
    Within 30 days after the delinquent date for the payment of any tax or installment thereof and after the delivery of the tax books containing the computation and levy of the taxes, or as soon thereafter as the school treasurer shall present the certificate of the amount of the tax and make a demand therefor, the collector shall pay to the treasurer the full amount of the tax certified by the county clerk, or if any part remains uncollected, the collector shall, in addition to the amount collected, deliver to the treasurer a statement of the amount of uncollected taxes for his district or districts, taking his receipt therefor, which receipt shall be evidence in favor of the collector as against the treasurer.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-15) (from Ch. 122, par. 17-15)
    Sec. 17-15. Failure of collector to pay.
    If any collector fails to pay the taxes or any part thereof, the school treasurer or other authorized person may proceed against him and his sureties in a civil action upon his official bond in any court of competent jurisdiction. The collector so in default shall pay 12% of the amount due to be assessed as damages, which shall be included in the judgment rendered against him. If he can show that any part of the taxes could not be collected by law, he shall not be liable for such taxes until he has collected, or may be able to collect them.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-16) (from Ch. 122, par. 17-16)
    Sec. 17-16. Tax anticipation warrants. When there is no money in the treasury of any school district having a population of 500,000 or less inhabitants, whether governed by either or both the general school laws or any special charter, to defray the necessary expenses of the district, including amounts necessary to pay maturing principal and interest of bonds, the school board may issue warrants, or may provide a fund to meet the expenses by issuing and disposing of warrants, drawn against and in anticipation of any taxes levied for the payment of the necessary expenses of the district, either for transportation, educational or for all operations and maintenance purposes, or for payments to the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund, or for the payment of maturing principal and interest of bonds, or for fire prevention, safety, energy conservation and school security purposes, as the case may be, to the extent of 85% of the total amount of the tax so levied. The warrants shall show upon their face that they are payable in the numerical order of their issuance solely from such taxes when collected, and shall be received by any collector of taxes in payment of the taxes against which they are issued, and such taxes shall be set apart and held for their payment.
    Every warrant shall bear interest, payable only out of the taxes against which it is drawn, at a rate not exceeding the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, if issued before July 1, 1971 and if issued thereafter at the rate of not to exceed the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, from the date of its issuance until paid or until notice shall be given by publication in a newspaper or otherwise that the money for its payment is available and that it will be paid on presentation, unless a lower rate of interest is specified therein, in which case the interest shall be computed and paid at the lower rate.
    With respect to instruments for the payment of money issued under this Section either before, on, or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1989, it is and always has been the intention of the General Assembly (i) that the Omnibus Bond Acts are and always have been supplementary grants of power to issue instruments in accordance with the Omnibus Bond Acts, regardless of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts, (ii) that the provisions of this Section are not a limitation on the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts, and (iii) that instruments issued under this Section within the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts are not invalid because of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts.
(Source: P.A. 86-4; 86-1334; 87-984.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-17)
    Sec. 17-17. School board establishment of lines of credit.
    (a) In lieu of issuing tax anticipation warrants in accordance with Section 17-16 of this Code, the school board of a school district having a population of 500,000 or less inhabitants may issue notes, bonds, or other obligations (and in connection with that issuance, establish a line of credit with a bank or other financial institution) in an amount not to exceed 85% of the amount of property taxes most recently levied for educational, operations and maintenance, transportation, or other tax levy purposes or any combination thereof. Moneys thus borrowed shall be applied to the purposes for which the tax or any combination of the taxes may be levied and no other purpose. All moneys so borrowed shall be repaid exclusively from property tax revenues within 60 days after the property tax revenues have been received by the board.
    (a-5) In lieu of issuing notes or certificates in accordance with the provisions of the Revenue Anticipation Act or Section 18-18 of this Code, the school board of a school district having a population of 500,000 or less inhabitants may anticipate revenues due in the current fiscal year or expected to be due in the next subsequent fiscal year and issue notes, bonds, or other obligations (and in connection with that issuance, establish a line of credit with a bank or other financial institution) in an amount not to exceed the following:
        (1) if anticipating revenues due in the current
    	
fiscal year, 85% of the amount or amounts of the revenues due in the current fiscal year as certified by the State Superintendent of Education or other official in a position to provide assurances as to the amounts; and
        (2) if anticipating revenues expected to be due in
    	
the next subsequent fiscal year, 50% of the amount or amounts of the revenues due in the current fiscal year as certified by the State Superintendent of Education or other official in a position to provide assurances as to the amounts.
    All moneys so borrowed shall be repaid exclusively from the anticipated revenues within 60 days after the revenues have been received.
    (b) Borrowing authorized under subsections (a) and (a-5) of this Section shall bear interest at a rate not to exceed the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, from the date of issuance until paid.
    (c) Prior to borrowing or establishing a line of credit under this Section, the board shall authorize, by resolution, the borrowing or line of credit. The resolution shall set forth facts demonstrating the need for the borrowing or line of credit, state the amount to be borrowed, establish a maximum interest rate limit not to exceed that set forth in subsection (b) of this Section, and provide a date by which the borrowed funds shall be repaid. The resolution shall direct the relevant officials to make arrangements to set apart and hold the taxes or other revenue, as received, that will be used to repay the borrowing. In addition, the resolution may authorize the relevant officials to make partial repayments of the borrowing as the taxes or other revenues become available and may contain any other terms, restrictions, or limitations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 96-19, eff. 6-26-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-18)
    Sec. 17-18. Establishment of lines of credit by other educational entities.
    (a) In lieu of borrowing in accordance with the provisions of Section 18-20 of this Code, an entity, such as a special education cooperative or other such joint agreement or an intergovernmental agreement, may anticipate revenues due in the current fiscal year or expected to be due in the next subsequent fiscal year and issue notes or other obligations (and in connection with that issuance, establish a line of credit with a bank or other financial institution) in an amount not to exceed the following:
        (1) if anticipating revenues due in the current
    	
fiscal year, 85% of the amount or amounts of State categorical or grant payments due in the current fiscal year as certified by the State Superintendent of Education or other official in a position to provide assurances as to the amounts; and
        (2) if anticipating revenues expected to be due in
    	
the next subsequent fiscal year, 50% of the amount or amounts of State categorical or grant payments due in the current fiscal year as certified by the State Superintendent of Education or other official in a position to provide assurances as to the amounts.
    All moneys so borrowed shall be repaid exclusively from such anticipated revenues within 60 days after the revenues have been received.
    (b) Borrowing authorized under subsection (a) of this Section shall bear interest at a rate not to exceed the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, from the date of issuance until paid.
    (c) Prior to borrowing or establishing a line of credit under this Section, the regional superintendent of schools or governing board, as the case may be, shall authorize, by executive order or resolution, the borrowing or line of credit. The executive order or resolution shall set forth facts demonstrating the need for the borrowing or line of credit, state the amount to be borrowed, establish a maximum interest rate limit not to exceed that set forth in subsection (b) of this Section, and provide a date by which the borrowed funds shall be repaid. The executive order or resolution shall direct the relevant officials to make arrangements to set apart and hold the revenue, as received, that will be used to repay the borrowing. In addition, the executive order or resolution may authorize the relevant officials to make partial repayments of the borrowing as the revenues become available and may contain any other terms, restrictions, or limitations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 96-19, eff. 6-26-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/17-19)
    Sec. 17-19. Establishment of lines of credit by regional superintendents.
    (a) In lieu of borrowing in accordance with the provisions of Section 18-20 of this Code, a regional superintendent of schools, in his or her official capacity as regional superintendent of schools, may anticipate revenues due in the current fiscal year or expected to be due in the next subsequent fiscal year and issue notes or other obligations (and in connection with that issuance, establish a line of credit with a bank or other financial institution) in an amount not to exceed the following:
        (1) if anticipating revenues due in the current
    	
fiscal year, 85% of the amount or amounts of State categorical or grant payments due in the current fiscal year as certified by the State Superintendent of Education or other official in a position to provide assurances as to the amounts; and
        (2) if anticipating revenues expected to be due in
    	
the next subsequent fiscal year, 50% of the amount or amounts of State categorical or grant payments due in the current fiscal year as certified by the State Superintendent of Education or other official in a position to provide assurances as to the amounts.
    All moneys so borrowed shall be repaid exclusively from such anticipated revenues within 60 days after the revenues have been received.
    (b) Borrowing authorized under subsection (a) of this Section shall bear interest at a rate not to exceed the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, from the date of issuance until paid.
    (c) Prior to borrowing or establishing a line of credit under this Section, the regional superintendent of schools, in his or her official capacity as regional superintendent of schools, shall authorize, by executive order or resolution, the borrowing or line of credit. The executive order or resolution shall set forth facts demonstrating the need for the borrowing or line of credit, state the amount to be borrowed, establish a maximum interest rate limit not to exceed that set forth in subsection (b) of this Section, and provide a date by which the borrowed funds shall be repaid. The executive order or resolution shall direct the relevant officials to make arrangements to set apart and hold the revenue, as received, that will be used to repay the borrowing. In addition, the executive order or resolution may authorize the relevant officials to make partial repayments of the borrowing as the revenues become available and may contain any other terms, restrictions, or limitations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 96-19, eff. 6-26-09.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 18 heading)
ARTICLE 18. COMMON SCHOOL FUND

    (105 ILCS 5/18-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 18-1)
    Sec. 18-1. Moneys constituting fund. The common school fund of the state shall consist of any sums accredited thereto in pursuance of law, of the interest on the school fund proper, which fund is 3% upon the proceeds of the sales of public lands in the State, 1/6 part excepted; and the interest on the surplus revenue distributed by Act of Congress and made part of the common school fund by Act of the legislature, March 4, 1837. The interest on the school fund proper and the surplus revenue shall be paid by the State annually at the rate of 6%, and shall be distributed as provided by law.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/18-3) (from Ch. 122, par. 18-3)
    Sec. 18-3. Tuition of children from orphanages and children's homes. When the children from any home for orphans, dependent, abandoned or maladjusted children maintained by any organization or association admitting to such home children from the State in general or when children residing in a school district wherein the State of Illinois maintains and operates any welfare or penal institution on property owned by the State of Illinois, which contains houses, housing units or housing accommodations within a school district, attend grades kindergarten through 12 of the public schools maintained by that school district, the State Superintendent of Education shall direct the State Comptroller to pay a specified amount sufficient to pay the annual tuition cost of such children who attended such public schools during the regular school year ending on June 30. The Comptroller shall pay the amount after receipt of a voucher submitted by the State Superintendent of Education.
    The amount of the tuition for such children attending the public schools of the district shall be determined by the State Superintendent of Education by multiplying the number of such children in average daily attendance in such schools by 1.2 times the total annual per capita cost of administering the schools of the district. Such total annual per capita cost shall be determined by totaling all expenses of the school district in the educational, operations and maintenance, bond and interest, transportation, Illinois municipal retirement, and rent funds for the school year preceding the filing of such tuition claims less expenditures not applicable to the regular K-12 program, less offsetting revenues from State sources except those from the common school fund, less offsetting revenues from federal sources except those from federal impaction aid, less student and community service revenues, plus a depreciation allowance; and dividing such total by the average daily attendance for the year.
    Annually on or before June 15 the superintendent of the district shall certify to the State Superintendent of Education the following:
        1. The name of the home and of the organization or
    	
association maintaining it; or the legal description of the real estate upon which the house, housing units, or housing accommodations are located and that no taxes or service charges or other payments authorized by law to be made in lieu of taxes were collected therefrom or on account thereof during either of the calendar years included in the school year for which claim is being made;
        2. The number of children from the home or living in
    	
such houses, housing units or housing accommodations and attending the schools of the district;
        3. The total number of children attending the schools
    	
of the district;
        4. The per capita tuition charge of the district; and
        5. The computed amount of the tuition payment claimed
    	
as due.
    Whenever the persons in charge of such home for orphans, dependent, abandoned or maladjusted children have received from the parent or guardian of any such child or by virtue of an order of court a specific allowance for educating such child, such persons shall pay to the school board in the district where the child attends school such amount of the allowance as is necessary to pay the tuition required by such district for the education of the child. If the allowance is insufficient to pay the tuition in full the State Superintendent of Education shall direct the Comptroller to pay to the district the difference between the total tuition charged and the amount of the allowance.
    Whenever the facilities of a school district in which such house, housing units or housing accommodations are located, are limited, pupils may be assigned by that district to the schools of any adjacent district to the limit of the facilities of the adjacent district to properly educate such pupils as shall be determined by the school board of the adjacent district, and the State Superintendent of Education shall direct the Comptroller to pay a specified amount sufficient to pay the annual tuition of the children so assigned to and attending public schools in the adjacent districts and the Comptroller shall draw his warrant upon the State Treasurer for the payment of such amount for the benefit of the adjacent school districts in the same manner as for districts in which the houses, housing units or housing accommodations are located.
    Summer session costs shall be reimbursed based on the actual expenditures for providing these services. On or before November 1 of each year, the superintendent of each eligible school district shall certify to the State Superintendent of Education the claim of the district for the summer session following the regular school year just ended. The State Superintendent of Education shall transmit to the Comptroller no later than December 15th of each year vouchers for payment of amounts due to school districts for summer session.
    Claims for tuition for children from any home for orphans or dependent, abandoned, or maladjusted children shall be paid on a current year basis. On September 30, December 31, and March 31, the State Board of Education shall voucher payments for districts with those students based on an estimated cost calculated from the prior year's claim. The school district shall certify to the State Superintendent of Education the report of claims due for such tuition payments on or before June 15. Claims received by June 15 may be amended until August 1. The State Superintendent of Education shall direct the State Comptroller to pay to the district, on or before August 31, the amount due for the district for the school year in accordance with the calculation of the claim as set forth in this Section. However, notwithstanding any other provisions of this Section or the School Code, beginning with fiscal year 1994 and each fiscal year thereafter, if the amount appropriated for any fiscal year is less than the amount required for purposes of this Section, the amount required to eliminate any insufficient reimbursement for each district claim under this Section shall be reimbursed on August 31 of the next fiscal year. Payments required to eliminate any insufficiency for prior fiscal year claims shall be made before any claims are paid for the current fiscal year.
    If a school district makes a claim for reimbursement under Section 14-7.03 it shall not include in any claim filed under this Section children residing on the property of State institutions included in its claim under Section 14-7.03.
    Any child who is not a resident of Illinois who is placed in a child welfare institution, private facility, State operated program, orphanage or children's home shall have the payment for his educational tuition and any related services assured by the placing agent.
    In order to provide services appropriate to allow a student under the legal guardianship or custodianship of the State to participate in local school district educational programs, costs may be incurred in appropriate cases by the district that are in excess of 1.2 times the district per capita tuition charge allowed under the provisions of this Section. In the event such excess costs are incurred, they must be documented in accordance with cost rules established under the authority of this Section and may then be claimed for reimbursement under this Section.
    Planned services for students eligible for this funding must be a collaborative effort between the appropriate State agency or the student's group home or institution and the local school district.
(Source: P.A. 101-17, eff. 6-14-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/18-4.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 18-4.2)
    Sec. 18-4.2. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 88-641, eff. 9-9-94. Repealed by P.A. 91-96, eff. 7-9-99.)

    (105 ILCS 5/18-4.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 18-4.3)
    Sec. 18-4.3. Summer school grants. Through fiscal year 2017, grants shall be determined for pupil attendance in summer schools conducted under Sections 10-22.33A and 34-18 and approved under Section 2-3.25 in the following manner.
    The amount of grant for each accredited summer school attendance pupil shall be obtained by dividing the total amount of apportionments determined under Section 18-8.05 by the actual number of pupils in average daily attendance used for such apportionments. The number of credited summer school attendance pupils shall be determined (a) by counting clock hours of class instruction by pupils enrolled in grades 1 through 12 in approved courses conducted at least 60 clock hours in summer sessions; (b) by dividing such total of clock hours of class instruction by 4 to produce days of credited pupil attendance; (c) by dividing such days of credited pupil attendance by the actual number of days in the regular term as used in computation in the general apportionment in Section 18-8.05; and (d) by multiplying by 1.25.
    The amount of the grant for a summer school program approved by the State Superintendent of Education for children with disabilities, as defined in Sections 14-1.02 through 14-1.07, shall be determined in the manner contained above except that average daily membership shall be utilized in lieu of average daily attendance.
    In the case of an apportionment based on summer school attendance or membership pupils, the claim therefor shall be presented as a separate claim for the particular school year in which such summer school session ends. On or before November 1 of each year the superintendent of each eligible school district shall certify to the State Superintendent of Education the claim of the district for the summer session just ended. Failure on the part of the school board to so certify shall constitute a forfeiture of its right to such payment. The State Superintendent of Education shall transmit to the Comptroller no later than December 15th of each year vouchers for payment of amounts due school districts for summer school. The State Superintendent of Education shall direct the Comptroller to draw his warrants for payments thereof by the 30th day of December. If the money appropriated by the General Assembly for such purpose for any year is insufficient, it shall be apportioned on the basis of claims approved.
    However, notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, for each fiscal year the money appropriated by the General Assembly for the purposes of this Section shall only be used for grants for approved summer school programs for those children with disabilities served pursuant to Section 14-7.02 or 14-7.02b of this Code.
    No funding shall be provided to school districts under this Section after fiscal year 2017. In fiscal year 2018 and each fiscal year thereafter, all funding received by a school district from the State pursuant to Section 18-8.15 of this Code that is attributable to summer school for special education pupils must be used for special education services authorized under this Code.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/18-4.4) (from Ch. 122, par. 18-4.4)
    Sec. 18-4.4. Tax Equivalent Grants. When any State institution is located in a school district in which the State owns 45% or more of the total land area of the district, the State Superintendent of Education shall annually direct the State Comptroller to pay the amount of the tax-equivalent grants provided in this Section, and the State Comptroller shall draw his warrant upon the State Treasurer for the payment of the grants. For fiscal year 1995 and each fiscal year thereafter, the grant shall equal 0.5% of the equalized assessed valuation of the land owned by the State (computing that equalized assessed valuation by multiplying the average value per taxable acre of the school district by the total number of acres of land owned by the State). Annually on or before September 15, 1994 and July 1, thereafter, the district superintendent shall certify to the State Board of Education the following matters:
        1. The name of the State institution.
        2. The total land area of the district in acres.
        3. The total ownership of the land of the State in
    	
acres.
        4. The total equalized assessed value of all the land
    	
in the district.
        5. The rate of school tax payable in the year.
        6. The computed amount of the tax-equivalent grant
    	
claimed.
    Failure of any district superintendent to certify the claim for the tax-equivalent grant on or before September 15, 1994 or July 1 of a subsequent year shall constitute a forfeiture by the district of its right to such grant for the school year.
(Source: P.A. 91-723, eff. 6-2-00.)

    (105 ILCS 5/18-4.5)
    Sec. 18-4.5. Home Hospital Grants. Except for those children qualifying under Article 14, school districts shall be eligible to receive reimbursement for all children requiring home or hospital instruction at not more than $1,000 annually per child or $9,000 per teacher, whichever is less.
(Source: P.A. 98-739, eff. 7-16-14.)

    (105 ILCS 5/18-5) (from Ch. 122, par. 18-5)
    Sec. 18-5. Compensation of regional superintendents and assistants. The State Board of Education shall request an appropriation payable from the Personal Property Tax Replacement Fund for compensation for regional superintendents of schools and the assistant regional superintendents of schools authorized by Section 3-15.10 of this Act, and as provided in "An Act concerning fees and salaries and to classify the several counties of this State with reference thereto", approved March 29, 1872 as amended, and shall present vouchers to the Comptroller monthly for the payment to the several regional superintendents and such assistant regional superintendents of their compensation as fixed by law. Such payments shall be made either (1) monthly, at the close of the month, or (2) semimonthly on or around the 15th of the month and at the close of the month, at the option of the regional superintendent or assistant regional superintendent.
(Source: P.A. 97-619, eff. 11-14-11; 97-732, eff. 6-30-12; 98-24, eff. 6-19-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/18-6) (from Ch. 122, par. 18-6)
    Sec. 18-6. Supervisory expenses. The State Board of Education shall annually request an appropriation for regional office of education expenses, aggregating $1,000 per county per year for each educational service region. The State Board of Education shall present vouchers to the Comptroller as soon as may be after the first day of August each year for each regional office of education. Each regional office of education may draw upon these funds for the expenses necessarily incurred in providing for supervisory services in the region.
(Source: P.A. 98-739, eff. 7-16-14.)

    (105 ILCS 5/18-7) (from Ch. 122, par. 18-7)
    Sec. 18-7. Payments for benefit of teacher retirement systems.
    (a) In each fiscal year through fiscal year 1998, the State Board of Education shall distribute to the Public School Teachers' Pension and Retirement Fund of Chicago the sum, if any, appropriated for that fiscal year from the Common School Fund for the benefit of the Retirement Fund, in the manner provided in this Section, the Illinois Pension Code, the State Finance Act, and other applicable provisions of law. In making this distribution, the State Board of Education shall present vouchers to the State Comptroller on the 10th and 20th days of each month beginning in August. Each payment shall equal 1/24 of the annual amount appropriated in the months of August through May and 1/12 of the annual amount appropriated in June.
    Beginning in fiscal year 1999, the State contributions to the Public School Teachers' Pension and Retirement Fund of Chicago shall be appropriated directly to the Fund and paid in vouchers submitted by the board of trustees of the Fund. Vouchers submitted under this subsection shall be paid by the State Comptroller and Treasurer by warrants drawn on funds appropriated to the Public School Teachers' Pension and Retirement Fund of Chicago.
    (b) The State Board of Education shall, in State fiscal year 1995, pay to the Teachers' Retirement System of the State of Illinois the amount appropriated for the required State contribution to the System for that fiscal year. The State Board of Education shall present vouchers to the State Comptroller for this purpose on the 10th and 20th days of each month of the fiscal year, other than the month of July. Each payment in the months of August through May shall equal 1/24 of the amount appropriated for that fiscal year; each payment in the month of June shall equal 1/12 of the amount appropriated for that fiscal year.
    Vouchers submitted under this subsection shall be paid by the State Comptroller and Treasurer by warrants drawn on funds appropriated to the State Board of Education for that purpose.
    (c) Beginning in State fiscal year 1996, the required State contributions to the Teachers' Retirement System of the State of Illinois shall be appropriated directly to the System and paid on vouchers submitted by the board of trustees of the retirement system, as provided in Section 16-158 of the Illinois Pension Code. These vouchers shall be paid by the State Comptroller and Treasurer by warrants drawn on funds appropriated to the retirement system for that purpose.
(Source: P.A. 90-548, eff. 12-4-97.)

    (105 ILCS 5/18-8) (from Ch. 122, par. 18-8)
    Sec. 18-8. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 90-655, eff. 7-30-98. Repealed internally, eff. 7-1-98.)

    (105 ILCS 5/18-8.05)
    Sec. 18-8.05. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 100-863, eff. 8-14-18. Repealed by P.A. 100-582, eff. 3-23-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/18-8.1)
    Sec. 18-8.1. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 3759. Repealed by P.A. 98-739, eff. 7-16-14.)

    (105 ILCS 5/18-8.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 18-8.2)
    Sec. 18-8.2. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 94-902, eff. 7-1-06. Repealed by P.A. 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/18-8.3)
    Sec. 18-8.3. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 88-555, eff. 7-27-94. Repealed by P.A. 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/18-8.4)
    Sec. 18-8.4. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 84-1243. Repealed by P.A. 95-793, eff. 1-1-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/18-8.5) (from Ch. 122, par. 18-8.5)
    Sec. 18-8.5. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 94-902, eff. 7-1-06. Repealed by P.A. 94-1019, eff. 7-10-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/18-8.7)
    Sec. 18-8.7. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 88-647, eff. 9-16-94. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/18-8.10)
    Sec. 18-8.10. Fast growth grants.
    (a) If there has been an increase in a school district's student population over the most recent 2 school years of (i) over 1.5% in a district with over 10,000 pupils in average daily attendance (as defined in Section 18-8.05 or 18-8.15 of this Code) or (ii) over 7.5% in any other district, then the district is eligible for a grant under this Section, subject to appropriation.
    (b) The State Board of Education shall determine a per pupil grant amount for each school district. The total grant amount for a district for any given school year shall equal the per pupil grant amount multiplied by the difference between the number of pupils in average daily attendance for the 2 most recent school years.
    (c) Funds for grants under this Section must be appropriated to the State Board of Education in a separate line item for this purpose. If the amount appropriated in any fiscal year is insufficient to pay all grants for a school year, then the amount appropriated shall be prorated among eligible districts. As soon as possible after funds have been appropriated to the State Board of Education, the State Board of Education shall distribute the grants to eligible districts.
    (d) If a school district intentionally reports incorrect average daily attendance numbers to receive a grant under this Section, then the district shall be denied State aid in the same manner as State aid is denied for intentional incorrect reporting of average daily attendance numbers under Section 18-8.05 or 18-8.15 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/18-8.15)
    Sec. 18-8.15. Evidence-Based Funding for student success for the 2017-2018 and subsequent school years.
    (a) General provisions.
        (1) The purpose of this Section is to ensure that,
    	
by June 30, 2027 and beyond, this State has a kindergarten through grade 12 public education system with the capacity to ensure the educational development of all persons to the limits of their capacities in accordance with Section 1 of Article X of the Constitution of the State of Illinois. To accomplish that objective, this Section creates a method of funding public education that is evidence-based; is sufficient to ensure every student receives a meaningful opportunity to learn irrespective of race, ethnicity, sexual orientation, gender, or community-income level; and is sustainable and predictable. When fully funded under this Section, every school shall have the resources, based on what the evidence indicates is needed, to:
            (A) provide all students with a high quality
        	
education that offers the academic, enrichment, social and emotional support, technical, and career-focused programs that will allow them to become competitive workers, responsible parents, productive citizens of this State, and active members of our national democracy;
            (B) ensure all students receive the education
        	
they need to graduate from high school with the skills required to pursue post-secondary education and training for a rewarding career;
            (C) reduce, with a goal of eliminating, the
        	
achievement gap between at-risk and non-at-risk students by raising the performance of at-risk students and not by reducing standards; and
            (D) ensure this State satisfies its obligation to
        	
assume the primary responsibility to fund public education and simultaneously relieve the disproportionate burden placed on local property taxes to fund schools.
        (2) The Evidence-Based Funding formula under this
    	
Section shall be applied to all Organizational Units in this State. The Evidence-Based Funding formula outlined in this Act is based on the formula outlined in Senate Bill 1 of the 100th General Assembly, as passed by both legislative chambers. As further defined and described in this Section, there are 4 major components of the Evidence-Based Funding model:
            (A) First, the model calculates a unique Adequacy
        	
Target for each Organizational Unit in this State that considers the costs to implement research-based activities, the unit's student demographics, and regional wage differences.
            (B) Second, the model calculates each
        	
Organizational Unit's Local Capacity, or the amount each Organizational Unit is assumed to contribute toward its Adequacy Target from local resources.
            (C) Third, the model calculates how much funding
        	
the State currently contributes to the Organizational Unit and adds that to the unit's Local Capacity to determine the unit's overall current adequacy of funding.
            (D) Finally, the model's distribution method
        	
allocates new State funding to those Organizational Units that are least well-funded, considering both Local Capacity and State funding, in relation to their Adequacy Target.
        (3) An Organizational Unit receiving any funding
    	
under this Section may apply those funds to any fund so received for which that Organizational Unit is authorized to make expenditures by law.
        (4) As used in this Section, the following terms
    	
shall have the meanings ascribed in this paragraph (4):
        "Adequacy Target" is defined in paragraph (1) of
    	
subsection (b) of this Section.
        "Adjusted EAV" is defined in paragraph (4) of
    	
subsection (d) of this Section.
        "Adjusted Local Capacity Target" is defined in
    	
paragraph (3) of subsection (c) of this Section.
        "Adjusted Operating Tax Rate" means a tax rate for
    	
all Organizational Units, for which the State Superintendent shall calculate and subtract for the Operating Tax Rate a transportation rate based on total expenses for transportation services under this Code, as reported on the most recent Annual Financial Report in Pupil Transportation Services, function 2550 in both the Education and Transportation funds and functions 4110 and 4120 in the Transportation fund, less any corresponding fiscal year State of Illinois scheduled payments excluding net adjustments for prior years for regular, vocational, or special education transportation reimbursement pursuant to Section 29-5 or subsection (b) of Section 14-13.01 of this Code divided by the Adjusted EAV. If an Organizational Unit's corresponding fiscal year State of Illinois scheduled payments excluding net adjustments for prior years for regular, vocational, or special education transportation reimbursement pursuant to Section 29-5 or subsection (b) of Section 14-13.01 of this Code exceed the total transportation expenses, as defined in this paragraph, no transportation rate shall be subtracted from the Operating Tax Rate.
        "Allocation Rate" is defined in paragraph (3) of
    	
subsection (g) of this Section.
        "Alternative School" means a public school that is
    	
created and operated by a regional superintendent of schools and approved by the State Board.
        "Applicable Tax Rate" is defined in paragraph (1) of
    	
subsection (d) of this Section.
        "Assessment" means any of those benchmark, progress
    	
monitoring, formative, diagnostic, and other assessments, in addition to the State accountability assessment, that assist teachers' needs in understanding the skills and meeting the needs of the students they serve.
        "Assistant principal" means a school administrator
    	
duly endorsed to be employed as an assistant principal in this State.
        "At-risk student" means a student who is at risk of
    	
not meeting the Illinois Learning Standards or not graduating from elementary or high school and who demonstrates a need for vocational support or social services beyond that provided by the regular school program. All students included in an Organizational Unit's Low-Income Count, as well as all English learner and disabled students attending the Organizational Unit, shall be considered at-risk students under this Section.
        "Average Student Enrollment" or "ASE" for fiscal year
    	
2018 means, for an Organizational Unit, the greater of the average number of students (grades K through 12) reported to the State Board as enrolled in the Organizational Unit on October 1 in the immediately preceding school year, plus the pre-kindergarten students who receive special education services of 2 or more hours a day as reported to the State Board on December 1 in the immediately preceding school year, or the average number of students (grades K through 12) reported to the State Board as enrolled in the Organizational Unit on October 1, plus the pre-kindergarten students who receive special education services of 2 or more hours a day as reported to the State Board on December 1, for each of the immediately preceding 3 school years. For fiscal year 2019 and each subsequent fiscal year, "Average Student Enrollment" or "ASE" means, for an Organizational Unit, the greater of the average number of students (grades K through 12) reported to the State Board as enrolled in the Organizational Unit on October 1 and March 1 in the immediately preceding school year, plus the pre-kindergarten students who receive special education services as reported to the State Board on October 1 and March 1 in the immediately preceding school year, or the average number of students (grades K through 12) reported to the State Board as enrolled in the Organizational Unit on October 1 and March 1, plus the pre-kindergarten students who receive special education services as reported to the State Board on October 1 and March 1, for each of the immediately preceding 3 school years. For the purposes of this definition, "enrolled in the Organizational Unit" means the number of students reported to the State Board who are enrolled in schools within the Organizational Unit that the student attends or would attend if not placed or transferred to another school or program to receive needed services. For the purposes of calculating "ASE", all students, grades K through 12, excluding those attending kindergarten for a half day and students attending an alternative education program operated by a regional office of education or intermediate service center, shall be counted as 1.0. All students attending kindergarten for a half day shall be counted as 0.5, unless in 2017 by June 15 or by March 1 in subsequent years, the school district reports to the State Board of Education the intent to implement full-day kindergarten district-wide for all students, then all students attending kindergarten shall be counted as 1.0. Special education pre-kindergarten students shall be counted as 0.5 each. If the State Board does not collect or has not collected both an October 1 and March 1 enrollment count by grade or a December 1 collection of special education pre-kindergarten students as of August 31, 2017 (the effective date of Public Act 100-465), it shall establish such collection for all future years. For any year in which a count by grade level was collected only once, that count shall be used as the single count available for computing a 3-year average ASE. Funding for programs operated by a regional office of education or an intermediate service center must be calculated using the Evidence-Based Funding formula under this Section for the 2019-2020 school year and each subsequent school year until separate adequacy formulas are developed and adopted for each type of program. ASE for a program operated by a regional office of education or an intermediate service center must be determined by the March 1 enrollment for the program. For the 2019-2020 school year, the ASE used in the calculation must be the first-year ASE and, in that year only, the assignment of students served by a regional office of education or intermediate service center shall not result in a reduction of the March enrollment for any school district. For the 2020-2021 school year, the ASE must be the greater of the current-year ASE or the 2-year average ASE. Beginning with the 2021-2022 school year, the ASE must be the greater of the current-year ASE or the 3-year average ASE. School districts shall submit the data for the ASE calculation to the State Board within 45 days of the dates required in this Section for submission of enrollment data in order for it to be included in the ASE calculation. For fiscal year 2018 only, the ASE calculation shall include only enrollment taken on October 1.
        "Base Funding Guarantee" is defined in paragraph (10)
    	
of subsection (g) of this Section.
        "Base Funding Minimum" is defined in subsection (e)
    	
of this Section.
        "Base Tax Year" means the property tax levy year used
    	
to calculate the Budget Year allocation of primary State aid.
        "Base Tax Year's Extension" means the product of the
    	
equalized assessed valuation utilized by the county clerk in the Base Tax Year multiplied by the limiting rate as calculated by the county clerk and defined in PTELL.
        "Bilingual Education Allocation" means the amount of
    	
an Organizational Unit's final Adequacy Target attributable to bilingual education divided by the Organizational Unit's final Adequacy Target, the product of which shall be multiplied by the amount of new funding received pursuant to this Section. An Organizational Unit's final Adequacy Target attributable to bilingual education shall include all additional investments in English learner students' adequacy elements.
        "Budget Year" means the school year for which primary
    	
State aid is calculated and awarded under this Section.
        "Central office" means individual administrators and
    	
support service personnel charged with managing the instructional programs, business and operations, and security of the Organizational Unit.
        "Comparable Wage Index" or "CWI" means a regional
    	
cost differentiation metric that measures systemic, regional variations in the salaries of college graduates who are not educators. The CWI utilized for this Section shall, for the first 3 years of Evidence-Based Funding implementation, be the CWI initially developed by the National Center for Education Statistics, as most recently updated by Texas A & M University. In the fourth and subsequent years of Evidence-Based Funding implementation, the State Superintendent shall re-determine the CWI using a similar methodology to that identified in the Texas A & M University study, with adjustments made no less frequently than once every 5 years.
        "Computer technology and equipment" means computers
    	
servers, notebooks, network equipment, copiers, printers, instructional software, security software, curriculum management courseware, and other similar materials and equipment.
        "Computer technology and equipment investment
    	
allocation" means the final Adequacy Target amount of an Organizational Unit assigned to Tier 1 or Tier 2 in the prior school year attributable to the additional $285.50 per student computer technology and equipment investment grant divided by the Organizational Unit's final Adequacy Target, the result of which shall be multiplied by the amount of new funding received pursuant to this Section. An Organizational Unit assigned to a Tier 1 or Tier 2 final Adequacy Target attributable to the received computer technology and equipment investment grant shall include all additional investments in computer technology and equipment adequacy elements.
        "Core subject" means mathematics; science; reading,
    	
English, writing, and language arts; history and social studies; world languages; and subjects taught as Advanced Placement in high schools.
        "Core teacher" means a regular classroom teacher in
    	
elementary schools and teachers of a core subject in middle and high schools.
        "Core Intervention teacher (tutor)" means a licensed
    	
teacher providing one-on-one or small group tutoring to students struggling to meet proficiency in core subjects.
        "CPPRT" means corporate personal property replacement
    	
tax funds paid to an Organizational Unit during the calendar year one year before the calendar year in which a school year begins, pursuant to "An Act in relation to the abolition of ad valorem personal property tax and the replacement of revenues lost thereby, and amending and repealing certain Acts and parts of Acts in connection therewith", certified August 14, 1979, as amended (Public Act 81-1st S.S.-1).
        "EAV" means equalized assessed valuation as defined
    	
in paragraph (2) of subsection (d) of this Section and calculated in accordance with paragraph (3) of subsection (d) of this Section.
        "ECI" means the Bureau of Labor Statistics' national
    	
employment cost index for civilian workers in educational services in elementary and secondary schools on a cumulative basis for the 12-month calendar year preceding the fiscal year of the Evidence-Based Funding calculation.
        "EIS Data" means the employment information system
    	
data maintained by the State Board on educators within Organizational Units.
        "Employee benefits" means health, dental, and vision
    	
insurance offered to employees of an Organizational Unit, the costs associated with the statutorily required payment of the normal cost of the Organizational Unit's teacher pensions, Social Security employer contributions, and Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund employer contributions.
        "English learner" or "EL" means a child included in
    	
the definition of "English learners" under Section 14C-2 of this Code participating in a program of transitional bilingual education or a transitional program of instruction meeting the requirements and program application procedures of Article 14C of this Code. For the purposes of collecting the number of EL students enrolled, the same collection and calculation methodology as defined above for "ASE" shall apply to English learners, with the exception that EL student enrollment shall include students in grades pre-kindergarten through 12.
        "Essential Elements" means those elements, resources,
    	
and educational programs that have been identified through academic research as necessary to improve student success, improve academic performance, close achievement gaps, and provide for other per student costs related to the delivery and leadership of the Organizational Unit, as well as the maintenance and operations of the unit, and which are specified in paragraph (2) of subsection (b) of this Section.
        "Evidence-Based Funding" means State funding provided
    	
to an Organizational Unit pursuant to this Section.
        "Extended day" means academic and enrichment programs
    	
provided to students outside the regular school day before and after school or during non-instructional times during the school day.
        "Extension Limitation Ratio" means a numerical ratio
    	
in which the numerator is the Base Tax Year's Extension and the denominator is the Preceding Tax Year's Extension.
        "Final Percent of Adequacy" is defined in paragraph
    	
(4) of subsection (f) of this Section.
        "Final Resources" is defined in paragraph (3) of
    	
subsection (f) of this Section.
        "Full-time equivalent" or "FTE" means the full-time
    	
equivalency compensation for staffing the relevant position at an Organizational Unit.
        "Funding Gap" is defined in paragraph (1) of
    	
subsection (g).
        "Guidance counselor" means a licensed guidance
    	
counselor who provides guidance and counseling support for students within an Organizational Unit.
        "Hybrid District" means a partial elementary unit
    	
district created pursuant to Article 11E of this Code.
        "Instructional assistant" means a core or special
    	
education, non-licensed employee who assists a teacher in the classroom and provides academic support to students.
        "Instructional facilitator" means a qualified teacher
    	
or licensed teacher leader who facilitates and coaches continuous improvement in classroom instruction; provides instructional support to teachers in the elements of research-based instruction or demonstrates the alignment of instruction with curriculum standards and assessment tools; develops or coordinates instructional programs or strategies; develops and implements training; chooses standards-based instructional materials; provides teachers with an understanding of current research; serves as a mentor, site coach, curriculum specialist, or lead teacher; or otherwise works with fellow teachers, in collaboration, to use data to improve instructional practice or develop model lessons.
        "Instructional materials" means relevant
    	
instructional materials for student instruction, including, but not limited to, textbooks, consumable workbooks, laboratory equipment, library books, and other similar materials.
        "Laboratory School" means a public school that is
    	
created and operated by a public university and approved by the State Board.
        "Librarian" means a teacher with an endorsement as a
    	
library information specialist or another individual whose primary responsibility is overseeing library resources within an Organizational Unit.
        "Limiting rate for Hybrid Districts" means the
    	
combined elementary school and high school limiting rates.
        "Local Capacity" is defined in paragraph (1) of
    	
subsection (c) of this Section.
        "Local Capacity Percentage" is defined in
    	
subparagraph (A) of paragraph (2) of subsection (c) of this Section.
        "Local Capacity Ratio" is defined in subparagraph (B)
    	
of paragraph (2) of subsection (c) of this Section.
        "Local Capacity Target" is defined in paragraph (2)
    	
of subsection (c) of this Section.
        "Low-Income Count" means, for an Organizational Unit
    	
in a fiscal year, the higher of the average number of students for the prior school year or the immediately preceding 3 school years who, as of July 1 of the immediately preceding fiscal year (as determined by the Department of Human Services), are eligible for at least one of the following low-income programs: Medicaid, the Children's Health Insurance Program, Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), or the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, excluding pupils who are eligible for services provided by the Department of Children and Family Services. Until such time that grade level low-income populations become available, grade level low-income populations shall be determined by applying the low-income percentage to total student enrollments by grade level. The low-income percentage is determined by dividing the Low-Income Count by the Average Student Enrollment. The low-income percentage for programs operated by a regional office of education or an intermediate service center must be set to the weighted average of the low-income percentages of all of the school districts in the service region. The weighted low-income percentage is the result of multiplying the low-income percentage of each school district served by the regional office of education or intermediate service center by each school district's Average Student Enrollment, summarizing those products and dividing the total by the total Average Student Enrollment for the service region.
        "Maintenance and operations" means custodial
    	
services, facility and ground maintenance, facility operations, facility security, routine facility repairs, and other similar services and functions.
        "Minimum Funding Level" is defined in paragraph (9)
    	
of subsection (g) of this Section.
        "New Property Tax Relief Pool Funds" means, for any
    	
given fiscal year, all State funds appropriated under Section 2-3.170 of this Code.
        "New State Funds" means, for a given school year, all
    	
State funds appropriated for Evidence-Based Funding in excess of the amount needed to fund the Base Funding Minimum for all Organizational Units in that school year.
        "Net State Contribution Target" means, for a given
    	
school year, the amount of State funds that would be necessary to fully meet the Adequacy Target of an Operational Unit minus the Preliminary Resources available to each unit.
        "Nurse" means an individual licensed as a certified
    	
school nurse, in accordance with the rules established for nursing services by the State Board, who is an employee of and is available to provide health care-related services for students of an Organizational Unit.
        "Operating Tax Rate" means the rate utilized in the
    	
previous year to extend property taxes for all purposes, except Bond and Interest, Summer School, Rent, Capital Improvement, and Vocational Education Building purposes. For Hybrid Districts, the Operating Tax Rate shall be the combined elementary and high school rates utilized in the previous year to extend property taxes for all purposes, except Bond and Interest, Summer School, Rent, Capital Improvement, and Vocational Education Building purposes.
        "Organizational Unit" means a Laboratory School or
    	
any public school district that is recognized as such by the State Board and that contains elementary schools typically serving kindergarten through 5th grades, middle schools typically serving 6th through 8th grades, high schools typically serving 9th through 12th grades, a program established under Section 2-3.66 or 2-3.41, or a program operated by a regional office of education or an intermediate service center under Article 13A or 13B. The General Assembly acknowledges that the actual grade levels served by a particular Organizational Unit may vary slightly from what is typical.
        "Organizational Unit CWI" is determined by
    	
calculating the CWI in the region and original county in which an Organizational Unit's primary administrative office is located as set forth in this paragraph, provided that if the Organizational Unit CWI as calculated in accordance with this paragraph is less than 0.9, the Organizational Unit CWI shall be increased to 0.9. Each county's current CWI value shall be adjusted based on the CWI value of that county's neighboring Illinois counties, to create a "weighted adjusted index value". This shall be calculated by summing the CWI values of all of a county's adjacent Illinois counties and dividing by the number of adjacent Illinois counties, then taking the weighted value of the original county's CWI value and the adjacent Illinois county average. To calculate this weighted value, if the number of adjacent Illinois counties is greater than 2, the original county's CWI value will be weighted at 0.25 and the adjacent Illinois county average will be weighted at 0.75. If the number of adjacent Illinois counties is 2, the original county's CWI value will be weighted at 0.33 and the adjacent Illinois county average will be weighted at 0.66. The greater of the county's current CWI value and its weighted adjusted index value shall be used as the Organizational Unit CWI.
        "Preceding Tax Year" means the property tax levy year
    	
immediately preceding the Base Tax Year.
        "Preceding Tax Year's Extension" means the product of
    	
the equalized assessed valuation utilized by the county clerk in the Preceding Tax Year multiplied by the Operating Tax Rate.
        "Preliminary Percent of Adequacy" is defined in
    	
paragraph (2) of subsection (f) of this Section.
        "Preliminary Resources" is defined in paragraph (2)
    	
of subsection (f) of this Section.
        "Principal" means a school administrator duly
    	
endorsed to be employed as a principal in this State.
        "Professional development" means training programs
    	
for licensed staff in schools, including, but not limited to, programs that assist in implementing new curriculum programs, provide data focused or academic assessment data training to help staff identify a student's weaknesses and strengths, target interventions, improve instruction, encompass instructional strategies for English learner, gifted, or at-risk students, address inclusivity, cultural sensitivity, or implicit bias, or otherwise provide professional support for licensed staff.
        "Prototypical" means 450 special education
    	
pre-kindergarten and kindergarten through grade 5 students for an elementary school, 450 grade 6 through 8 students for a middle school, and 600 grade 9 through 12 students for a high school.
        "PTELL" means the Property Tax Extension Limitation
    	
Law.
        "PTELL EAV" is defined in paragraph (4) of subsection
    	
(d) of this Section.
        "Pupil support staff" means a nurse, psychologist,
    	
social worker, family liaison personnel, or other staff member who provides support to at-risk or struggling students.
        "Real Receipts" is defined in paragraph (1) of
    	
subsection (d) of this Section.
        "Regionalization Factor" means, for a particular
    	
Organizational Unit, the figure derived by dividing the Organizational Unit CWI by the Statewide Weighted CWI.
        "School site staff" means the primary school
    	
secretary and any additional clerical personnel assigned to a school.
        "Special education" means special educational
    	
facilities and services, as defined in Section 14-1.08 of this Code.
        "Special Education Allocation" means the amount of an
    	
Organizational Unit's final Adequacy Target attributable to special education divided by the Organizational Unit's final Adequacy Target, the product of which shall be multiplied by the amount of new funding received pursuant to this Section. An Organizational Unit's final Adequacy Target attributable to special education shall include all special education investment adequacy elements.
        "Specialist teacher" means a teacher who provides
    	
instruction in subject areas not included in core subjects, including, but not limited to, art, music, physical education, health, driver education, career-technical education, and such other subject areas as may be mandated by State law or provided by an Organizational Unit.
        "Specially Funded Unit" means an Alternative School,
    	
safe school, Department of Juvenile Justice school, special education cooperative or entity recognized by the State Board as a special education cooperative, State-approved charter school, or alternative learning opportunities program that received direct funding from the State Board during the 2016-2017 school year through any of the funding sources included within the calculation of the Base Funding Minimum or Glenwood Academy.
        "Supplemental Grant Funding" means supplemental
    	
general State aid funding received by an Organizational Unit during the 2016-2017 school year pursuant to subsection (H) of Section 18-8.05 of this Code (now repealed).
        "State Adequacy Level" is the sum of the Adequacy
    	
Targets of all Organizational Units.
        "State Board" means the State Board of Education.
        "State Superintendent" means the State Superintendent
    	
of Education.
        "Statewide Weighted CWI" means a figure determined by
    	
multiplying each Organizational Unit CWI times the ASE for that Organizational Unit creating a weighted value, summing all Organizational Units' weighted values, and dividing by the total ASE of all Organizational Units, thereby creating an average weighted index.
        "Student activities" means non-credit producing
    	
after-school programs, including, but not limited to, clubs, bands, sports, and other activities authorized by the school board of the Organizational Unit.
        "Substitute teacher" means an individual teacher or
    	
teaching assistant who is employed by an Organizational Unit and is temporarily serving the Organizational Unit on a per diem or per period-assignment basis to replace another staff member.
        "Summer school" means academic and enrichment
    	
programs provided to students during the summer months outside of the regular school year.
        "Supervisory aide" means a non-licensed staff member
    	
who helps in supervising students of an Organizational Unit, but does so outside of the classroom, in situations such as, but not limited to, monitoring hallways and playgrounds, supervising lunchrooms, or supervising students when being transported in buses serving the Organizational Unit.
        "Target Ratio" is defined in paragraph (4) of
    	
subsection (g).
        "Tier 1", "Tier 2", "Tier 3", and "Tier 4" are
    	
defined in paragraph (3) of subsection (g).
        "Tier 1 Aggregate Funding", "Tier 2 Aggregate
    	
Funding", "Tier 3 Aggregate Funding", and "Tier 4 Aggregate Funding" are defined in paragraph (1) of subsection (g).
    (b) Adequacy Target calculation.
        (1) Each Organizational Unit's Adequacy Target is
    	
the sum of the Organizational Unit's cost of providing Essential Elements, as calculated in accordance with this subsection (b), with the salary amounts in the Essential Elements multiplied by a Regionalization Factor calculated pursuant to paragraph (3) of this subsection (b).
        (2) The Essential Elements are attributable on a pro
    	
rata basis related to defined subgroups of the ASE of each Organizational Unit as specified in this paragraph (2), with investments and FTE positions pro rata funded based on ASE counts in excess of or less than the thresholds set forth in this paragraph (2). The method for calculating attributable pro rata costs and the defined subgroups thereto are as follows:
            (A) Core class size investments. Each
        	
Organizational Unit shall receive the funding required to support that number of FTE core teacher positions as is needed to keep the respective class sizes of the Organizational Unit to the following maximum numbers:
                (i) For grades kindergarten through 3, the
            	
Organizational Unit shall receive funding required to support one FTE core teacher position for every 15 Low-Income Count students in those grades and one FTE core teacher position for every 20 non-Low-Income Count students in those grades.
                (ii) For grades 4 through 12, the
            	
Organizational Unit shall receive funding required to support one FTE core teacher position for every 20 Low-Income Count students in those grades and one FTE core teacher position for every 25 non-Low-Income Count students in those grades.
            The number of non-Low-Income Count students in a
        	
grade shall be determined by subtracting the Low-Income students in that grade from the ASE of the Organizational Unit for that grade.
            (B) Specialist teacher investments. Each
        	
Organizational Unit shall receive the funding needed to cover that number of FTE specialist teacher positions that correspond to the following percentages:
                (i) if the Organizational Unit operates an
            	
elementary or middle school, then 20.00% of the number of the Organizational Unit's core teachers, as determined under subparagraph (A) of this paragraph (2); and
                (ii) if such Organizational Unit operates a
            	
high school, then 33.33% of the number of the Organizational Unit's core teachers.
            (C) Instructional facilitator investments. Each
        	
Organizational Unit shall receive the funding needed to cover one FTE instructional facilitator position for every 200 combined ASE of pre-kindergarten children with disabilities and all kindergarten through grade 12 students of the Organizational Unit.
            (D) Core intervention teacher (tutor)
        	
investments. Each Organizational Unit shall receive the funding needed to cover one FTE teacher position for each prototypical elementary, middle, and high school.
            (E) Substitute teacher investments. Each
        	
Organizational Unit shall receive the funding needed to cover substitute teacher costs that is equal to 5.70% of the minimum pupil attendance days required under Section 10-19 of this Code for all full-time equivalent core, specialist, and intervention teachers, school nurses, special education teachers and instructional assistants, instructional facilitators, and summer school and extended day teacher positions, as determined under this paragraph (2), at a salary rate of 33.33% of the average salary for grade K through 12 teachers and 33.33% of the average salary of each instructional assistant position.
            (F) Core guidance counselor investments. Each
        	
Organizational Unit shall receive the funding needed to cover one FTE guidance counselor for each 450 combined ASE of pre-kindergarten children with disabilities and all kindergarten through grade 5 students, plus one FTE guidance counselor for each 250 grades 6 through 8 ASE middle school students, plus one FTE guidance counselor for each 250 grades 9 through 12 ASE high school students.
            (G) Nurse investments. Each Organizational Unit
        	
shall receive the funding needed to cover one FTE nurse for each 750 combined ASE of pre-kindergarten children with disabilities and all kindergarten through grade 12 students across all grade levels it serves.
            (H) Supervisory aide investments. Each
        	
Organizational Unit shall receive the funding needed to cover one FTE for each 225 combined ASE of pre-kindergarten children with disabilities and all kindergarten through grade 5 students, plus one FTE for each 225 ASE middle school students, plus one FTE for each 200 ASE high school students.
            (I) Librarian investments. Each Organizational
        	
Unit shall receive the funding needed to cover one FTE librarian for each prototypical elementary school, middle school, and high school and one FTE aide or media technician for every 300 combined ASE of pre-kindergarten children with disabilities and all kindergarten through grade 12 students.
            (J) Principal investments. Each Organizational
        	
Unit shall receive the funding needed to cover one FTE principal position for each prototypical elementary school, plus one FTE principal position for each prototypical middle school, plus one FTE principal position for each prototypical high school.
            (K) Assistant principal investments. Each
        	
Organizational Unit shall receive the funding needed to cover one FTE assistant principal position for each prototypical elementary school, plus one FTE assistant principal position for each prototypical middle school, plus one FTE assistant principal position for each prototypical high school.
            (L) School site staff investments. Each
        	
Organizational Unit shall receive the funding needed for one FTE position for each 225 ASE of pre-kindergarten children with disabilities and all kindergarten through grade 5 students, plus one FTE position for each 225 ASE middle school students, plus one FTE position for each 200 ASE high school students.
            (M) Gifted investments. Each Organizational Unit
        	
shall receive $40 per kindergarten through grade 12 ASE.
            (N) Professional development investments. Each
        	
Organizational Unit shall receive $125 per student of the combined ASE of pre-kindergarten children with disabilities and all kindergarten through grade 12 students for trainers and other professional development-related expenses for supplies and materials.
            (O) Instructional material investments. Each
        	
Organizational Unit shall receive $190 per student of the combined ASE of pre-kindergarten children with disabilities and all kindergarten through grade 12 students to cover instructional material costs.
            (P) Assessment investments. Each Organizational
        	
Unit shall receive $25 per student of the combined ASE of pre-kindergarten children with disabilities and all kindergarten through grade 12 students to cover assessment costs.
            (Q) Computer technology and equipment
        	
investments. Each Organizational Unit shall receive $285.50 per student of the combined ASE of pre-kindergarten children with disabilities and all kindergarten through grade 12 students to cover computer technology and equipment costs. For the 2018-2019 school year and subsequent school years, Organizational Units assigned to Tier 1 and Tier 2 in the prior school year shall receive an additional $285.50 per student of the combined ASE of pre-kindergarten children with disabilities and all kindergarten through grade 12 students to cover computer technology and equipment costs in the Organizational Unit's Adequacy Target. The State Board may establish additional requirements for Organizational Unit expenditures of funds received pursuant to this subparagraph (Q), including a requirement that funds received pursuant to this subparagraph (Q) may be used only for serving the technology needs of the district. It is the intent of Public Act 100-465 that all Tier 1 and Tier 2 districts receive the addition to their Adequacy Target in the following year, subject to compliance with the requirements of the State Board.
            (R) Student activities investments. Each
        	
Organizational Unit shall receive the following funding amounts to cover student activities: $100 per kindergarten through grade 5 ASE student in elementary school, plus $200 per ASE student in middle school, plus $675 per ASE student in high school.
            (S) Maintenance and operations investments. Each
        	
Organizational Unit shall receive $1,038 per student of the combined ASE of pre-kindergarten children with disabilities and all kindergarten through grade 12 students for day-to-day maintenance and operations expenditures, including salary, supplies, and materials, as well as purchased services, but excluding employee benefits. The proportion of salary for the application of a Regionalization Factor and the calculation of benefits is equal to $352.92.
            (T) Central office investments. Each
        	
Organizational Unit shall receive $742 per student of the combined ASE of pre-kindergarten children with disabilities and all kindergarten through grade 12 students to cover central office operations, including administrators and classified personnel charged with managing the instructional programs, business and operations of the school district, and security personnel. The proportion of salary for the application of a Regionalization Factor and the calculation of benefits is equal to $368.48.
            (U) Employee benefit investments. Each
        	
Organizational Unit shall receive 30% of the total of all salary-calculated elements of the Adequacy Target, excluding substitute teachers and student activities investments, to cover benefit costs. For central office and maintenance and operations investments, the benefit calculation shall be based upon the salary proportion of each investment. If at any time the responsibility for funding the employer normal cost of teacher pensions is assigned to school districts, then that amount certified by the Teachers' Retirement System of the State of Illinois to be paid by the Organizational Unit for the preceding school year shall be added to the benefit investment. For any fiscal year in which a school district organized under Article 34 of this Code is responsible for paying the employer normal cost of teacher pensions, then that amount of its employer normal cost plus the amount for retiree health insurance as certified by the Public School Teachers' Pension and Retirement Fund of Chicago to be paid by the school district for the preceding school year that is statutorily required to cover employer normal costs and the amount for retiree health insurance shall be added to the 30% specified in this subparagraph (U). The Teachers' Retirement System of the State of Illinois and the Public School Teachers' Pension and Retirement Fund of Chicago shall submit such information as the State Superintendent may require for the calculations set forth in this subparagraph (U).
            (V) Additional investments in low-income
        	
students. In addition to and not in lieu of all other funding under this paragraph (2), each Organizational Unit shall receive funding based on the average teacher salary for grades K through 12 to cover the costs of:
                (i) one FTE intervention teacher (tutor)
            	
position for every 125 Low-Income Count students;
                (ii) one FTE pupil support staff position for
            	
every 125 Low-Income Count students;
                (iii) one FTE extended day teacher position
            	
for every 120 Low-Income Count students; and
                (iv) one FTE summer school teacher position
            	
for every 120 Low-Income Count students.
            (W) Additional investments in English learner
        	
students. In addition to and not in lieu of all other funding under this paragraph (2), each Organizational Unit shall receive funding based on the average teacher salary for grades K through 12 to cover the costs of:
                (i) one FTE intervention teacher (tutor)
            	
position for every 125 English learner students;
                (ii) one FTE pupil support staff position for
            	
every 125 English learner students;
                (iii) one FTE extended day teacher position
            	
for every 120 English learner students;
                (iv) one FTE summer school teacher position
            	
for every 120 English learner students; and
                (v) one FTE core teacher position for every
            	
100 English learner students.
            (X) Special education investments. Each
        	
Organizational Unit shall receive funding based on the average teacher salary for grades K through 12 to cover special education as follows:
                (i) one FTE teacher position for every 141
            	
combined ASE of pre-kindergarten children with disabilities and all kindergarten through grade 12 students;
                (ii) one FTE instructional assistant for
            	
every 141 combined ASE of pre-kindergarten children with disabilities and all kindergarten through grade 12 students; and
                (iii) one FTE psychologist position for every
            	
1,000 combined ASE of pre-kindergarten children with disabilities and all kindergarten through grade 12 students.
        (3) For calculating the salaries included within the
    	
Essential Elements, the State Superintendent shall annually calculate average salaries to the nearest dollar using the employment information system data maintained by the State Board, limited to public schools only and excluding special education and vocational cooperatives, schools operated by the Department of Juvenile Justice, and charter schools, for the following positions:
            (A) Teacher for grades K through 8.
            (B) Teacher for grades 9 through 12.
            (C) Teacher for grades K through 12.
            (D) Guidance counselor for grades K through 8.
            (E) Guidance counselor for grades 9 through 12.
            (F) Guidance counselor for grades K through 12.
            (G) Social worker.
            (H) Psychologist.
            (I) Librarian.
            (J) Nurse.
            (K) Principal.
            (L) Assistant principal.
        For the purposes of this paragraph (3), "teacher"
    	
includes core teachers, specialist and elective teachers, instructional facilitators, tutors, special education teachers, pupil support staff teachers, English learner teachers, extended day teachers, and summer school teachers. Where specific grade data is not required for the Essential Elements, the average salary for corresponding positions shall apply. For substitute teachers, the average teacher salary for grades K through 12 shall apply.
        For calculating the salaries included within the
    	
Essential Elements for positions not included within EIS Data, the following salaries shall be used in the first year of implementation of Evidence-Based Funding:
            (i) school site staff, $30,000; and
            (ii) non-instructional assistant, instructional
        	
assistant, library aide, library media tech, or supervisory aide: $25,000.
        In the second and subsequent years of implementation
    	
of Evidence-Based Funding, the amounts in items (i) and (ii) of this paragraph (3) shall annually increase by the ECI.
        The salary amounts for the Essential Elements
    	
determined pursuant to subparagraphs (A) through (L), (S) and (T), and (V) through (X) of paragraph (2) of subsection (b) of this Section shall be multiplied by a Regionalization Factor.
    (c) Local Capacity calculation.
        (1) Each Organizational Unit's Local Capacity
    	
represents an amount of funding it is assumed to contribute toward its Adequacy Target for purposes of the Evidence-Based Funding formula calculation. "Local Capacity" means either (i) the Organizational Unit's Local Capacity Target as calculated in accordance with paragraph (2) of this subsection (c) if its Real Receipts are equal to or less than its Local Capacity Target or (ii) the Organizational Unit's Adjusted Local Capacity, as calculated in accordance with paragraph (3) of this subsection (c) if Real Receipts are more than its Local Capacity Target.
        (2) "Local Capacity Target" means, for an
    	
Organizational Unit, that dollar amount that is obtained by multiplying its Adequacy Target by its Local Capacity Ratio.
            (A) An Organizational Unit's Local Capacity
        	
Percentage is the conversion of the Organizational Unit's Local Capacity Ratio, as such ratio is determined in accordance with subparagraph (B) of this paragraph (2), into a cumulative distribution resulting in a percentile ranking to determine each Organizational Unit's relative position to all other Organizational Units in this State. The calculation of Local Capacity Percentage is described in subparagraph (C) of this paragraph (2).
            (B) An Organizational Unit's Local Capacity Ratio
        	
in a given year is the percentage obtained by dividing its Adjusted EAV or PTELL EAV, whichever is less, by its Adequacy Target, with the resulting ratio further adjusted as follows:
                (i) for Organizational Units serving grades
            	
kindergarten through 12 and Hybrid Districts, no further adjustments shall be made;
                (ii) for Organizational Units serving grades
            	
kindergarten through 8, the ratio shall be multiplied by 9/13;
                (iii) for Organizational Units serving grades
            	
9 through 12, the Local Capacity Ratio shall be multiplied by 4/13; and
                (iv) for an Organizational Unit with a
            	
different grade configuration than those specified in items (i) through (iii) of this subparagraph (B), the State Superintendent shall determine a comparable adjustment based on the grades served.
            (C) The Local Capacity Percentage is equal to the
        	
percentile ranking of the district. Local Capacity Percentage converts each Organizational Unit's Local Capacity Ratio to a cumulative distribution resulting in a percentile ranking to determine each Organizational Unit's relative position to all other Organizational Units in this State. The Local Capacity Percentage cumulative distribution resulting in a percentile ranking for each Organizational Unit shall be calculated using the standard normal distribution of the score in relation to the weighted mean and weighted standard deviation and Local Capacity Ratios of all Organizational Units. If the value assigned to any Organizational Unit is in excess of 90%, the value shall be adjusted to 90%. For Laboratory Schools, the Local Capacity Percentage shall be set at 10% in recognition of the absence of EAV and resources from the public university that are allocated to the Laboratory School. For programs operated by a regional office of education or an intermediate service center, the Local Capacity Percentage must be set at 10% in recognition of the absence of EAV and resources from school districts that are allocated to the regional office of education or intermediate service center. The weighted mean for the Local Capacity Percentage shall be determined by multiplying each Organizational Unit's Local Capacity Ratio times the ASE for the unit creating a weighted value, summing the weighted values of all Organizational Units, and dividing by the total ASE of all Organizational Units. The weighted standard deviation shall be determined by taking the square root of the weighted variance of all Organizational Units' Local Capacity Ratio, where the variance is calculated by squaring the difference between each unit's Local Capacity Ratio and the weighted mean, then multiplying the variance for each unit times the ASE for the unit to create a weighted variance for each unit, then summing all units' weighted variance and dividing by the total ASE of all units.
            (D) For any Organizational Unit, the
        	
Organizational Unit's Adjusted Local Capacity Target shall be reduced by either (i) the school board's remaining contribution pursuant to paragraph (ii) of subsection (b-4) of Section 16-158 of the Illinois Pension Code in a given year or (ii) the board of education's remaining contribution pursuant to paragraph (iv) of subsection (b) of Section 17-129 of the Illinois Pension Code absent the employer normal cost portion of the required contribution and amount allowed pursuant to subdivision (3) of Section 17-142.1 of the Illinois Pension Code in a given year. In the preceding sentence, item (i) shall be certified to the State Board of Education by the Teachers' Retirement System of the State of Illinois and item (ii) shall be certified to the State Board of Education by the Public School Teachers' Pension and Retirement Fund of the City of Chicago.
        (3) If an Organizational Unit's Real Receipts are
    	
more than its Local Capacity Target, then its Local Capacity shall equal an Adjusted Local Capacity Target as calculated in accordance with this paragraph (3). The Adjusted Local Capacity Target is calculated as the sum of the Organizational Unit's Local Capacity Target and its Real Receipts Adjustment. The Real Receipts Adjustment equals the Organizational Unit's Real Receipts less its Local Capacity Target, with the resulting figure multiplied by the Local Capacity Percentage.
        As used in this paragraph (3), "Real Percent of
    	
Adequacy" means the sum of an Organizational Unit's Real Receipts, CPPRT, and Base Funding Minimum, with the resulting figure divided by the Organizational Unit's Adequacy Target.
    (d) Calculation of Real Receipts, EAV, and Adjusted EAV for purposes of the Local Capacity calculation.
        (1) An Organizational Unit's Real Receipts are the
    	
product of its Applicable Tax Rate and its Adjusted EAV. An Organizational Unit's Applicable Tax Rate is its Adjusted Operating Tax Rate for property within the Organizational Unit.
        (2) The State Superintendent shall calculate the
    	
equalized assessed valuation, or EAV, of all taxable property of each Organizational Unit as of September 30 of the previous year in accordance with paragraph (3) of this subsection (d). The State Superintendent shall then determine the Adjusted EAV of each Organizational Unit in accordance with paragraph (4) of this subsection (d), which Adjusted EAV figure shall be used for the purposes of calculating Local Capacity.
        (3) To calculate Real Receipts and EAV, the
    	
Department of Revenue shall supply to the State Superintendent the value as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue of all taxable property of every Organizational Unit, together with (i) the applicable tax rate used in extending taxes for the funds of the Organizational Unit as of September 30 of the previous year and (ii) the limiting rate for all Organizational Units subject to property tax extension limitations as imposed under PTELL.
            (A) The Department of Revenue shall add to the
        	
equalized assessed value of all taxable property of each Organizational Unit situated entirely or partially within a county that is or was subject to the provisions of Section 15-176 or 15-177 of the Property Tax Code (i) an amount equal to the total amount by which the homestead exemption allowed under Section 15-176 or 15-177 of the Property Tax Code for real property situated in that Organizational Unit exceeds the total amount that would have been allowed in that Organizational Unit if the maximum reduction under Section 15-176 was (I) $4,500 in Cook County or $3,500 in all other counties in tax year 2003 or (II) $5,000 in all counties in tax year 2004 and thereafter and (ii) an amount equal to the aggregate amount for the taxable year of all additional exemptions under Section 15-175 of the Property Tax Code for owners with a household income of $30,000 or less. The county clerk of any county that is or was subject to the provisions of Section 15-176 or 15-177 of the Property Tax Code shall annually calculate and certify to the Department of Revenue for each Organizational Unit all homestead exemption amounts under Section 15-176 or 15-177 of the Property Tax Code and all amounts of additional exemptions under Section 15-175 of the Property Tax Code for owners with a household income of $30,000 or less. It is the intent of this subparagraph (A) that if the general homestead exemption for a parcel of property is determined under Section 15-176 or 15-177 of the Property Tax Code rather than Section 15-175, then the calculation of EAV shall not be affected by the difference, if any, between the amount of the general homestead exemption allowed for that parcel of property under Section 15-176 or 15-177 of the Property Tax Code and the amount that would have been allowed had the general homestead exemption for that parcel of property been determined under Section 15-175 of the Property Tax Code. It is further the intent of this subparagraph (A) that if additional exemptions are allowed under Section 15-175 of the Property Tax Code for owners with a household income of less than $30,000, then the calculation of EAV shall not be affected by the difference, if any, because of those additional exemptions.
            (B) With respect to any part of an Organizational
        	
Unit within a redevelopment project area in respect to which a municipality has adopted tax increment allocation financing pursuant to the Tax Increment Allocation Redevelopment Act, Division 74.4 of Article 11 of the Illinois Municipal Code, or the Industrial Jobs Recovery Law, Division 74.6 of Article 11 of the Illinois Municipal Code, no part of the current EAV of real property located in any such project area that is attributable to an increase above the total initial EAV of such property shall be used as part of the EAV of the Organizational Unit, until such time as all redevelopment project costs have been paid, as provided in Section 11-74.4-8 of the Tax Increment Allocation Redevelopment Act or in Section 11-74.6-35 of the Industrial Jobs Recovery Law. For the purpose of the EAV of the Organizational Unit, the total initial EAV or the current EAV, whichever is lower, shall be used until such time as all redevelopment project costs have been paid.
            (B-5) The real property equalized assessed
        	
valuation for a school district shall be adjusted by subtracting from the real property value, as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue, for the district an amount computed by dividing the amount of any abatement of taxes under Section 18-170 of the Property Tax Code by 3.00% for a district maintaining grades kindergarten through 12, by 2.30% for a district maintaining grades kindergarten through 8, or by 1.05% for a district maintaining grades 9 through 12 and adjusted by an amount computed by dividing the amount of any abatement of taxes under subsection (a) of Section 18-165 of the Property Tax Code by the same percentage rates for district type as specified in this subparagraph (B-5).
            (C) For Organizational Units that are Hybrid
        	
Districts, the State Superintendent shall use the lesser of the adjusted equalized assessed valuation for property within the partial elementary unit district for elementary purposes, as defined in Article 11E of this Code, or the adjusted equalized assessed valuation for property within the partial elementary unit district for high school purposes, as defined in Article 11E of this Code.
        (4) An Organizational Unit's Adjusted EAV shall be
    	
the average of its EAV over the immediately preceding 3 years or its EAV in the immediately preceding year if the EAV in the immediately preceding year has declined by 10% or more compared to the 3-year average. In the event of Organizational Unit reorganization, consolidation, or annexation, the Organizational Unit's Adjusted EAV for the first 3 years after such change shall be as follows: the most current EAV shall be used in the first year, the average of a 2-year EAV or its EAV in the immediately preceding year if the EAV declines by 10% or more compared to the 2-year average for the second year, and a 3-year average EAV or its EAV in the immediately preceding year if the Adjusted EAV declines by 10% or more compared to the 3-year average for the third year. For any school district whose EAV in the immediately preceding year is used in calculations, in the following year, the Adjusted EAV shall be the average of its EAV over the immediately preceding 2 years or the immediately preceding year if that year represents a decline of 10% or more compared to the 2-year average.
        "PTELL EAV" means a figure calculated by the State
    	
Board for Organizational Units subject to PTELL as described in this paragraph (4) for the purposes of calculating an Organizational Unit's Local Capacity Ratio. Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph (4), the PTELL EAV of an Organizational Unit shall be equal to the product of the equalized assessed valuation last used in the calculation of general State aid under Section 18-8.05 of this Code (now repealed) or Evidence-Based Funding under this Section and the Organizational Unit's Extension Limitation Ratio. If an Organizational Unit has approved or does approve an increase in its limiting rate, pursuant to Section 18-190 of the Property Tax Code, affecting the Base Tax Year, the PTELL EAV shall be equal to the product of the equalized assessed valuation last used in the calculation of general State aid under Section 18-8.05 of this Code (now repealed) or Evidence-Based Funding under this Section multiplied by an amount equal to one plus the percentage increase, if any, in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers for all items published by the United States Department of Labor for the 12-month calendar year preceding the Base Tax Year, plus the equalized assessed valuation of new property, annexed property, and recovered tax increment value and minus the equalized assessed valuation of disconnected property.
        As used in this paragraph (4), "new property" and
    	
"recovered tax increment value" shall have the meanings set forth in the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law.
    (e) Base Funding Minimum calculation.
        (1) For the 2017-2018 school year, the Base Funding
    	
Minimum of an Organizational Unit or a Specially Funded Unit shall be the amount of State funds distributed to the Organizational Unit or Specially Funded Unit during the 2016-2017 school year prior to any adjustments and specified appropriation amounts described in this paragraph (1) from the following Sections, as calculated by the State Superintendent: Section 18-8.05 of this Code (now repealed); Section 5 of Article 224 of Public Act 99-524 (equity grants); Section 14-7.02b of this Code (funding for children requiring special education services); Section 14-13.01 of this Code (special education facilities and staffing), except for reimbursement of the cost of transportation pursuant to Section 14-13.01; Section 14C-12 of this Code (English learners); and Section 18-4.3 of this Code (summer school), based on an appropriation level of $13,121,600. For a school district organized under Article 34 of this Code, the Base Funding Minimum also includes (i) the funds allocated to the school district pursuant to Section 1D-1 of this Code attributable to funding programs authorized by the Sections of this Code listed in the preceding sentence and (ii) the difference between (I) the funds allocated to the school district pursuant to Section 1D-1 of this Code attributable to the funding programs authorized by Section 14-7.02 (non-public special education reimbursement), subsection (b) of Section 14-13.01 (special education transportation), Section 29-5 (transportation), Section 2-3.80 (agricultural education), Section 2-3.66 (truants' alternative education), Section 2-3.62 (educational service centers), and Section 14-7.03 (special education - orphanage) of this Code and Section 15 of the Childhood Hunger Relief Act (free breakfast program) and (II) the school district's actual expenditures for its non-public special education, special education transportation, transportation programs, agricultural education, truants' alternative education, services that would otherwise be performed by a regional office of education, special education orphanage expenditures, and free breakfast, as most recently calculated and reported pursuant to subsection (f) of Section 1D-1 of this Code. The Base Funding Minimum for Glenwood Academy shall be $625,500. For programs operated by a regional office of education or an intermediate service center, the Base Funding Minimum must be the total amount of State funds allocated to those programs in the 2018-2019 school year and amounts provided pursuant to Article 34 of Public Act 100-586 and Section 3-16 of this Code. All programs established after June 5, 2019 (the effective date of Public Act 101-10) and administered by a regional office of education or an intermediate service center must have an initial Base Funding Minimum set to an amount equal to the first-year ASE multiplied by the amount of per pupil funding received in the previous school year by the lowest funded similar existing program type. If the enrollment for a program operated by a regional office of education or an intermediate service center is zero, then it may not receive Base Funding Minimum funds for that program in the next fiscal year, and those funds must be distributed to Organizational Units under subsection (g).
        (2) For the 2018-2019 and subsequent school years,
    	
the Base Funding Minimum of Organizational Units and Specially Funded Units shall be the sum of (i) the amount of Evidence-Based Funding for the prior school year, (ii) the Base Funding Minimum for the prior school year, and (iii) any amount received by a school district pursuant to Section 7 of Article 97 of Public Act 100-21.
        (3) Subject to approval by the General Assembly as
    	
provided in this paragraph (3), an Organizational Unit that meets all of the following criteria, as determined by the State Board, shall have District Intervention Money added to its Base Funding Minimum at the time the Base Funding Minimum is calculated by the State Board:
            (A) The Organizational Unit is operating under
        	
an Independent Authority under Section 2-3.25f-5 of this Code for a minimum of 4 school years or is subject to the control of the State Board pursuant to a court order for a minimum of 4 school years.
            (B) The Organizational Unit was designated as a
        	
Tier 1 or Tier 2 Organizational Unit in the previous school year under paragraph (3) of subsection (g) of this Section.
            (C) The Organizational Unit demonstrates
        	
sustainability through a 5-year financial and strategic plan.
            (D) The Organizational Unit has made sufficient
        	
progress and achieved sufficient stability in the areas of governance, academic growth, and finances.
        As part of its determination under this paragraph
    	
(3), the State Board may consider the Organizational Unit's summative designation, any accreditations of the Organizational Unit, or the Organizational Unit's financial profile, as calculated by the State Board.
        If the State Board determines that an Organizational
    	
Unit has met the criteria set forth in this paragraph (3), it must submit a report to the General Assembly, no later than January 2 of the fiscal year in which the State Board makes it determination, on the amount of District Intervention Money to add to the Organizational Unit's Base Funding Minimum. The General Assembly must review the State Board's report and may approve or disapprove, by joint resolution, the addition of District Intervention Money. If the General Assembly fails to act on the report within 40 calendar days from the receipt of the report, the addition of District Intervention Money is deemed approved. If the General Assembly approves the amount of District Intervention Money to be added to the Organizational Unit's Base Funding Minimum, the District Intervention Money must be added to the Base Funding Minimum annually thereafter.
        For the first 4 years following the initial year that
    	
the State Board determines that an Organizational Unit has met the criteria set forth in this paragraph (3) and has received funding under this Section, the Organizational Unit must annually submit to the State Board, on or before November 30, a progress report regarding its financial and strategic plan under subparagraph (C) of this paragraph (3). The plan shall include the financial data from the past 4 annual financial reports or financial audits that must be presented to the State Board by November 15 of each year and the approved budget financial data for the current year. The plan shall be developed according to the guidelines presented to the Organizational Unit by the State Board. The plan shall further include financial projections for the next 3 fiscal years and include a discussion and financial summary of the Organizational Unit's facility needs. If the Organizational Unit does not demonstrate sufficient progress toward its 5-year plan or if it has failed to file an annual financial report, an annual budget, a financial plan, a deficit reduction plan, or other financial information as required by law, the State Board may establish a Financial Oversight Panel under Article 1H of this Code. However, if the Organizational Unit already has a Financial Oversight Panel, the State Board may extend the duration of the Panel.
    (f) Percent of Adequacy and Final Resources calculation.
        (1) The Evidence-Based Funding formula establishes a
    	
Percent of Adequacy for each Organizational Unit in order to place such units into tiers for the purposes of the funding distribution system described in subsection (g) of this Section. Initially, an Organizational Unit's Preliminary Resources and Preliminary Percent of Adequacy are calculated pursuant to paragraph (2) of this subsection (f). Then, an Organizational Unit's Final Resources and Final Percent of Adequacy are calculated to account for the Organizational Unit's poverty concentration levels pursuant to paragraphs (3) and (4) of this subsection (f).
        (2) An Organizational Unit's Preliminary Resources
    	
are equal to the sum of its Local Capacity Target, CPPRT, and Base Funding Minimum. An Organizational Unit's Preliminary Percent of Adequacy is the lesser of (i) its Preliminary Resources divided by its Adequacy Target or (ii) 100%.
        (3) Except for Specially Funded Units, an
    	
Organizational Unit's Final Resources are equal to the sum of its Local Capacity, CPPRT, and Adjusted Base Funding Minimum. The Base Funding Minimum of each Specially Funded Unit shall serve as its Final Resources, except that the Base Funding Minimum for State-approved charter schools shall not include any portion of general State aid allocated in the prior year based on the per capita tuition charge times the charter school enrollment.
        (4) An Organizational Unit's Final Percent of
    	
Adequacy is its Final Resources divided by its Adequacy Target. An Organizational Unit's Adjusted Base Funding Minimum is equal to its Base Funding Minimum less its Supplemental Grant Funding, with the resulting figure added to the product of its Supplemental Grant Funding and Preliminary Percent of Adequacy.
    (g) Evidence-Based Funding formula distribution system.
        (1) In each school year under the Evidence-Based
    	
Funding formula, each Organizational Unit receives funding equal to the sum of its Base Funding Minimum and the unit's allocation of New State Funds determined pursuant to this subsection (g). To allocate New State Funds, the Evidence-Based Funding formula distribution system first places all Organizational Units into one of 4 tiers in accordance with paragraph (3) of this subsection (g), based on the Organizational Unit's Final Percent of Adequacy. New State Funds are allocated to each of the 4 tiers as follows: Tier 1 Aggregate Funding equals 50% of all New State Funds, Tier 2 Aggregate Funding equals 49% of all New State Funds, Tier 3 Aggregate Funding equals 0.9% of all New State Funds, and Tier 4 Aggregate Funding equals 0.1% of all New State Funds. Each Organizational Unit within Tier 1 or Tier 2 receives an allocation of New State Funds equal to its tier Funding Gap, as defined in the following sentence, multiplied by the tier's Allocation Rate determined pursuant to paragraph (4) of this subsection (g). For Tier 1, an Organizational Unit's Funding Gap equals the tier's Target Ratio, as specified in paragraph (5) of this subsection (g), multiplied by the Organizational Unit's Adequacy Target, with the resulting amount reduced by the Organizational Unit's Final Resources. For Tier 2, an Organizational Unit's Funding Gap equals the tier's Target Ratio, as described in paragraph (5) of this subsection (g), multiplied by the Organizational Unit's Adequacy Target, with the resulting amount reduced by the Organizational Unit's Final Resources and its Tier 1 funding allocation. To determine the Organizational Unit's Funding Gap, the resulting amount is then multiplied by a factor equal to one minus the Organizational Unit's Local Capacity Target percentage. Each Organizational Unit within Tier 3 or Tier 4 receives an allocation of New State Funds equal to the product of its Adequacy Target and the tier's Allocation Rate, as specified in paragraph (4) of this subsection (g).
        (2) To ensure equitable distribution of dollars for
    	
all Tier 2 Organizational Units, no Tier 2 Organizational Unit shall receive fewer dollars per ASE than any Tier 3 Organizational Unit. Each Tier 2 and Tier 3 Organizational Unit shall have its funding allocation divided by its ASE. Any Tier 2 Organizational Unit with a funding allocation per ASE below the greatest Tier 3 allocation per ASE shall get a funding allocation equal to the greatest Tier 3 funding allocation per ASE multiplied by the Organizational Unit's ASE. Each Tier 2 Organizational Unit's Tier 2 funding allocation shall be multiplied by the percentage calculated by dividing the original Tier 2 Aggregate Funding by the sum of all Tier 2 Organizational Units' Tier 2 funding allocation after adjusting districts' funding below Tier 3 levels.
        (3) Organizational Units are placed into one of 4
    	
tiers as follows:
            (A) Tier 1 consists of all Organizational Units,
        	
except for Specially Funded Units, with a Percent of Adequacy less than the Tier 1 Target Ratio. The Tier 1 Target Ratio is the ratio level that allows for Tier 1 Aggregate Funding to be distributed, with the Tier 1 Allocation Rate determined pursuant to paragraph (4) of this subsection (g).
            (B) Tier 2 consists of all Tier 1 Units and all
        	
other Organizational Units, except for Specially Funded Units, with a Percent of Adequacy of less than 0.90.
            (C) Tier 3 consists of all Organizational Units,
        	
except for Specially Funded Units, with a Percent of Adequacy of at least 0.90 and less than 1.0.
            (D) Tier 4 consists of all Organizational Units
        	
with a Percent of Adequacy of at least 1.0.
        (4) The Allocation Rates for Tiers 1 through 4 are
    	
determined as follows:
            (A) The Tier 1 Allocation Rate is 30%.
            (B) The Tier 2 Allocation Rate is the result of
        	
the following equation: Tier 2 Aggregate Funding, divided by the sum of the Funding Gaps for all Tier 2 Organizational Units, unless the result of such equation is higher than 1.0. If the result of such equation is higher than 1.0, then the Tier 2 Allocation Rate is 1.0.
            (C) The Tier 3 Allocation Rate is the result of
        	
the following equation: Tier 3 Aggregate Funding, divided by the sum of the Adequacy Targets of all Tier 3 Organizational Units.
            (D) The Tier 4 Allocation Rate is the result of
        	
the following equation: Tier 4 Aggregate Funding, divided by the sum of the Adequacy Targets of all Tier 4 Organizational Units.
        (5) A tier's Target Ratio is determined as follows:
            (A) The Tier 1 Target Ratio is the ratio level
        	
that allows for Tier 1 Aggregate Funding to be distributed with the Tier 1 Allocation Rate.
            (B) The Tier 2 Target Ratio is 0.90.
            (C) The Tier 3 Target Ratio is 1.0.
        (6) If, at any point, the Tier 1 Target Ratio is
    	
greater than 90%, then all Tier 1 funding shall be allocated to Tier 2 and no Tier 1 Organizational Unit's funding may be identified.
        (7) In the event that all Tier 2 Organizational Units
    	
receive funding at the Tier 2 Target Ratio level, any remaining New State Funds shall be allocated to Tier 3 and Tier 4 Organizational Units.
        (8) If any Specially Funded Units, excluding Glenwood
    	
Academy, recognized by the State Board do not qualify for direct funding following the implementation of Public Act 100-465 from any of the funding sources included within the definition of Base Funding Minimum, the unqualified portion of the Base Funding Minimum shall be transferred to one or more appropriate Organizational Units as determined by the State Superintendent based on the prior year ASE of the Organizational Units.
        (8.5) If a school district withdraws from a special
    	
education cooperative, the portion of the Base Funding Minimum that is attributable to the school district may be redistributed to the school district upon withdrawal. The school district and the cooperative must include the amount of the Base Funding Minimum that is to be reapportioned in their withdrawal agreement and notify the State Board of the change with a copy of the agreement upon withdrawal.
        (9) The Minimum Funding Level is intended to
    	
establish a target for State funding that will keep pace with inflation and continue to advance equity through the Evidence-Based Funding formula. The target for State funding of New Property Tax Relief Pool Funds is $50,000,000 for State fiscal year 2019 and subsequent State fiscal years. The Minimum Funding Level is equal to $350,000,000. In addition to any New State Funds, no more than $50,000,000 New Property Tax Relief Pool Funds may be counted toward the Minimum Funding Level. If the sum of New State Funds and applicable New Property Tax Relief Pool Funds are less than the Minimum Funding Level, than funding for tiers shall be reduced in the following manner:
            (A) First, Tier 4 funding shall be reduced by an
        	
amount equal to the difference between the Minimum Funding Level and New State Funds until such time as Tier 4 funding is exhausted.
            (B) Next, Tier 3 funding shall be reduced by an
        	
amount equal to the difference between the Minimum Funding Level and New State Funds and the reduction in Tier 4 funding until such time as Tier 3 funding is exhausted.
            (C) Next, Tier 2 funding shall be reduced by an
        	
amount equal to the difference between the Minimum Funding Level and New State Funds and the reduction in Tier 4 and Tier 3.
            (D) Finally, Tier 1 funding shall be reduced by
        	
an amount equal to the difference between the Minimum Funding level and New State Funds and the reduction in Tier 2, 3, and 4 funding. In addition, the Allocation Rate for Tier 1 shall be reduced to a percentage equal to the Tier 1 Allocation Rate set by paragraph (4) of this subsection (g), multiplied by the result of New State Funds divided by the Minimum Funding Level.
        (9.5) For State fiscal year 2019 and subsequent State
    	
fiscal years, if New State Funds exceed $300,000,000, then any amount in excess of $300,000,000 shall be dedicated for purposes of Section 2-3.170 of this Code up to a maximum of $50,000,000.
        (10) In the event of a decrease in the amount of the
    	
appropriation for this Section in any fiscal year after implementation of this Section, the Organizational Units receiving Tier 1 and Tier 2 funding, as determined under paragraph (3) of this subsection (g), shall be held harmless by establishing a Base Funding Guarantee equal to the per pupil kindergarten through grade 12 funding received in accordance with this Section in the prior fiscal year. Reductions shall be made to the Base Funding Minimum of Organizational Units in Tier 3 and Tier 4 on a per pupil basis equivalent to the total number of the ASE in Tier 3-funded and Tier 4-funded Organizational Units divided by the total reduction in State funding. The Base Funding Minimum as reduced shall continue to be applied to Tier 3 and Tier 4 Organizational Units and adjusted by the relative formula when increases in appropriations for this Section resume. In no event may State funding reductions to Organizational Units in Tier 3 or Tier 4 exceed an amount that would be less than the Base Funding Minimum established in the first year of implementation of this Section. If additional reductions are required, all school districts shall receive a reduction by a per pupil amount equal to the aggregate additional appropriation reduction divided by the total ASE of all Organizational Units.
        (11) The State Superintendent shall make minor
    	
adjustments to the distribution formula set forth in this subsection (g) to account for the rounding of percentages to the nearest tenth of a percentage and dollar amounts to the nearest whole dollar.
    (h) State Superintendent administration of funding and district submission requirements.
        (1) The State Superintendent shall, in accordance
    	
with appropriations made by the General Assembly, meet the funding obligations created under this Section.
        (2) The State Superintendent shall calculate the
    	
Adequacy Target for each Organizational Unit and Net State Contribution Target for each Organizational Unit under this Section. No Evidence-Based Funding shall be distributed within an Organizational Unit without the approval of the unit's school board.
        (3) Annually, the State Superintendent shall
    	
calculate and report to each Organizational Unit the unit's aggregate financial adequacy amount, which shall be the sum of the Adequacy Target for each Organizational Unit. The State Superintendent shall calculate and report separately for each Organizational Unit the unit's total State funds allocated for its students with disabilities. The State Superintendent shall calculate and report separately for each Organizational Unit the amount of funding and applicable FTE calculated for each Essential Element of the unit's Adequacy Target.
        (4) Annually, the State Superintendent shall
    	
calculate and report to each Organizational Unit the amount the unit must expend on special education and bilingual education and computer technology and equipment for Organizational Units assigned to Tier 1 or Tier 2 that received an additional $285.50 per student computer technology and equipment investment grant to their Adequacy Target pursuant to the unit's Base Funding Minimum, Special Education Allocation, Bilingual Education Allocation, and computer technology and equipment investment allocation.
        (5) Moneys distributed under this Section shall be
    	
calculated on a school year basis, but paid on a fiscal year basis, with payments beginning in August and extending through June. Unless otherwise provided, the moneys appropriated for each fiscal year shall be distributed in 22 equal payments at least 2 times monthly to each Organizational Unit. If moneys appropriated for any fiscal year are distributed other than monthly, the distribution shall be on the same basis for each Organizational Unit.
        (6) Any school district that fails, for any given
    	
school year, to maintain school as required by law or to maintain a recognized school is not eligible to receive Evidence-Based Funding. In case of non-recognition of one or more attendance centers in a school district otherwise operating recognized schools, the claim of the district shall be reduced in the proportion that the enrollment in the attendance center or centers bears to the enrollment of the school district. "Recognized school" means any public school that meets the standards for recognition by the State Board. A school district or attendance center not having recognition status at the end of a school term is entitled to receive State aid payments due upon a legal claim that was filed while it was recognized.
        (7) School district claims filed under this Section
    	
are subject to Sections 18-9 and 18-12 of this Code, except as otherwise provided in this Section.
        (8) Each fiscal year, the State Superintendent shall
    	
calculate for each Organizational Unit an amount of its Base Funding Minimum and Evidence-Based Funding that shall be deemed attributable to the provision of special educational facilities and services, as defined in Section 14-1.08 of this Code, in a manner that ensures compliance with maintenance of State financial support requirements under the federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Act. An Organizational Unit must use such funds only for the provision of special educational facilities and services, as defined in Section 14-1.08 of this Code, and must comply with any expenditure verification procedures adopted by the State Board.
        (9) All Organizational Units in this State must
    	
submit annual spending plans by the end of September of each year to the State Board as part of the annual budget process, which shall describe how each Organizational Unit will utilize the Base Funding Minimum and Evidence-Based Funding it receives from this State under this Section with specific identification of the intended utilization of Low-Income, English learner, and special education resources. Additionally, the annual spending plans of each Organizational Unit shall describe how the Organizational Unit expects to achieve student growth and how the Organizational Unit will achieve State education goals, as defined by the State Board. The State Superintendent may, from time to time, identify additional requisites for Organizational Units to satisfy when compiling the annual spending plans required under this subsection (h). The format and scope of annual spending plans shall be developed by the State Superintendent and the State Board of Education. School districts that serve students under Article 14C of this Code shall continue to submit information as required under Section 14C-12 of this Code.
        (10) No later than January 1, 2018, the State
    	
Superintendent shall develop a 5-year strategic plan for all Organizational Units to help in planning for adequacy funding under this Section. The State Superintendent shall submit the plan to the Governor and the General Assembly, as provided in Section 3.1 of the General Assembly Organization Act. The plan shall include recommendations for:
            (A) a framework for collaborative, professional,
        	
innovative, and 21st century learning environments using the Evidence-Based Funding model;
            (B) ways to prepare and support this State's
        	
educators for successful instructional careers;
            (C) application and enhancement of the current
        	
financial accountability measures, the approved State plan to comply with the federal Every Student Succeeds Act, and the Illinois Balanced Accountability Measures in relation to student growth and elements of the Evidence-Based Funding model; and
            (D) implementation of an effective school
        	
adequacy funding system based on projected and recommended funding levels from the General Assembly.
        (11) On an annual basis, the State Superintendent
    	
must recalibrate all of the following per pupil elements of the Adequacy Target and applied to the formulas, based on the study of average expenses and as reported in the most recent annual financial report:
            (A) Gifted under subparagraph (M) of paragraph
        	
(2) of subsection (b).
            (B) Instructional materials under subparagraph
        	
(O) of paragraph (2) of subsection (b).
            (C) Assessment under subparagraph (P) of
        	
paragraph (2) of subsection (b).
            (D) Student activities under subparagraph (R) of
        	
paragraph (2) of subsection (b).
            (E) Maintenance and operations under subparagraph
        	
(S) of paragraph (2) of subsection (b).
            (F) Central office under subparagraph (T) of
        	
paragraph (2) of subsection (b).
    (i) Professional Review Panel.
        (1) A Professional Review Panel is created to study
    	
and review topics related to the implementation and effect of Evidence-Based Funding, as assigned by a joint resolution or Public Act of the General Assembly or a motion passed by the State Board of Education. The Panel must provide recommendations to and serve the Governor, the General Assembly, and the State Board. The State Superintendent or his or her designee must serve as a voting member and chairperson of the Panel. The State Superintendent must appoint a vice chairperson from the membership of the Panel. The Panel must advance recommendations based on a three-fifths majority vote of Panel members present and voting. A minority opinion may also accompany any recommendation of the Panel. The Panel shall be appointed by the State Superintendent, except as otherwise provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection (i) and include the following members:
            (A) Two appointees that represent district
        	
superintendents, recommended by a statewide organization that represents district superintendents.
            (B) Two appointees that represent school boards,
        	
recommended by a statewide organization that represents school boards.
            (C) Two appointees from districts that represent
        	
school business officials, recommended by a statewide organization that represents school business officials.
            (D) Two appointees that represent school
        	
principals, recommended by a statewide organization that represents school principals.
            (E) Two appointees that represent teachers,
        	
recommended by a statewide organization that represents teachers.
            (F) Two appointees that represent teachers,
        	
recommended by another statewide organization that represents teachers.
            (G) Two appointees that represent regional
        	
superintendents of schools, recommended by organizations that represent regional superintendents.
            (H) Two independent experts selected solely by
        	
the State Superintendent.
            (I) Two independent experts recommended by public
        	
universities in this State.
            (J) One member recommended by a statewide
        	
organization that represents parents.
            (K) Two representatives recommended by collective
        	
impact organizations that represent major metropolitan areas or geographic areas in Illinois.
            (L) One member from a statewide organization
        	
focused on research-based education policy to support a school system that prepares all students for college, a career, and democratic citizenship.
            (M) One representative from a school district
        	
organized under Article 34 of this Code.
        The State Superintendent shall ensure that the
    	
membership of the Panel includes representatives from school districts and communities reflecting the geographic, socio-economic, racial, and ethnic diversity of this State. The State Superintendent shall additionally ensure that the membership of the Panel includes representatives with expertise in bilingual education and special education. Staff from the State Board shall staff the Panel.
        (2) In addition to those Panel members appointed by
    	
the State Superintendent, 4 members of the General Assembly shall be appointed as follows: one member of the House of Representatives appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, one member of the Senate appointed by the President of the Senate, one member of the House of Representatives appointed by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives, and one member of the Senate appointed by the Minority Leader of the Senate. There shall be one additional member appointed by the Governor. All members appointed by legislative leaders or the Governor shall be non-voting, ex officio members.
        (3) The Panel must study topics at the direction of
    	
the General Assembly or State Board of Education, as provided under paragraph (1). The Panel may also study the following topics at the direction of the chairperson:
            (A) The format and scope of annual spending plans
        	
referenced in paragraph (9) of subsection (h) of this Section.
            (B) The Comparable Wage Index under this Section.
            (C) Maintenance and operations, including capital
        	
maintenance and construction costs.
            (D) "At-risk student" definition.
            (E) Benefits.
            (F) Technology.
            (G) Local Capacity Target.
            (H) Funding for Alternative Schools, Laboratory
        	
Schools, safe schools, and alternative learning opportunities programs.
            (I) Funding for college and career acceleration
        	
strategies.
            (J) Special education investments.
            (K) Early childhood investments, in collaboration
        	
with the Illinois Early Learning Council.
        (4) (Blank).
        (5) Within 5 years after the implementation of this
    	
Section, and every 5 years thereafter, the Panel shall complete an evaluative study of the entire Evidence-Based Funding model, including an assessment of whether or not the formula is achieving State goals. The Panel shall report to the State Board, the General Assembly, and the Governor on the findings of the study.
        (6) (Blank).
        (7) To ensure that (i) the Adequacy Target
    	
calculation under subsection (b) accurately reflects the needs of students living in poverty or attending schools located in areas of high poverty, (ii) racial equity within the Evidence-Based Funding formula is explicitly explored and advanced, and (iii) the funding goals of the formula distribution system established under this Section are sufficient to provide adequate funding for every student and to fully fund every school in this State, the Panel shall review the Essential Elements under paragraph (2) of subsection (b). The Panel shall consider all of the following in its review:
            (A) The financial ability of school districts to
        	
provide instruction in a foreign language to every student and whether an additional Essential Element should be added to the formula to ensure that every student has access to instruction in a foreign language.
            (B) The adult-to-student ratio for each Essential
        	
Element in which a ratio is identified. The Panel shall consider whether the ratio accurately reflects the staffing needed to support students living in poverty or who have traumatic backgrounds.
            (C) Changes to the Essential Elements that may be
        	
required to better promote racial equity and eliminate structural racism within schools.
            (D) The impact of investing $350,000,000 in
        	
additional funds each year under this Section and an estimate of when the school system will become fully funded under this level of appropriation.
            (E) Provide an overview of alternative funding
        	
structures that would enable the State to become fully funded at an earlier date.
            (F) The potential to increase efficiency and to
        	
find cost savings within the school system to expedite the journey to a fully funded system.
            (G) The appropriate levels for reenrolling and
        	
graduating high-risk high school students who have been previously out of school. These outcomes shall include enrollment, attendance, skill gains, credit gains, graduation or promotion to the next grade level, and the transition to college, training, or employment, with an emphasis on progressively increasing the overall attendance.
            (H) The evidence-based or research-based
        	
practices that are shown to reduce the gaps and disparities experienced by African American students in academic achievement and educational performance, including practices that have been shown to reduce parities in disciplinary rates, drop-out rates, graduation rates, college matriculation rates, and college completion rates.
        On or before December 31, 2021, the Panel shall
    	
report to the State Board, the General Assembly, and the Governor on the findings of its review. This paragraph (7) is inoperative on and after July 1, 2022.
    (j) References. Beginning July 1, 2017, references in other laws to general State aid funds or calculations under Section 18-8.05 of this Code (now repealed) shall be deemed to be references to evidence-based model formula funds or calculations under this Section.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17; 100-578, eff. 1-31-18; 100-582, eff. 3-23-18; 101-10, eff. 6-5-19; 101-17, eff. 6-14-19; 101-643, eff. 6-18-20; 101-654, eff. 3-8-21.)

    (105 ILCS 5/18-9) (from Ch. 122, par. 18-9)
    Sec. 18-9. Requirement for special equalization and supplementary State aid. If property comprising an aggregate assessed valuation equal to 6% or more of the total assessed valuation of all taxable property in a school district is owned by a person or corporation that is the subject of bankruptcy proceedings or that has been adjudged bankrupt and, as a result thereof, has not paid taxes on the property, then the district may amend its general State aid or evidence-based funding claim (i) back to the inception of the bankruptcy, not to exceed 6 years, in which time those taxes were not paid and (ii) for each succeeding year that those taxes remain unpaid, by adding to the claim an amount determined by multiplying the assessed valuation of the property on which taxes have not been paid due to the bankruptcy by the lesser of the total tax rate for the district for the tax year for which the taxes are unpaid or the applicable rate used in calculating the district's general State aid under paragraph (3) of subsection (D) of Section 18-8.05 of this Code or evidence-based funding under Section 18-8.15 of this Code, as applicable. If at any time a district that receives additional State aid under this Section receives tax revenue from the property for the years that taxes were not paid, the district's next claim for State aid shall be reduced in an amount equal to the taxes paid on the property, not to exceed the additional State aid received under this Section. Claims under this Section shall be filed on forms prescribed by the State Superintendent of Education, and the State Superintendent of Education, upon receipt of a claim, shall adjust the claim in accordance with the provisions of this Section. Supplementary State aid for each succeeding year under this Section shall be paid beginning with the first general State aid or evidence-based funding claim paid after the district has filed a completed claim in accordance with this Section.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/18-10)
    Sec. 18-10. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 83-1362. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/18-11) (from Ch. 122, par. 18-11)
    Sec. 18-11. Payment of claims.
    (a) With respect to payments for each fiscal year before fiscal year 2009, except payments for the period of June 1982 through July 1983 and payments for fiscal year 1994, as soon as may be after the 10th and 20th days of each of the months of August through the following July, if moneys are available in the common school fund in the State treasury for payments under Sections 18-8.05 through 18-9, the State Comptroller shall draw his warrants upon the State Treasurer as directed by the State Board of Education pursuant to Section 2-3.17b and in accordance with the transfers from the General Revenue Fund to the Common School Fund as specified in Section 8a of the State Finance Act.
    Each such semimonthly warrant shall be in an amount equal to 1/24 of the total amount to be distributed to school districts for the fiscal year. The amount of payments made in July of each year shall be considered as payments for claims covering the school year that commenced during the immediately preceding calendar year. If the payments provided for under Sections 18-8.05 through 18-9 have been assigned as security for State aid anticipation certificates pursuant to Section 18-18, the State Board of Education shall pay the appropriate amount of the payment, as specified in the notification required by Section 18-18, directly to the assignee.
    (a-5) With respect to payments made under Sections 18-8.05 through 18-10 of this Code for fiscal year 2009 and each fiscal year thereafter, as soon as may be after the 10th and 20th days of each of the months of August through the following June, if moneys are available in the Common School Fund in the State treasury for payments under Sections 18-8.05 through 18-10 of this Code, the State Comptroller shall draw his or her warrants upon the State Treasurer as directed by the State Board of Education pursuant to Section 2-3.17b of this Code and in accordance with the transfers from the General Revenue Fund to the Common School Fund as specified in Section 8a of the State Finance Act.
    Each such semimonthly warrant shall be in an amount equal to 1/22 of the total amount to be distributed to school districts for the fiscal year. If the payments provided for under Sections 18-8.05 through 18-10 of this Code have been assigned as security for State aid anticipation certificates pursuant to Section 18-18 of this Code, then the State Board of Education shall pay the appropriate amount of the payment, as specified in the notification required by Section 18-18 of this Code, directly to the assignee.
    (b) (Blank).
    (c) (Blank).
(Source: P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07; 95-496, eff. 8-28-07; 95-835, eff. 8-15-08.)

    (105 ILCS 5/18-12) (from Ch. 122, par. 18-12)
    Sec. 18-12. Dates for filing State aid claims. The school board of each school district, a regional office of education, a laboratory school, or a State-authorized charter school shall require teachers, principals, or superintendents to furnish from records kept by them such data as it needs in preparing and certifying to the State Superintendent of Education its report of claims provided in Section 18-8.05 or 18-8.15 of this Code. The claim shall be based on the latest available equalized assessed valuation and tax rates, as provided in Section 18-8.05 or 18-8.15, shall use the average daily attendance as determined by the method outlined in Section 18-8.05 or 18-8.15, and shall be certified and filed with the State Superintendent of Education by June 21 for districts and State-authorized charter schools with an official school calendar end date before June 15 or within 2 weeks following the official school calendar end date for districts, regional offices of education, laboratory schools, or State-authorized charter schools with a school year end date of June 15 or later. Failure to so file by these deadlines constitutes a forfeiture of the right to receive payment by the State until such claim is filed. The State Superintendent of Education shall voucher for payment those claims to the State Comptroller as provided in Section 18-11.
    Except as otherwise provided in this Section, if any school district fails to provide the minimum school term specified in Section 10-19, the State aid claim for that year shall be reduced by the State Superintendent of Education in an amount equivalent to 1/176 or .56818% for each day less than the number of days required by this Code.
    If the State Superintendent of Education determines that the failure to provide the minimum school term was occasioned by an act or acts of God, or was occasioned by conditions beyond the control of the school district which posed a hazardous threat to the health and safety of pupils, the State aid claim need not be reduced.
    If a school district is precluded from providing the minimum hours of instruction required for a full day of attendance due to (A) an adverse weather condition, (B) a condition beyond the control of the school district that poses a hazardous threat to the health and safety of students, or (C) beginning with the 2016-2017 school year, the utilization of the school district's facilities for not more than 2 school days per school year by local or county authorities for the purpose of holding a memorial or funeral services in remembrance of a community member, then the partial day of attendance may be counted if (i) the school district has provided at least one hour of instruction prior to the closure of the school district, (ii) a school building has provided at least one hour of instruction prior to the closure of the school building, or (iii) the normal start time of the school district is delayed.
    If, prior to providing any instruction, a school district must close one or more but not all school buildings after consultation with a local emergency response agency or due to a condition beyond the control of the school district, then the school district may claim attendance for up to 2 school days based on the average attendance of the 3 school days immediately preceding the closure of the affected school building or, if approved by the State Board of Education, utilize the provisions of an e-learning program for the affected school building as prescribed in Section 10-20.56 of this Code. The partial or no day of attendance described in this Section and the reasons therefore shall be certified within a month of the closing or delayed start by the school district superintendent to the regional superintendent of schools for forwarding to the State Superintendent of Education for approval.
    Other than the utilization of any e-learning days as prescribed in Section 10-20.56 of this Code, no exception to the requirement of providing a minimum school term may be approved by the State Superintendent of Education pursuant to this Section unless a school district has first used all emergency days provided for in its regular calendar.
    If the State Superintendent of Education declares that an energy shortage exists during any part of the school year for the State or a designated portion of the State, a district may operate the school attendance centers within the district 4 days of the week during the time of the shortage by extending each existing school day by one clock hour of school work, and the State aid claim shall not be reduced, nor shall the employees of that district suffer any reduction in salary or benefits as a result thereof. A district may operate all attendance centers on this revised schedule, or may apply the schedule to selected attendance centers, taking into consideration such factors as pupil transportation schedules and patterns and sources of energy for individual attendance centers.
    Electronically submitted State aid claims shall be submitted by duly authorized district individuals over a secure network that is password protected. The electronic submission of a State aid claim must be accompanied with an affirmation that all of the provisions of Section 18-8.05 or 18-8.15 and Sections 10-22.5 and 24-4 of this Code are met in all respects.
(Source: P.A. 99-194, eff. 7-30-15; 99-657, eff. 7-28-16; 100-28, eff. 8-4-17; 100-465, eff. 8-31-17; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/18-12.5)
    Sec. 18-12.5. State aid claims during health emergencies. After consultation with a local health department, if a school district closes one or more recognized school buildings, but not all buildings, during a public health emergency, as determined by the State Board of Education in consultation with the Illinois Department of Public Health, the district may claim a full day of attendance for those days based on the average of the 3 school days of attendance immediately preceding the closure of the school building. Attendance for those days may be claimed only if the school building was scheduled to be in operation on those days. The partial or no day of attendance and the reasons thereof shall be certified, as prescribed by the State Board of Education, within a month after the closing by the school district superintendent to the regional superintendent of schools for forwarding to the State Superintendent of Education for approval.
    This Section is applicable beginning April 1, 2009 and only if a school district closes a building or buildings, but not the entire district, which must be done in accordance with Section 18-12 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 96-689, eff. 8-25-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/18-13) (from Ch. 122, par. 18-13)
    Sec. 18-13. Notice to school officers of amount in treasurer's hands.
    On or before September 30 of each year the county collectors, county superintendents of schools, township collectors, and all other persons paying money into the hands of school treasurers for school purposes, shall notify in writing the presidents of school trustees and clerks or secretaries of school boards of the amount paid into the treasurer's hands and the date of payment.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/18-14) (from Ch. 122, par. 18-14)
    Sec. 18-14. Apportionment of county fund. The regional superintendent of schools shall apportion and distribute under rules prescribed by the State Board of Education, the principal of the county fund to the townships and parts of townships in his region in the manner prescribed for distribution of the State school fund among the counties by Sections 18-8 to 18-9. The principal of the county fund so distributed shall be added to the principal of the township fund of the townships and parts of townships in his region. The interest, rents, issues and profits arising and accruing from the principal of the county fund shall be distributed to the townships and parts of townships in his region as required by the provisions of this Act.
(Source: P.A. 81-1508.)

    (105 ILCS 5/18-15) (from Ch. 122, par. 18-15)
    Sec. 18-15. Township loanable fund-Distribution of income.
    All bonds, notes, mortgages, moneys and effects which have accrued or may accrue from the sale of Section 16 of the common school lands of any township, or from the sale of any real estate or other property taken on any judgment or for any debt due to the principal of any township fund, and all other funds which have been or may be carried to and made part of the principal of any township fund, shall constitute the principal of the township fund; and no part thereof shall be distributed or expended for any purpose, except upon liquidation of the fund but shall be loaned and held to use, rent or profit, as provided by law. The interest, rents, issues and profits arising and accruing from the principal of any township fund shall be used in the manner and at the times provided by this Act.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/18-17)
    Sec. 18-17. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 96-1403, eff. 7-29-10. Repealed by P.A. 97-570, eff. 8-25-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/18-18) (from Ch. 122, par. 18-18)
    Sec. 18-18. The board of education of any school district may borrow money by contracting or entering into loan agreements and may evidence such borrowings by the issuance of State aid anticipation certificates. Such certificates may be issued without submission to the electors of the school district or city for approval of the question of the issuance of such certificates. Such certificates shall bear interest or discount to maturity at a rate not to exceed the rate permissible for such board's full faith and credit general obligation notes and shall mature in such a manner so that no such certificates shall be outstanding for more than 13 months. State aid anticipation certificates shall be payable solely from payments to be made at any time, whether made before or after August 1, of any year, pursuant to this Article 18 and may be secured by assignment of such payments with the assignee receiving such payments directly from the State Superintendent of Education. Prior to the issuance of any such certificates the State Superintendent of Education shall certify the appropriated amount of State aid to be paid the district in the current fiscal year. The amount of certificates to be issued shall not exceed 75% of the amounts of State aid certified by the State Superintendent of Education after subtracting the amount of funds available for transfer from the district's working cash fund in anticipation of State aid to be paid such district pursuant to this Article 18. The amount of State aid anticipation certificates shall not be counted as indebtedness of the district for purposes of any debt limits nor are such certificates full faith and credit general obligation notes or tax anticipation warrants; provided, however, that the total amount of State aid anticipation certificates, general obligation notes and tax anticipation warrants outstanding for any fiscal year may not exceed 85% of the taxes levied by the district for that year.
    Any school district may borrow up to 100% of the amount of State aid to be received in July, as certified by the State Superintendent of Education. Such anticipation certificates shall be repaid not later than August 1 from State aid payments received in July.
    Whenever the board of a district desires to issue such State aid anticipation certificates as herein authorized, it shall adopt a resolution designating the purposes for which the proceeds of the certificates are to be expended and fixing the amount of the certificates proposed to be issued, the maturity thereof, and optional provisions, if any, and the rate of interest or discount to maturity thereon. Such resolution may provide for the appointment of a trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the power of a trust company within the State, and for the establishment of such funds or accounts to be maintained by such trustee as the school district shall deem necessary to provide for the security and payment of the certificates. If such resolution provides for the appointment of a trustee, such trustee shall be considered the assignee of any payments assigned by the school district pursuant to such resolution and this Section. Any amounts paid by the State Superintendent of Education to such trustee as assignee pursuant to Section 18-11 shall be deposited in the funds or accounts established pursuant to such resolution, and shall be held by such trustee in trust for the benefit of the holders of the certificates, and such holders shall have a lien on and a security interest in such funds or accounts so long as the certificates remain outstanding and unpaid. Except as provided otherwise in this Section, such amounts shall be used solely for the payment of certificates at maturity and shall not be used for any other purpose so long as the certificates remain outstanding and unpaid. Pending such application such amounts shall be invested by such trustee in investments of the kind specified in the Public Funds Investment Act. Upon payment in full of the certificates, any amounts held by such trustee, including earnings on investments not used for payment of the certificates, shall be paid to such district.
    Said certificates shall be issued in the corporate name of the school district. They shall be signed by the president and secretary of said board. They shall be sold by the board upon such terms as may be approved by the board, and the proceeds thereof shall be received by the treasurer and expended by the board for the purposes provided in the resolution authorizing any such certificates.
    Upon the issuance of said certificates, the board shall give written notification to the appropriate regional superintendent and the State Superintendent of Education of the issuance of the certificates and the terms thereof, including, but not limited to, any assignment of State aid payments made pursuant to this Section, the name and address of each assignee, the amounts and dates of the payments to be made by the State Superintendent of Education directly to each assignee under Section 18-11, the amount of the certificates held by each assignee and the maturity date of the certificates.
(Source: P.A. 87-839; 87-1215; 88-641, eff. 9-9-94.)

    (105 ILCS 5/18-19) (from Ch. 122, par. 18-19)
    Sec. 18-19. The State Board of Education may make distributions of monies from the Education Assistance Fund, pursuant to appropriation, in addition to such sums as may have been otherwise appropriated for the same purpose, for any of the purposes set forth in this Article, subject to the same terms and conditions that apply to distributions under the several sections of this Article, respectively.
(Source: P.A. 86-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/18-20) (from Ch. 122, par. 18-20)
    Sec. 18-20. Borrowing authority. When an educational program is operated by a regional superintendent or an entity such as an educational service center, special education cooperative, joint agreement, or intergovernmental agreement, and the program receives State categorical or grant payments from the State Comptroller and a financial hardship exists, then the entity may borrow an amount up to 50% of the State payments that are due and payable, as certified by the State Superintendent, provided the terms of the loan shall not include interest in excess of that provided for by the Bond Authorization Act and further provided that the principal and interest of a loan shall be repaid from the categorical or grant payments immediately upon receipt of those payments.
(Source: P.A. 86-1487; 87-1168.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 19 heading)
ARTICLE 19. DEBT LIMITATION - BONDS -
TERRITORY LIABLE - REFUNDING BONDS


 
    (105 ILCS 5/prec. Sec. 19-1 heading)
DEBT LIMITATION

    (105 ILCS 5/19-1)
    Sec. 19-1. Debt limitations of school districts.
    (a) School districts shall not be subject to the provisions limiting their indebtedness prescribed in the Local Government Debt Limitation Act.
    No school districts maintaining grades K through 8 or 9 through 12 shall become indebted in any manner or for any purpose to an amount, including existing indebtedness, in the aggregate exceeding 6.9% on the value of the taxable property therein to be ascertained by the last assessment for State and county taxes or, until January 1, 1983, if greater, the sum that is produced by multiplying the school district's 1978 equalized assessed valuation by the debt limitation percentage in effect on January 1, 1979, previous to the incurring of such indebtedness.
    No school districts maintaining grades K through 12 shall become indebted in any manner or for any purpose to an amount, including existing indebtedness, in the aggregate exceeding 13.8% on the value of the taxable property therein to be ascertained by the last assessment for State and county taxes or, until January 1, 1983, if greater, the sum that is produced by multiplying the school district's 1978 equalized assessed valuation by the debt limitation percentage in effect on January 1, 1979, previous to the incurring of such indebtedness.
    No partial elementary unit district, as defined in Article 11E of this Code, shall become indebted in any manner or for any purpose in an amount, including existing indebtedness, in the aggregate exceeding 6.9% of the value of the taxable property of the entire district, to be ascertained by the last assessment for State and county taxes, plus an amount, including existing indebtedness, in the aggregate exceeding 6.9% of the value of the taxable property of that portion of the district included in the elementary and high school classification, to be ascertained by the last assessment for State and county taxes. Moreover, no partial elementary unit district, as defined in Article 11E of this Code, shall become indebted on account of bonds issued by the district for high school purposes in the aggregate exceeding 6.9% of the value of the taxable property of the entire district, to be ascertained by the last assessment for State and county taxes, nor shall the district become indebted on account of bonds issued by the district for elementary purposes in the aggregate exceeding 6.9% of the value of the taxable property for that portion of the district included in the elementary and high school classification, to be ascertained by the last assessment for State and county taxes.
    Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law to the contrary, in any case in which the voters of a school district have approved a proposition for the issuance of bonds of such school district at an election held prior to January 1, 1979, and all of the bonds approved at such election have not been issued, the debt limitation applicable to such school district during the calendar year 1979 shall be computed by multiplying the value of taxable property therein, including personal property, as ascertained by the last assessment for State and county taxes, previous to the incurring of such indebtedness, by the percentage limitation applicable to such school district under the provisions of this subsection (a).
    (a-5) After January 1, 2018, no school district may issue bonds under Sections 19-2 through 19-7 of this Code and rely on an exception to the debt limitations in this Section unless it has complied with the requirements of Section 21 of the Bond Issue Notification Act and the bonds have been approved by referendum.
    (b) Notwithstanding the debt limitation prescribed in subsection (a) of this Section, additional indebtedness may be incurred in an amount not to exceed the estimated cost of acquiring or improving school sites or constructing and equipping additional building facilities under the following conditions:
        (1) Whenever the enrollment of students for the next
    	
school year is estimated by the board of education to increase over the actual present enrollment by not less than 35% or by not less than 200 students or the actual present enrollment of students has increased over the previous school year by not less than 35% or by not less than 200 students and the board of education determines that additional school sites or building facilities are required as a result of such increase in enrollment; and
        (2) When the Regional Superintendent of Schools
    	
having jurisdiction over the school district and the State Superintendent of Education concur in such enrollment projection or increase and approve the need for such additional school sites or building facilities and the estimated cost thereof; and
        (3) When the voters in the school district approve a
    	
proposition for the issuance of bonds for the purpose of acquiring or improving such needed school sites or constructing and equipping such needed additional building facilities at an election called and held for that purpose. Notice of such an election shall state that the amount of indebtedness proposed to be incurred would exceed the debt limitation otherwise applicable to the school district. The ballot for such proposition shall state what percentage of the equalized assessed valuation will be outstanding in bonds if the proposed issuance of bonds is approved by the voters; or
        (4) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs (1)
    	
through (3) of this subsection (b), if the school board determines that additional facilities are needed to provide a quality educational program and not less than 2/3 of those voting in an election called by the school board on the question approve the issuance of bonds for the construction of such facilities, the school district may issue bonds for this purpose; or
        (5) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs (1)
    	
through (3) of this subsection (b), if (i) the school district has previously availed itself of the provisions of paragraph (4) of this subsection (b) to enable it to issue bonds, (ii) the voters of the school district have not defeated a proposition for the issuance of bonds since the referendum described in paragraph (4) of this subsection (b) was held, (iii) the school board determines that additional facilities are needed to provide a quality educational program, and (iv) a majority of those voting in an election called by the school board on the question approve the issuance of bonds for the construction of such facilities, the school district may issue bonds for this purpose.
    In no event shall the indebtedness incurred pursuant to this subsection (b) and the existing indebtedness of the school district exceed 15% of the value of the taxable property therein to be ascertained by the last assessment for State and county taxes, previous to the incurring of such indebtedness or, until January 1, 1983, if greater, the sum that is produced by multiplying the school district's 1978 equalized assessed valuation by the debt limitation percentage in effect on January 1, 1979.
    The indebtedness provided for by this subsection (b) shall be in addition to and in excess of any other debt limitation.
    (c) Notwithstanding the debt limitation prescribed in subsection (a) of this Section, in any case in which a public question for the issuance of bonds of a proposed school district maintaining grades kindergarten through 12 received at least 60% of the valid ballots cast on the question at an election held on or prior to November 8, 1994, and in which the bonds approved at such election have not been issued, the school district pursuant to the requirements of Section 11A-10 (now repealed) may issue the total amount of bonds approved at such election for the purpose stated in the question.
    (d) Notwithstanding the debt limitation prescribed in subsection (a) of this Section, a school district that meets all the criteria set forth in paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection (d) may incur an additional indebtedness in an amount not to exceed $4,500,000, even though the amount of the additional indebtedness authorized by this subsection (d), when incurred and added to the aggregate amount of indebtedness of the district existing immediately prior to the district incurring the additional indebtedness authorized by this subsection (d), causes the aggregate indebtedness of the district to exceed the debt limitation otherwise applicable to that district under subsection (a):
        (1) The additional indebtedness authorized by this
    	
subsection (d) is incurred by the school district through the issuance of bonds under and in accordance with Section 17-2.11a for the purpose of replacing a school building which, because of mine subsidence damage, has been closed as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection (d) or through the issuance of bonds under and in accordance with Section 19-3 for the purpose of increasing the size of, or providing for additional functions in, such replacement school buildings, or both such purposes.
        (2) The bonds issued by the school district as
    	
provided in paragraph (1) above are issued for the purposes of construction by the school district of a new school building pursuant to Section 17-2.11, to replace an existing school building that, because of mine subsidence damage, is closed as of the end of the 1992-93 school year pursuant to action of the regional superintendent of schools of the educational service region in which the district is located under Section 3-14.22 or are issued for the purpose of increasing the size of, or providing for additional functions in, the new school building being constructed to replace a school building closed as the result of mine subsidence damage, or both such purposes.
    (e) (Blank).
    (f) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this Section or of any other law, bonds in not to exceed the aggregate amount of $5,500,000 and issued by a school district meeting the following criteria shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory limitation and may be issued in an amount or amounts, including existing indebtedness, in excess of any heretofore or hereafter imposed statutory limitation as to indebtedness:
        (1) At the time of the sale of such bonds, the board
    	
of education of the district shall have determined by resolution that the enrollment of students in the district is projected to increase by not less than 7% during each of the next succeeding 2 school years.
        (2) The board of education shall also determine by
    	
resolution that the improvements to be financed with the proceeds of the bonds are needed because of the projected enrollment increases.
        (3) The board of education shall also determine by
    	
resolution that the projected increases in enrollment are the result of improvements made or expected to be made to passenger rail facilities located in the school district.
    Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this Section or of any other law, a school district that has availed itself of the provisions of this subsection (f) prior to July 22, 2004 (the effective date of Public Act 93-799) may also issue bonds approved by referendum up to an amount, including existing indebtedness, not exceeding 25% of the equalized assessed value of the taxable property in the district if all of the conditions set forth in items (1), (2), and (3) of this subsection (f) are met.
    (g) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this Section or any other law, bonds in not to exceed an aggregate amount of 25% of the equalized assessed value of the taxable property of a school district and issued by a school district meeting the criteria in paragraphs (i) through (iv) of this subsection shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory limitation and may be issued pursuant to resolution of the school board in an amount or amounts, including existing indebtedness, in excess of any statutory limitation of indebtedness heretofore or hereafter imposed:
        (i) The bonds are issued for the purpose of
    	
constructing a new high school building to replace two adjacent existing buildings which together house a single high school, each of which is more than 65 years old, and which together are located on more than 10 acres and less than 11 acres of property.
        (ii) At the time the resolution authorizing the
    	
issuance of the bonds is adopted, the cost of constructing a new school building to replace the existing school building is less than 60% of the cost of repairing the existing school building.
        (iii) The sale of the bonds occurs before July 1,
    	
1997.
        (iv) The school district issuing the bonds is a unit
    	
school district located in a county of less than 70,000 and more than 50,000 inhabitants, which has an average daily attendance of less than 1,500 and an equalized assessed valuation of less than $29,000,000.
    (h) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Section or the provisions of any other law, until January 1, 1998, a community unit school district maintaining grades K through 12 may issue bonds up to an amount, including existing indebtedness, not exceeding 27.6% of the equalized assessed value of the taxable property in the district, if all of the following conditions are met:
        (i) The school district has an equalized assessed
    	
valuation for calendar year 1995 of less than $24,000,000;
        (ii) The bonds are issued for the capital
    	
improvement, renovation, rehabilitation, or replacement of existing school buildings of the district, all of which buildings were originally constructed not less than 40 years ago;
        (iii) The voters of the district approve a
    	
proposition for the issuance of the bonds at a referendum held after March 19, 1996; and
        (iv) The bonds are issued pursuant to Sections 19-2
    	
through 19-7 of this Code.
    (i) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Section or the provisions of any other law, until January 1, 1998, a community unit school district maintaining grades K through 12 may issue bonds up to an amount, including existing indebtedness, not exceeding 27% of the equalized assessed value of the taxable property in the district, if all of the following conditions are met:
        (i) The school district has an equalized assessed
    	
valuation for calendar year 1995 of less than $44,600,000;
        (ii) The bonds are issued for the capital
    	
improvement, renovation, rehabilitation, or replacement of existing school buildings of the district, all of which existing buildings were originally constructed not less than 80 years ago;
        (iii) The voters of the district approve a
    	
proposition for the issuance of the bonds at a referendum held after December 31, 1996; and
        (iv) The bonds are issued pursuant to Sections 19-2
    	
through 19-7 of this Code.
    (j) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Section or the provisions of any other law, until January 1, 1999, a community unit school district maintaining grades K through 12 may issue bonds up to an amount, including existing indebtedness, not exceeding 27% of the equalized assessed value of the taxable property in the district if all of the following conditions are met:
        (i) The school district has an equalized assessed
    	
valuation for calendar year 1995 of less than $140,000,000 and a best 3 months average daily attendance for the 1995-96 school year of at least 2,800;
        (ii) The bonds are issued to purchase a site and
    	
build and equip a new high school, and the school district's existing high school was originally constructed not less than 35 years prior to the sale of the bonds;
        (iii) At the time of the sale of the bonds, the board
    	
of education determines by resolution that a new high school is needed because of projected enrollment increases;
        (iv) At least 60% of those voting in an election held
    	
after December 31, 1996 approve a proposition for the issuance of the bonds; and
        (v) The bonds are issued pursuant to Sections 19-2
    	
through 19-7 of this Code.
    (k) Notwithstanding the debt limitation prescribed in subsection (a) of this Section, a school district that meets all the criteria set forth in paragraphs (1) through (4) of this subsection (k) may issue bonds to incur an additional indebtedness in an amount not to exceed $4,000,000 even though the amount of the additional indebtedness authorized by this subsection (k), when incurred and added to the aggregate amount of indebtedness of the school district existing immediately prior to the school district incurring such additional indebtedness, causes the aggregate indebtedness of the school district to exceed or increases the amount by which the aggregate indebtedness of the district already exceeds the debt limitation otherwise applicable to that school district under subsection (a):
        (1) the school district is located in 2 counties, and
    	
a referendum to authorize the additional indebtedness was approved by a majority of the voters of the school district voting on the proposition to authorize that indebtedness;
        (2) the additional indebtedness is for the purpose of
    	
financing a multi-purpose room addition to the existing high school;
        (3) the additional indebtedness, together with the
    	
existing indebtedness of the school district, shall not exceed 17.4% of the value of the taxable property in the school district, to be ascertained by the last assessment for State and county taxes; and
        (4) the bonds evidencing the additional indebtedness
    	
are issued, if at all, within 120 days of August 14, 1998 (the effective date of Public Act 90-757).
    (l) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Section or the provisions of any other law, until January 1, 2000, a school district maintaining grades kindergarten through 8 may issue bonds up to an amount, including existing indebtedness, not exceeding 15% of the equalized assessed value of the taxable property in the district if all of the following conditions are met:
        (i) the district has an equalized assessed valuation
    	
for calendar year 1996 of less than $10,000,000;
        (ii) the bonds are issued for capital improvement,
    	
renovation, rehabilitation, or replacement of one or more school buildings of the district, which buildings were originally constructed not less than 70 years ago;
        (iii) the voters of the district approve a
    	
proposition for the issuance of the bonds at a referendum held on or after March 17, 1998; and
        (iv) the bonds are issued pursuant to Sections 19-2
    	
through 19-7 of this Code.
    (m) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Section or the provisions of any other law, until January 1, 1999, an elementary school district maintaining grades K through 8 may issue bonds up to an amount, excluding existing indebtedness, not exceeding 18% of the equalized assessed value of the taxable property in the district, if all of the following conditions are met:
        (i) The school district has an equalized assessed
    	
valuation for calendar year 1995 or less than $7,700,000;
        (ii) The school district operates 2 elementary
    	
attendance centers that until 1976 were operated as the attendance centers of 2 separate and distinct school districts;
        (iii) The bonds are issued for the construction of a
    	
new elementary school building to replace an existing multi-level elementary school building of the school district that is not accessible at all levels and parts of which were constructed more than 75 years ago;
        (iv) The voters of the school district approve a
    	
proposition for the issuance of the bonds at a referendum held after July 1, 1998; and
        (v) The bonds are issued pursuant to Sections 19-2
    	
through 19-7 of this Code.
    (n) Notwithstanding the debt limitation prescribed in subsection (a) of this Section or any other provisions of this Section or of any other law, a school district that meets all of the criteria set forth in paragraphs (i) through (vi) of this subsection (n) may incur additional indebtedness by the issuance of bonds in an amount not exceeding the amount certified by the Capital Development Board to the school district as provided in paragraph (iii) of this subsection (n), even though the amount of the additional indebtedness so authorized, when incurred and added to the aggregate amount of indebtedness of the district existing immediately prior to the district incurring the additional indebtedness authorized by this subsection (n), causes the aggregate indebtedness of the district to exceed the debt limitation otherwise applicable by law to that district:
        (i) The school district applies to the State Board of
    	
Education for a school construction project grant and submits a district facilities plan in support of its application pursuant to Section 5-20 of the School Construction Law.
        (ii) The school district's application and facilities
    	
plan are approved by, and the district receives a grant entitlement for a school construction project issued by, the State Board of Education under the School Construction Law.
        (iii) The school district has exhausted its bonding
    	
capacity or the unused bonding capacity of the district is less than the amount certified by the Capital Development Board to the district under Section 5-15 of the School Construction Law as the dollar amount of the school construction project's cost that the district will be required to finance with non-grant funds in order to receive a school construction project grant under the School Construction Law.
        (iv) The bonds are issued for a "school construction
    	
project", as that term is defined in Section 5-5 of the School Construction Law, in an amount that does not exceed the dollar amount certified, as provided in paragraph (iii) of this subsection (n), by the Capital Development Board to the school district under Section 5-15 of the School Construction Law.
        (v) The voters of the district approve a proposition
    	
for the issuance of the bonds at a referendum held after the criteria specified in paragraphs (i) and (iii) of this subsection (n) are met.
        (vi) The bonds are issued pursuant to Sections 19-2
    	
through 19-7 of the School Code.
    (o) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Section or the provisions of any other law, until November 1, 2007, a community unit school district maintaining grades K through 12 may issue bonds up to an amount, including existing indebtedness, not exceeding 20% of the equalized assessed value of the taxable property in the district if all of the following conditions are met:
        (i) the school district has an equalized assessed
    	
valuation for calendar year 2001 of at least $737,000,000 and an enrollment for the 2002-2003 school year of at least 8,500;
        (ii) the bonds are issued to purchase school sites,
    	
build and equip a new high school, build and equip a new junior high school, build and equip 5 new elementary schools, and make technology and other improvements and additions to existing schools;
        (iii) at the time of the sale of the bonds, the board
    	
of education determines by resolution that the sites and new or improved facilities are needed because of projected enrollment increases;
        (iv) at least 57% of those voting in a general
    	
election held prior to January 1, 2003 approved a proposition for the issuance of the bonds; and
        (v) the bonds are issued pursuant to Sections 19-2
    	
through 19-7 of this Code.
    (p) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Section or the provisions of any other law, a community unit school district maintaining grades K through 12 may issue bonds up to an amount, including indebtedness, not exceeding 27% of the equalized assessed value of the taxable property in the district if all of the following conditions are met:
        (i) The school district has an equalized assessed
    	
valuation for calendar year 2001 of at least $295,741,187 and a best 3 months' average daily attendance for the 2002-2003 school year of at least 2,394.
        (ii) The bonds are issued to build and equip 3
    	
elementary school buildings; build and equip one middle school building; and alter, repair, improve, and equip all existing school buildings in the district.
        (iii) At the time of the sale of the bonds, the
    	
board of education determines by resolution that the project is needed because of expanding growth in the school district and a projected enrollment increase.
        (iv) The bonds are issued pursuant to Sections 19-2
    	
through 19-7 of this Code.
    (p-5) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Section or the provisions of any other law, bonds issued by a community unit school district maintaining grades K through 12 shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory limitation and may be issued in an amount or amounts, including existing indebtedness, in excess of any heretofore or hereafter imposed statutory limitation as to indebtedness, if all of the following conditions are met:
        (i) For each of the 4 most recent years, residential
    	
property comprises more than 80% of the equalized assessed valuation of the district.
        (ii) At least 2 school buildings that were
    	
constructed 40 or more years prior to the issuance of the bonds will be demolished and will be replaced by new buildings or additions to one or more existing buildings.
        (iii) Voters of the district approve a proposition
    	
for the issuance of the bonds at a regularly scheduled election.
        (iv) At the time of the sale of the bonds, the
    	
school board determines by resolution that the new buildings or building additions are needed because of an increase in enrollment projected by the school board.
        (v) The principal amount of the bonds, including
    	
existing indebtedness, does not exceed 25% of the equalized assessed value of the taxable property in the district.
        (vi) The bonds are issued prior to January 1, 2007,
    	
pursuant to Sections 19-2 through 19-7 of this Code.
    (p-10) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Section or the provisions of any other law, bonds issued by a community consolidated school district maintaining grades K through 8 shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory limitation and may be issued in an amount or amounts, including existing indebtedness, in excess of any heretofore or hereafter imposed statutory limitation as to indebtedness, if all of the following conditions are met:
        (i) For each of the 4 most recent years, residential
    	
and farm property comprises more than 80% of the equalized assessed valuation of the district.
        (ii) The bond proceeds are to be used to acquire and
    	
improve school sites and build and equip a school building.
        (iii) Voters of the district approve a proposition
    	
for the issuance of the bonds at a regularly scheduled election.
        (iv) At the time of the sale of the bonds, the
    	
school board determines by resolution that the school sites and building additions are needed because of an increase in enrollment projected by the school board.
        (v) The principal amount of the bonds, including
    	
existing indebtedness, does not exceed 20% of the equalized assessed value of the taxable property in the district.
        (vi) The bonds are issued prior to January 1, 2007,
    	
pursuant to Sections 19-2 through 19-7 of this Code.
    (p-15) In addition to all other authority to issue bonds, the Oswego Community Unit School District Number 308 may issue bonds with an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $450,000,000, but only if all of the following conditions are met:
        (i) The voters of the district have approved a
    	
proposition for the bond issue at the general election held on November 7, 2006.
        (ii) At the time of the sale of the bonds, the school
    	
board determines, by resolution, that: (A) the building and equipping of the new high school building, new junior high school buildings, new elementary school buildings, early childhood building, maintenance building, transportation facility, and additions to existing school buildings, the altering, repairing, equipping, and provision of technology improvements to existing school buildings, and the acquisition and improvement of school sites, as the case may be, are required as a result of a projected increase in the enrollment of students in the district; and (B) the sale of bonds for these purposes is authorized by legislation that exempts the debt incurred on the bonds from the district's statutory debt limitation.
        (iii) The bonds are issued, in one or more bond
    	
issues, on or before November 7, 2011, but the aggregate principal amount issued in all such bond issues combined must not exceed $450,000,000.
        (iv) The bonds are issued in accordance with this
    	
Article 19.
        (v) The proceeds of the bonds are used only to
    	
accomplish those projects approved by the voters at the general election held on November 7, 2006.
The debt incurred on any bonds issued under this subsection (p-15) shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory debt limitation.
    (p-20) In addition to all other authority to issue bonds, the Lincoln-Way Community High School District Number 210 may issue bonds with an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $225,000,000, but only if all of the following conditions are met:
        (i) The voters of the district have approved a
    	
proposition for the bond issue at the general primary election held on March 21, 2006.
        (ii) At the time of the sale of the bonds, the school
    	
board determines, by resolution, that: (A) the building and equipping of the new high school buildings, the altering, repairing, and equipping of existing school buildings, and the improvement of school sites, as the case may be, are required as a result of a projected increase in the enrollment of students in the district; and (B) the sale of bonds for these purposes is authorized by legislation that exempts the debt incurred on the bonds from the district's statutory debt limitation.
        (iii) The bonds are issued, in one or more bond
    	
issues, on or before March 21, 2011, but the aggregate principal amount issued in all such bond issues combined must not exceed $225,000,000.
        (iv) The bonds are issued in accordance with this
    	
Article 19.
        (v) The proceeds of the bonds are used only to
    	
accomplish those projects approved by the voters at the primary election held on March 21, 2006.
The debt incurred on any bonds issued under this subsection (p-20) shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory debt limitation.
    (p-25) In addition to all other authority to issue bonds, Rochester Community Unit School District 3A may issue bonds with an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $18,500,000, but only if all of the following conditions are met:
        (i) The voters of the district approve a proposition
    	
for the bond issuance at the general primary election held in 2008.
        (ii) At the time of the sale of the bonds, the school
    	
board determines, by resolution, that: (A) the building and equipping of a new high school building; the addition of classrooms and support facilities at the high school, middle school, and elementary school; the altering, repairing, and equipping of existing school buildings; and the improvement of school sites, as the case may be, are required as a result of a projected increase in the enrollment of students in the district; and (B) the sale of bonds for these purposes is authorized by a law that exempts the debt incurred on the bonds from the district's statutory debt limitation.
        (iii) The bonds are issued, in one or more bond
    	
issues, on or before December 31, 2012, but the aggregate principal amount issued in all such bond issues combined must not exceed $18,500,000.
        (iv) The bonds are issued in accordance with this
    	
Article 19.
        (v) The proceeds of the bonds are used to accomplish
    	
only those projects approved by the voters at the primary election held in 2008.
The debt incurred on any bonds issued under this subsection (p-25) shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory debt limitation.
    (p-30) In addition to all other authority to issue bonds, Prairie Grove Consolidated School District 46 may issue bonds with an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $30,000,000, but only if all of the following conditions are met:
        (i) The voters of the district approve a proposition
    	
for the bond issuance at an election held in 2008.
        (ii) At the time of the sale of the bonds, the school
    	
board determines, by resolution, that (A) the building and equipping of a new school building and additions to existing school buildings are required as a result of a projected increase in the enrollment of students in the district and (B) the altering, repairing, and equipping of existing school buildings are required because of the age of the existing school buildings.
        (iii) The bonds are issued, in one or more bond
    	
issuances, on or before December 31, 2012; however, the aggregate principal amount issued in all such bond issuances combined must not exceed $30,000,000.
        (iv) The bonds are issued in accordance with this
    	
Article.
        (v) The proceeds of the bonds are used to accomplish
    	
only those projects approved by the voters at an election held in 2008.
The debt incurred on any bonds issued under this subsection (p-30) shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory debt limitation.
    (p-35) In addition to all other authority to issue bonds, Prairie Hill Community Consolidated School District 133 may issue bonds with an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $13,900,000, but only if all of the following conditions are met:
        (i) The voters of the district approved a proposition
    	
for the bond issuance at an election held on April 17, 2007.
        (ii) At the time of the sale of the bonds, the school
    	
board determines, by resolution, that (A) the improvement of the site of and the building and equipping of a school building are required as a result of a projected increase in the enrollment of students in the district and (B) the repairing and equipping of the Prairie Hill Elementary School building is required because of the age of that school building.
        (iii) The bonds are issued, in one or more bond
    	
issuances, on or before December 31, 2011, but the aggregate principal amount issued in all such bond issuances combined must not exceed $13,900,000.
        (iv) The bonds are issued in accordance with this
    	
Article.
        (v) The proceeds of the bonds are used to accomplish
    	
only those projects approved by the voters at an election held on April 17, 2007.
The debt incurred on any bonds issued under this subsection (p-35) shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory debt limitation.
    (p-40) In addition to all other authority to issue bonds, Mascoutah Community Unit District 19 may issue bonds with an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $55,000,000, but only if all of the following conditions are met:
        (1) The voters of the district approve a proposition
    	
for the bond issuance at a regular election held on or after November 4, 2008.
        (2) At the time of the sale of the bonds, the school
    	
board determines, by resolution, that (i) the building and equipping of a new high school building is required as a result of a projected increase in the enrollment of students in the district and the age and condition of the existing high school building, (ii) the existing high school building will be demolished, and (iii) the sale of bonds is authorized by statute that exempts the debt incurred on the bonds from the district's statutory debt limitation.
        (3) The bonds are issued, in one or more bond
    	
issuances, on or before December 31, 2011, but the aggregate principal amount issued in all such bond issuances combined must not exceed $55,000,000.
        (4) The bonds are issued in accordance with this
    	
Article.
        (5) The proceeds of the bonds are used to accomplish
    	
only those projects approved by the voters at a regular election held on or after November 4, 2008.
    The debt incurred on any bonds issued under this subsection (p-40) shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory debt limitation.
    (p-45) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this Section or of any other law, bonds issued pursuant to Section 19-3.5 of this Code shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory limitation if the bonds are issued in an amount or amounts, including existing indebtedness of the school district, not in excess of 18.5% of the value of the taxable property in the district to be ascertained by the last assessment for State and county taxes.
    (p-50) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this Section or of any other law, bonds issued pursuant to Section 19-3.10 of this Code shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory limitation if the bonds are issued in an amount or amounts, including existing indebtedness of the school district, not in excess of 43% of the value of the taxable property in the district to be ascertained by the last assessment for State and county taxes.
    (p-55) In addition to all other authority to issue bonds, Belle Valley School District 119 may issue bonds with an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $47,500,000, but only if all of the following conditions are met:
        (1) The voters of the district approve a proposition
    	
for the bond issuance at an election held on or after April 7, 2009.
        (2) Prior to the issuance of the bonds, the school
    	
board determines, by resolution, that (i) the building and equipping of a new school building is required as a result of mine subsidence in an existing school building and because of the age and condition of another existing school building and (ii) the issuance of bonds is authorized by statute that exempts the debt incurred on the bonds from the district's statutory debt limitation.
        (3) The bonds are issued, in one or more bond
    	
issuances, on or before March 31, 2014, but the aggregate principal amount issued in all such bond issuances combined must not exceed $47,500,000.
        (4) The bonds are issued in accordance with this
    	
Article.
        (5) The proceeds of the bonds are used to accomplish
    	
only those projects approved by the voters at an election held on or after April 7, 2009.
    The debt incurred on any bonds issued under this subsection (p-55) shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory debt limitation. Bonds issued under this subsection (p-55) must mature within not to exceed 30 years from their date, notwithstanding any other law to the contrary.
    (p-60) In addition to all other authority to issue bonds, Wilmington Community Unit School District Number 209-U may issue bonds with an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $2,285,000, but only if all of the following conditions are met:
        (1) The proceeds of the bonds are used to accomplish
    	
only those projects approved by the voters at the general primary election held on March 21, 2006.
        (2) Prior to the issuance of the bonds, the school
    	
board determines, by resolution, that (i) the projects approved by the voters were and are required because of the age and condition of the school district's prior and existing school buildings and (ii) the issuance of the bonds is authorized by legislation that exempts the debt incurred on the bonds from the district's statutory debt limitation.
        (3) The bonds are issued in one or more bond
    	
issuances on or before March 1, 2011, but the aggregate principal amount issued in all those bond issuances combined must not exceed $2,285,000.
        (4) The bonds are issued in accordance with this
    	
Article.
    The debt incurred on any bonds issued under this subsection (p-60) shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory debt limitation.
    (p-65) In addition to all other authority to issue bonds, West Washington County Community Unit School District 10 may issue bonds with an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $32,200,000 and maturing over a period not exceeding 25 years, but only if all of the following conditions are met:
        (1) The voters of the district approve a proposition
    	
for the bond issuance at an election held on or after February 2, 2010.
        (2) Prior to the issuance of the bonds, the school
    	
board determines, by resolution, that (A) all or a portion of the existing Okawville Junior/Senior High School Building will be demolished; (B) the building and equipping of a new school building to be attached to and the alteration, repair, and equipping of the remaining portion of the Okawville Junior/Senior High School Building is required because of the age and current condition of that school building; and (C) the issuance of bonds is authorized by a statute that exempts the debt incurred on the bonds from the district's statutory debt limitation.
        (3) The bonds are issued, in one or more bond
    	
issuances, on or before March 31, 2014, but the aggregate principal amount issued in all such bond issuances combined must not exceed $32,200,000.
        (4) The bonds are issued in accordance with this
    	
Article.
        (5) The proceeds of the bonds are used to accomplish
    	
only those projects approved by the voters at an election held on or after February 2, 2010.
    The debt incurred on any bonds issued under this subsection (p-65) shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory debt limitation.
    (p-70) In addition to all other authority to issue bonds, Cahokia Community Unit School District 187 may issue bonds with an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $50,000,000, but only if all the following conditions are met:
        (1) The voters of the district approve a proposition
    	
for the bond issuance at an election held on or after November 2, 2010.
        (2) Prior to the issuance of the bonds, the school
    	
board determines, by resolution, that (i) the building and equipping of a new school building is required as a result of the age and condition of an existing school building and (ii) the issuance of bonds is authorized by a statute that exempts the debt incurred on the bonds from the district's statutory debt limitation.
        (3) The bonds are issued, in one or more issuances,
    	
on or before July 1, 2016, but the aggregate principal amount issued in all such bond issuances combined must not exceed $50,000,000.
        (4) The bonds are issued in accordance with this
    	
Article.
        (5) The proceeds of the bonds are used to accomplish
    	
only those projects approved by the voters at an election held on or after November 2, 2010.
    The debt incurred on any bonds issued under this subsection (p-70) shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory debt limitation. Bonds issued under this subsection (p-70) must mature within not to exceed 25 years from their date, notwithstanding any other law, including Section 19-3 of this Code, to the contrary.
    (p-75) Notwithstanding the debt limitation prescribed in subsection (a) of this Section or any other provisions of this Section or of any other law, the execution of leases on or after January 1, 2007 and before July 1, 2011 by the Board of Education of Peoria School District 150 with a public building commission for leases entered into pursuant to the Public Building Commission Act shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory debt limitation.
    This subsection (p-75) applies only if the State Board of Education or the Capital Development Board makes one or more grants to Peoria School District 150 pursuant to the School Construction Law. The amount exempted from the debt limitation as prescribed in this subsection (p-75) shall be no greater than the amount of one or more grants awarded to Peoria School District 150 by the State Board of Education or the Capital Development Board.
    (p-80) In addition to all other authority to issue bonds, Ridgeland School District 122 may issue bonds with an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $50,000,000 for the purpose of refunding or continuing to refund bonds originally issued pursuant to voter approval at the general election held on November 7, 2000, and the debt incurred on any bonds issued under this subsection (p-80) shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory debt limitation. Bonds issued under this subsection (p-80) may be issued in one or more issuances and must mature within not to exceed 25 years from their date, notwithstanding any other law, including Section 19-3 of this Code, to the contrary.
    (p-85) In addition to all other authority to issue bonds, Hall High School District 502 may issue bonds with an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $32,000,000, but only if all the following conditions are met:
        (1) The voters of the district approve a proposition
    	
for the bond issuance at an election held on or after April 9, 2013.
        (2) Prior to the issuance of the bonds, the school
    	
board determines, by resolution, that (i) the building and equipping of a new school building is required as a result of the age and condition of an existing school building, (ii) the existing school building should be demolished in its entirety or the existing school building should be demolished except for the 1914 west wing of the building, and (iii) the issuance of bonds is authorized by a statute that exempts the debt incurred on the bonds from the district's statutory debt limitation.
        (3) The bonds are issued, in one or more issuances,
    	
not later than 5 years after the date of the referendum approving the issuance of the bonds, but the aggregate principal amount issued in all such bond issuances combined must not exceed $32,000,000.
        (4) The bonds are issued in accordance with this
    	
Article.
        (5) The proceeds of the bonds are used to accomplish
    	
only those projects approved by the voters at an election held on or after April 9, 2013.
    The debt incurred on any bonds issued under this subsection (p-85) shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory debt limitation. Bonds issued under this subsection (p-85) must mature within not to exceed 30 years from their date, notwithstanding any other law, including Section 19-3 of this Code, to the contrary.
    (p-90) In addition to all other authority to issue bonds, Lebanon Community Unit School District 9 may issue bonds with an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $7,500,000, but only if all of the following conditions are met:
        (1) The voters of the district approved a proposition
    	
for the bond issuance at the general primary election on February 2, 2010.
        (2) At or prior to the time of the sale of the bonds,
    	
the school board determines, by resolution, that (i) the building and equipping of a new elementary school building is required as a result of a projected increase in the enrollment of students in the district and the age and condition of the existing Lebanon Elementary School building, (ii) a portion of the existing Lebanon Elementary School building will be demolished and the remaining portion will be altered, repaired, and equipped, and (iii) the sale of bonds is authorized by a statute that exempts the debt incurred on the bonds from the district's statutory debt limitation.
        (3) The bonds are issued, in one or more bond
    	
issuances, on or before April 1, 2014, but the aggregate principal amount issued in all such bond issuances combined must not exceed $7,500,000.
        (4) The bonds are issued in accordance with this
    	
Article.
        (5) The proceeds of the bonds are used to accomplish
    	
only those projects approved by the voters at the general primary election held on February 2, 2010.
    The debt incurred on any bonds issued under this subsection (p-90) shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory debt limitation.
    (p-95) In addition to all other authority to issue bonds, Monticello Community Unit School District 25 may issue bonds with an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $35,000,000, but only if all of the following conditions are met:
        (1) The voters of the district approve a proposition
    	
for the bond issuance at an election held on or after November 4, 2014.
        (2) Prior to the issuance of the bonds, the school
    	
board determines, by resolution, that (i) the building and equipping of a new school building is required as a result of the age and condition of an existing school building and (ii) the issuance of bonds is authorized by a statute that exempts the debt incurred on the bonds from the district's statutory debt limitation.
        (3) The bonds are issued, in one or more issuances,
    	
on or before July 1, 2020, but the aggregate principal amount issued in all such bond issuances combined must not exceed $35,000,000.
        (4) The bonds are issued in accordance with this
    	
Article.
        (5) The proceeds of the bonds are used to accomplish
    	
only those projects approved by the voters at an election held on or after November 4, 2014.
    The debt incurred on any bonds issued under this subsection (p-95) shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory debt limitation. Bonds issued under this subsection (p-95) must mature within not to exceed 25 years from their date, notwithstanding any other law, including Section 19-3 of this Code, to the contrary.
    (p-100) In addition to all other authority to issue bonds, the community unit school district created in the territory comprising Milford Community Consolidated School District 280 and Milford Township High School District 233, as approved at the general primary election held on March 18, 2014, may issue bonds with an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $17,500,000, but only if all the following conditions are met:
        (1) The voters of the district approve a proposition
    	
for the bond issuance at an election held on or after November 4, 2014.
        (2) Prior to the issuance of the bonds, the school
    	
board determines, by resolution, that (i) the building and equipping of a new school building is required as a result of the age and condition of an existing school building and (ii) the issuance of bonds is authorized by a statute that exempts the debt incurred on the bonds from the district's statutory debt limitation.
        (3) The bonds are issued, in one or more issuances,
    	
on or before July 1, 2020, but the aggregate principal amount issued in all such bond issuances combined must not exceed $17,500,000.
        (4) The bonds are issued in accordance with this
    	
Article.
        (5) The proceeds of the bonds are used to accomplish
    	
only those projects approved by the voters at an election held on or after November 4, 2014.
    The debt incurred on any bonds issued under this subsection (p-100) shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory debt limitation. Bonds issued under this subsection (p-100) must mature within not to exceed 25 years from their date, notwithstanding any other law, including Section 19-3 of this Code, to the contrary.
    (p-105) In addition to all other authority to issue bonds, North Shore School District 112 may issue bonds with an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $150,000,000, but only if all of the following conditions are met:
        (1) The voters of the district approve a proposition
    	
for the bond issuance at an election held on or after March 15, 2016.
        (2) Prior to the issuance of the bonds, the school
    	
board determines, by resolution, that (i) the building and equipping of new buildings and improving the sites thereof and the building and equipping of additions to, altering, repairing, equipping, and renovating existing buildings and improving the sites thereof are required as a result of the age and condition of the district's existing buildings and (ii) the issuance of bonds is authorized by a statute that exempts the debt incurred on the bonds from the district's statutory debt limitation.
        (3) The bonds are issued, in one or more issuances,
    	
not later than 5 years after the date of the referendum approving the issuance of the bonds, but the aggregate principal amount issued in all such bond issuances combined must not exceed $150,000,000.
        (4) The bonds are issued in accordance with this
    	
Article.
        (5) The proceeds of the bonds are used to accomplish
    	
only those projects approved by the voters at an election held on or after March 15, 2016.
    The debt incurred on any bonds issued under this subsection (p-105) and on any bonds issued to refund or continue to refund such bonds shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory debt limitation. Bonds issued under this subsection (p-105) and any bonds issued to refund or continue to refund such bonds must mature within not to exceed 30 years from their date, notwithstanding any other law, including Section 19-3 of this Code, to the contrary.
    (p-110) In addition to all other authority to issue bonds, Sandoval Community Unit School District 501 may issue bonds with an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $2,000,000, but only if all of the following conditions are met:
        (1) The voters of the district approved a
    	
proposition for the bond issuance at an election held on March 20, 2012.
        (2) Prior to the issuance of the bonds, the school
    	
board determines, by resolution, that (i) the building and equipping of a new school building is required because of the age and current condition of the Sandoval Elementary School building and (ii) the issuance of bonds is authorized by a statute that exempts the debt incurred on the bonds from the district's statutory debt limitation.
        (3) The bonds are issued, in one or more bond
    	
issuances, on or before March 19, 2022, but the aggregate principal amount issued in all such bond issuances combined must not exceed $2,000,000.
        (4) The bonds are issued in accordance with this
    	
Article.
        (5) The proceeds of the bonds are used to
    	
accomplish only those projects approved by the voters at the election held on March 20, 2012.
    The debt incurred on any bonds issued under this subsection (p-110) and on any bonds issued to refund or continue to refund the bonds shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory debt limitation.
    (p-115) In addition to all other authority to issue bonds, Bureau Valley Community Unit School District 340 may issue bonds with an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $25,000,000, but only if all of the following conditions are met:
        (1) The voters of the district approve a proposition
    	
for the bond issuance at an election held on or after March 15, 2016.
        (2) Prior to the issuances of the bonds, the school
    	
board determines, by resolution, that (i) the renovating and equipping of some existing school buildings, the building and equipping of new school buildings, and the demolishing of some existing school buildings are required as a result of the age and condition of existing school buildings and (ii) the issuance of bonds is authorized by a statute that exempts the debt incurred on the bonds from the district's statutory debt limitation.
        (3) The bonds are issued, in one or more issuances,
    	
on or before July 1, 2021, but the aggregate principal amount issued in all such bond issuances combined must not exceed $25,000,000.
        (4) The bonds are issued in accordance with this
    	
Article.
        (5) The proceeds of the bonds are used to accomplish
    	
only those projects approved by the voters at an election held on or after March 15, 2016.
    The debt incurred on any bonds issued under this subsection (p-115) shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory debt limitation. Bonds issued under this subsection (p-115) must mature within not to exceed 30 years from their date, notwithstanding any other law, including Section 19-3 of this Code, to the contrary.
    (p-120) In addition to all other authority to issue bonds, Paxton-Buckley-Loda Community Unit School District 10 may issue bonds with an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $28,500,000, but only if all the following conditions are met:
        (1) The voters of the district approve a proposition
    	
for the bond issuance at an election held on or after November 8, 2016.
        (2) Prior to the issuance of the bonds, the school
    	
board determines, by resolution, that (i) the projects as described in said proposition, relating to the building and equipping of one or more school buildings or additions to existing school buildings, are required as a result of the age and condition of the District's existing buildings and (ii) the issuance of bonds is authorized by a statute that exempts the debt incurred on the bonds from the district's statutory debt limitation.
        (3) The bonds are issued, in one or more issuances,
    	
not later than 5 years after the date of the referendum approving the issuance of the bonds, but the aggregate principal amount issued in all such bond issuances combined must not exceed $28,500,000.
        (4) The bonds are issued in accordance with this
    	
Article.
        (5) The proceeds of the bonds are used to accomplish
    	
only those projects approved by the voters at an election held on or after November 8, 2016.
    The debt incurred on any bonds issued under this subsection (p-120) and on any bonds issued to refund or continue to refund such bonds shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory debt limitation. Bonds issued under this subsection (p-120) and any bonds issued to refund or continue to refund such bonds must mature within not to exceed 25 years from their date, notwithstanding any other law, including Section 19-3 of this Code, to the contrary.
    (p-125) In addition to all other authority to issue bonds, Hillsboro Community Unit School District 3 may issue bonds with an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $34,500,000, but only if all the following conditions are met:
        (1) The voters of the district approve a proposition
    	
for the bond issuance at an election held on or after March 15, 2016.
        (2) Prior to the issuance of the bonds, the school
    	
board determines, by resolution, that (i) altering, repairing, and equipping the high school agricultural/vocational building, demolishing the high school main, cafeteria, and gym buildings, building and equipping a school building, and improving sites are required as a result of the age and condition of the district's existing buildings and (ii) the issuance of bonds is authorized by a statute that exempts the debt incurred on the bonds from the district's statutory debt limitation.
        (3) The bonds are issued, in one or more issuances,
    	
not later than 5 years after the date of the referendum approving the issuance of the bonds, but the aggregate principal amount issued in all such bond issuances combined must not exceed $34,500,000.
        (4) The bonds are issued in accordance with this
    	
Article.
        (5) The proceeds of the bonds are used to accomplish
    	
only those projects approved by the voters at an election held on or after March 15, 2016.
    The debt incurred on any bonds issued under this subsection (p-125) and on any bonds issued to refund or continue to refund such bonds shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory debt limitation. Bonds issued under this subsection (p-125) and any bonds issued to refund or continue to refund such bonds must mature within not to exceed 25 years from their date, notwithstanding any other law, including Section 19-3 of this Code, to the contrary.
    (p-130) In addition to all other authority to issue bonds, Waltham Community Consolidated School District 185 may incur indebtedness in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $9,500,000 to build and equip a new school building and improve the site thereof, but only if all the following conditions are met:
        (1) A majority of the voters of the district voting
    	
on an advisory question voted in favor of the question regarding the use of funding sources to build a new school building without increasing property tax rates at the general election held on November 8, 2016.
        (2) Prior to incurring the debt, the school board
    	
enters into intergovernmental agreements with the City of LaSalle to pledge moneys in a special tax allocation fund associated with tax increment financing districts LaSalle I and LaSalle III and with the Village of Utica to pledge moneys in a special tax allocation fund associated with tax increment financing district Utica I for the purposes of repaying the debt issued pursuant to this subsection (p-130). Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the intergovernmental agreement may extend these tax increment financing districts as necessary to ensure repayment of the debt.
        (3) Prior to incurring the debt, the school board
    	
determines, by resolution, that (i) the building and equipping of a new school building is required as a result of the age and condition of the district's existing buildings and (ii) the debt is authorized by a statute that exempts the debt from the district's statutory debt limitation.
        (4) The debt is incurred, in one or more issuances,
    	
not later than January 1, 2021, and the aggregate principal amount of debt issued in all such issuances combined must not exceed $9,500,000.
    The debt incurred under this subsection (p-130) and on any bonds issued to pay, refund, or continue to refund such debt shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory debt limitation. Debt issued under this subsection (p-130) and any bonds issued to pay, refund, or continue to refund such debt must mature within not to exceed 25 years from their date, notwithstanding any other law, including Section 19-11 of this Code and subsection (b) of Section 17 of the Local Government Debt Reform Act, to the contrary.
    (p-133) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this Section or of any other law, bonds heretofore or hereafter issued by East Prairie School District 73 with an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $47,353,147 and approved by the voters of the district at the general election held on November 8, 2016, and any bonds issued to refund or continue to refund the bonds, shall not be considered indebtedness for the purposes of any statutory debt limitation and may mature within not to exceed 25 years from their date, notwithstanding any other law, including Section 19-3 of this Code, to the contrary.
    (p-135) In addition to all other authority to issue bonds, Brookfield LaGrange Park School District Number 95 may issue bonds with an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $20,000,000, but only if all the following conditions are met:
        (1) The voters of the district approve a proposition
    	
for the bond issuance at an election held on or after April 4, 2017.
        (2) Prior to the issuance of the bonds, the school
    	
board determines, by resolution, that (i) the additions and renovations to the Brook Park Elementary and S. E. Gross Middle School buildings are required to accommodate enrollment growth, replace outdated facilities, and create spaces consistent with 21st century learning and (ii) the issuance of the bonds is authorized by a statute that exempts the debt incurred on the bonds from the district's statutory debt limitation.
        (3) The bonds are issued, in one or more issuances,
    	
not later than 5 years after the date of the referendum approving the issuance of the bonds, but the aggregate principal amount issued in all such bond issuances combined must not exceed $20,000,000.
        (4) The bonds are issued in accordance with this
    	
Article.
        (5) The proceeds of the bonds are used to accomplish
    	
only those projects approved by the voters at an election held on or after April 4, 2017.
    The debt incurred on any bonds issued under this subsection (p-135) and on any bonds issued to refund or continue to refund such bonds shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory debt limitation.
    (p-140) The debt incurred on any bonds issued by Wolf Branch School District 113 under Section 17-2.11 of this Code for the purpose of repairing or replacing all or a portion of a school building that has been damaged by mine subsidence in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $17,500,000 and on any bonds issued to refund or continue to refund those bonds shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory debt limitation and must mature no later than 25 years from the date of issuance, notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, including Section 19-3 of this Code. The maximum allowable amount of debt exempt from statutory debt limitations under this subsection (p-140) shall be reduced by an amount equal to any grants awarded by the State Board of Education or Capital Development Board for the explicit purpose of repairing or reconstructing a school building damaged by mine subsidence.
    (p-145) In addition to all other authority to issue bonds, Greenview Community Unit School District 200 may issue bonds with an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $3,500,000, but only if all of the following conditions are met:
        (1) The voters of the district approve a proposition
    	
for the bond issuance at an election held on March 17, 2020.
        (2) Prior to the issuance of the bonds, the school
    	
board determines, by resolution, that the bonding is necessary for construction and expansion of the district's kindergarten through grade 12 facility.
        (3) The bonds are issued, in one or more issuances,
    	
not later than 5 years after the date of the referendum approving the issuance of the bonds, but the aggregate principal amount issued in all such bond issuances combined must not exceed $3,500,000.
        (4) The bonds are issued in accordance with this
    	
Article.
        (5) The proceeds of the bonds are used to accomplish
    	
only the projects approved by the voters at an election held on March 17, 2020.
    The debt incurred on any bonds issued under this subsection (p-145) and on any bonds issued to refund or continue to refund such bonds shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory debt limitation. Bonds issued under this subsection (p-145) and any bonds issued to refund or continue to refund such bonds must mature within not to exceed 25 years from their date, notwithstanding any other law, including Section 19-3 of this Code, to the contrary.
    (p-150) In addition to all other authority to issue bonds, Komarek School District 94 may issue bonds with an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $20,800,000, but only if all of the following conditions are met:
        (1) The voters of the district approve a proposition
    	
for the bond issuance at an election held on or after March 17, 2020.
        (2) Prior to the issuance of the bonds, the school
    	
board determines, by resolution, that (i) building and equipping additions to, altering, repairing, equipping, or demolishing a portion of, or improving the site of the district's existing school building is required as a result of the age and condition of the existing building and (ii) the issuance of the bonds is authorized by a statute that exempts the debt incurred on the bonds from the district's statutory debt limitation.
        (3) The bonds are issued, in one or more issuances,
    	
no later than 5 years after the date of the referendum approving the issuance of the bonds, but the aggregate principal amount issued in all of the bond issuances combined may not exceed $20,800,000.
        (4) The bonds are issued in accordance with this
    	
Article.
        (5) The proceeds of the bonds are used to accomplish
    	
only those projects approved by the voters at an election held on or after March 17, 2020.
    The debt incurred on any bonds issued under this subsection (p-150) and on any bonds issued to refund or continue to refund those bonds may not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory debt limitation. Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, including Section 19-3, bonds issued under this subsection (p-150) and any bonds issued to refund or continue to refund those bonds must mature within 30 years from their date of issuance.
    (p-155) In addition to all other authority to issue bonds, Williamsville Community Unit School District 15 may issue bonds with an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $40,000,000, but only if all of the following conditions are met:
        (1) The voters of the school district approve a
    	
proposition for the bond issuance at an election held on March 17, 2020.
        (2) Prior to the issuance of the bonds, the school
    	
board determines, by resolution, that the projects set forth in the proposition for the bond issuance were and are required because of the age and condition of the school district's existing school buildings.
        (3) The bonds are issued, in one or more issuances,
    	
not later than 5 years after the date of the referendum approving the issuance of the bonds, but the aggregate principal amount issued in all such bond issuances combined must not exceed $40,000,000.
        (4) The bonds are issued in accordance with this
    	
Article.
        (5) The proceeds of the bonds are used to accomplish
    	
only the projects approved by the voters at an election held on March 17, 2020.
    The debt incurred on any bonds issued under this subsection (p-155) and on any bonds issued to refund or continue to refund such bonds shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory debt limitation. Bonds issued under this subsection (p-155) and any bonds issued to refund or continue to refund such bonds must mature within not to exceed 25 years from their date, notwithstanding any other law, including Section 19-3 of this Code, to the contrary.
    (p-160) In addition to all other authority to issue bonds, Berkeley School District 87 may issue bonds with an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $105,000,000, but only if all of the following conditions are met:
        (1) The voters of the district approve a proposition
    	
for the bond issuance at the general primary election held on March 17, 2020.
        (2) Prior to the issuance of the bonds, the school
    	
board determines, by resolution, that (i) building and equipping a school building to replace the Sunnyside Intermediate and MacArthur Middle School buildings; building and equipping additions to and altering, repairing, and equipping the Riley Intermediate and Northlake Middle School buildings; altering, repairing, and equipping the Whittier Primary and Jefferson Primary School buildings; improving sites; renovating instructional spaces; providing STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) labs; and constructing life safety, security, and infrastructure improvements are required to replace outdated facilities and to provide safe spaces consistent with 21st century learning and (ii) the issuance of bonds is authorized by a statute that exempts the debt incurred on the bonds from the district's statutory debt limitation.
        (3) The bonds are issued, in one or more issuances,
    	
not later than 5 years after the date of the referendum approving the issuance of the bonds, but the aggregate principal amount issued in all such bond issuances combined must not exceed $105,000,000.
        (4) The bonds are issued in accordance with this
    	
Article.
        (5) The proceeds of the bonds are used to accomplish
    	
only those projects approved by the voters at the general primary election held on March 17, 2020.
    The debt incurred on any bonds issued under this subsection (p-160) and on any bonds issued to refund or continue to refund such bonds shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory debt limitation.
    (p-165) In addition to all other authority to issue bonds, Elmwood Park Community Unit School District 401 may issue bonds with an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $55,000,000, but only if all of the following conditions are met:
        (1) The voters of the district approve a proposition
    	
for the bond issuance at an election held on or after March 17, 2020.
        (2) Prior to the issuance of the bonds, the school
    	
board determines, by resolution, that (i) the building and equipping of an addition to the John Mills Elementary School building; the renovating, altering, repairing, and equipping of the John Mills and Elmwood Elementary School buildings; the installation of safety and security improvements; and the improvement of school sites are required as a result of the age and condition of the district's existing school buildings and (ii) the issuance of bonds is authorized by a statute that exempts the debt incurred on the bonds from the district's statutory debt limitation.
        (3) The bonds are issued, in one or more issuances,
    	
not later than 5 years after the date of the referendum approving the issuance of the bonds, but the aggregate principal amount issued in all such bond issuances combined must not exceed $55,000,000.
        (4) The bonds are issued in accordance with this
    	
Article.
        (5) The proceeds of the bonds are used to accomplish
    	
only the projects approved by the voters at an election held on or after March 17, 2020.
    The debt incurred on any bonds issued under this subsection (p-165) and on any bonds issued to refund or continue to refund such bonds shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory debt limitation. Bonds issued under this subsection (p-165) and any bonds issued to refund or continue to refund such bonds must mature within not to exceed 25 years from their date, notwithstanding any other law, including Section 19-3 of this Code, to the contrary.
    (p-170) In addition to all other authority to issue bonds, Maroa-Forsyth Community Unit School District 2 may issue bonds with an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $33,000,000, but only if all of the following conditions are met:
        (1) The voters of the school district approve a
    	
proposition for the bond issuance at an election held on March 17, 2020.
        (2) Prior to the issuance of the bonds, the school
    	
board determines, by resolution, that the projects set forth in the proposition for the bond issuance were and are required because of the age and condition of the school district's existing school buildings.
        (3) The bonds are issued, in one or more issuances,
    	
not later than 5 years after the date of the referendum approving the issuance of the bonds, but the aggregate principal amount issued in all such bond issuances combined must not exceed $33,000,000.
        (4) The bonds are issued in accordance with this
    	
Article.
        (5) The proceeds of the bonds are used to accomplish
    	
only the projects approved by the voters at an election held on March 17, 2020.
    The debt incurred on any bonds issued under this subsection (p-170) and on any bonds issued to refund or continue to refund such bonds shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory debt limitation. Bonds issued under this subsection (p-170) and any bonds issued to refund or continue to refund such bonds must mature within not to exceed 25 years from their date, notwithstanding any other law, including Section 19-3 of this Code, to the contrary.
    (p-175) In addition to all other authority to issue bonds, Schiller Park School District 81 may issue bonds with an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $30,000,000, but only if all of the following conditions are met:
        (1) The voters of the district approve a proposition
    	
for the bond issuance at an election held on or after March 17, 2020.
        (2) Prior to the issuance of the bonds, the school
    	
board determines, by resolution, that (i) building and equipping a school building to replace the Washington Elementary School building, installing fire suppression systems, security systems, and federal Americans with Disability Act of 1990 compliance measures, acquiring land, and improving the site are required to accommodate enrollment growth, replace an outdated facility, and create spaces consistent with 21st century learning and (ii) the issuance of bonds is authorized by a statute that exempts the debt incurred on the bonds from the district's statutory debt limitation.
        (3) The bonds are issued, in one or more issuances,
    	
not later than 5 years after the date of the referendum approving the issuance of the bonds, but the aggregate principal amount issued in all such bond issuances combined must not exceed $30,000,000.
        (4) The bonds are issued in accordance with this
    	
Article.
        (5) The proceeds of the bonds are used to accomplish
    	
only the projects approved by the voters at an election held on or after March 17, 2020.
    The debt incurred on any bonds issued under this subsection (p-175) and on any bonds issued to refund or continue to refund such bonds shall not be considered indebtedness for purposes of any statutory debt limitation. Bonds issued under this subsection (p-175) and any bonds issued to refund or continue to refund such bonds must mature within not to exceed 27 years from their date, notwithstanding any other law, including Section 19-3 of this Code, to the contrary.
    (q) A school district must notify the State Board of Education prior to issuing any form of long-term or short-term debt that will result in outstanding debt that exceeds 75% of the debt limit specified in this Section or any other provision of law.
(Source: P.A. 100-531, eff. 9-22-17; 100-650, eff. 7-31-18; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18; 101-646, eff. 6-26-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19-1.5)
    Sec. 19-1.5. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 88-641, eff. 9-9-94. Repealed by P.A. 94-234, eff. 7-1-06.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/prec. Sec. 19-2 heading)
BONDS

    (105 ILCS 5/19-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 19-2)
    Sec. 19-2. School directors - Power to borrow money and issue bonds. For the purpose of building or repairing schoolhouses or purchasing or improving school sites, the directors of any school district, when authorized by a majority of the votes cast on such proposition conducted in accordance with the general election law, may borrow money; and, as evidence of such indebtedness, may issue bonds signed by the president and clerk of the board, in denominations of not less than $100, and bearing interest at a rate not exceeding the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract.
    With respect to instruments for the payment of money issued under this Section either before, on, or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1989, it is and always has been the intention of the General Assembly (i) that the Omnibus Bond Acts are and always have been supplementary grants of power to issue instruments in accordance with the Omnibus Bond Acts, regardless of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts, (ii) that the provisions of this Section are not a limitation on the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts, and (iii) that instruments issued under this Section within the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts are not invalid because of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts.
    The proceeds of any bonds issued under authorization of this Section shall be deposited and accounted for separately within the Site and Construction/Capital Improvements Fund.
(Source: P.A. 86-4; 87-984.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19-3) (from Ch. 122, par. 19-3)
    Sec. 19-3. Boards of education. Any school district governed by a board of education and having a population of not more than 500,000 inhabitants, and not governed by a special Act may borrow money for the purpose of building, equipping, altering or repairing school buildings or purchasing or improving school sites, or acquiring and equipping playgrounds, recreation grounds, athletic fields, and other buildings or land used or useful for school purposes or for the purpose of purchasing a site, with or without a building or buildings thereon, or for the building of a house or houses on such site, or for the building of a house or houses on the school site of the school district, for residential purposes of the superintendent, principal, or teachers of the school district, and issue its negotiable coupon bonds therefor signed by the president and secretary of the board, in denominations of not less than $100 nor more than $5,000, payable at such place and at such time or times, not exceeding 20 years, with the exception of Lockport High School and bonds issued by any school district as qualified school construction bonds in accordance with applicable federal tax law not exceeding 25 years, from date of issuance, as the board of education may prescribe, and bearing interest at a rate not to exceed the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, payable annually, semiannually or quarterly, but no such bonds shall be issued unless the proposition to issue them is submitted to the voters of the district at a referendum held at a regularly scheduled election after the board has certified the proposition to the proper election authorities in accordance with the general election law, a majority of all the votes cast on the proposition is in favor of the proposition, and notice of such bond referendum has been given either (i) in accordance with the second paragraph of Section 12-1 of the Election Code irrespective of whether such notice included any reference to the public question as it appeared on the ballot, or (ii) for an election held on or after November 1, 1998, in accordance with Section 12-5 of the Election Code, or (iii) by publication of a true and legible copy of the specimen ballot label containing the proposition in the form in which it appeared or will appear on the official ballot label on the day of the election at least 5 days before the day of the election in at least one newspaper published in and having a general circulation in the district, irrespective of any other requirements of Article 12 or Section 24A-18 of the Election Code, nor shall any residential site be acquired unless such proposition to acquire a site is submitted to the voters of the district at a referendum held at a regularly scheduled election after the board has certified the proposition to the proper election authorities in accordance with the general election law and a majority of all the votes cast on the proposition is in favor of the proposition. Nothing in this Act or in any other law shall be construed to require the notice of the bond referendum to be published over the name or title of the election authority or the listing of maturity dates of any bonds either in the notice of bond election or ballot used in the bond election. The provisions of this Section concerning notice of the bond referendum apply only to (i) consolidated primary elections held prior to January 1, 2002 and the consolidated election held on April 17, 2007 at which not less than 60% of the voters voting on the bond proposition voted in favor of the bond proposition, and (ii) other elections held before July 1, 1999; otherwise, notices required in connection with the submission of public questions shall be as set forth in Section 12-5 of the Election Code. Such proposition may be initiated by resolution of the school board.
    With respect to instruments for the payment of money issued under this Section either before, on, or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1989, it is and always has been the intention of the General Assembly (i) that the Omnibus Bond Acts are and always have been supplementary grants of power to issue instruments in accordance with the Omnibus Bond Acts, regardless of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts, (ii) that the provisions of this Section are not a limitation on the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts, and (iii) that instruments issued under this Section within the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts are not invalid because of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts.
    The proceeds of any bonds issued under authority of this Section shall be deposited and accounted for separately within the Site and Construction/Capital Improvements Fund.
(Source: P.A. 99-735, eff. 8-5-16.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19-3.5)
    Sec. 19-3.5. Flood-damaged building. Martinsville Community Unit School District 3C is authorized to issue bonds in not to exceed the amount of $4,000,000 for the purpose of paying the cost of acquiring and improving a school site and building and equipping a new school building on the site to replace all or a portion of a school building closed by the regional superintendent of schools pursuant to Section 3-14.22 of this Code because of flood damage. The replacement building may be larger than the size of and offer more functions than the school building being replaced. Bonds issued pursuant to this Section may be issued without referendum and shall mature not more than 25 years from the date of issuance.
(Source: P.A. 96-517, eff. 8-14-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19-3.10)
    Sec. 19-3.10. Mine subsidence damaged building. Gillespie Community Unit School District 7 is authorized to issue bonds in not to exceed the amount of $22,000,000 for the purpose of paying the cost of acquiring and improving a school site and building and equipping a new school building on the site to replace all or a portion of a school building closed by the regional superintendent of schools pursuant to Section 3-14.22 of this Code because of mine subsidence damage. The replacement building may be larger than the size of and offer more functions than the school building being replaced. Bonds issued pursuant to this Section may be issued without referendum and shall mature not more than 25 years from the date of issuance.
(Source: P.A. 96-517, eff. 8-14-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19-3.15)
    Sec. 19-3.15. School additions; Chaney-Monge School District 88. Notwithstanding the requirements of any other applicable law and without further referendum approval, Chaney-Monge School District 88 is authorized to issue bonds in not to exceed the amount of $3,000,000 to provide for the improvement, alteration, and repair of schoolhouses and to fund the local share as required for a Capital Development Board school construction grant to fund school additions and associated construction and equipment with respect to which a referendum was passed on March 18, 2014.
(Source: P.A. 98-1060, eff. 8-26-14.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19-4) (from Ch. 122, par. 19-4)
    Sec. 19-4. Bonds issued - Boundaries changed. Where bonds are issued by any school district under the provisions of Section 19-2 through Section 19-6, and before any contract is let for the construction of buildings or improvements in accordance therewith the district boundaries are changed by the formation of a new district including all or a part of said district, or by the annexation of a district in its entirety to another district, then upon the adoption of a resolution by the board of education of the new district or the district to which the territory has been annexed, that the building or improvements are no longer feasible, the board shall by resolution order submitted to the electors the proposition of authorizing the board to use the proceeds of said bonds or the portion thereof allotted to the new district or district to which said territory is annexed for a specific new building or improvement in some locality of the district other than the one specified at the previous election, or for a different improvement, or for a part of the original improvements. In case a new district has been formed, no such referendum shall be held unless the new district embraces territory having as much or more assessed valuation as the territory embraced in the district at the first election. The board shall certify the resolution and the proposition to the proper election authorities for submission in accordance with the general election law.
    Where bonds are issued by any school district under the provisions of Section 19-2 through Section 19-6, and it is determined by the board of education by resolution that it is in the interests of the school district that part or all of the proceeds of said bonds be used for different purposes than authorized but for purposes for which bonds may be issued under the provisions of Section 19-2 through Section 19-6, the board shall by resolution order submitted to the electors the proposition of authorizing the board to use the proceeds of said bonds or a part thereof for the purposes set forth in said resolution and if a majority of all the votes cast on said proposition is in favor thereof the board shall have such authority. The board shall certify the resolution and the proposition to the proper election authorities for submission in accordance with the general election law.
(Source: P.A. 84-1334.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19-5) (from Ch. 122, par. 19-5)
    Sec. 19-5. Registration, numbering and countersigning. All bonds issued under this Act, except bonds issued by school districts having a population of more than 500,000 inhabitants, before being issued, negotiated and sold, shall be registered, numbered and countersigned by the treasurer who receives the taxes of the district. The registration shall be made in a book in which shall be entered the record of the election authorizing the directors or the board of education to borrow money and a description of the bonds issued, including the number, date, to whom issued, amount, rate of interest and when due.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19-6) (from Ch. 122, par. 19-6)
    Sec. 19-6. Bond money to school treasurer - Delivery of bonds - Record - Payment. All moneys borrowed under the authority of this Act, except money borrowed by school districts having a population of more than 500,000 inhabitants, shall be paid to the school treasurer of the district. The treasurer shall, before receiving any of the money, execute a bond with two or more persons having an interest in real estate, who shall not be trustees, or a surety company authorized to do business in this State, as surety, payable to the school board of the district in Class I county school units or township trustees in Class II county school units and conditioned upon the faithful discharge of his duties, except that the bond required of the school treasurer of a school district which is located in a Class II county school unit but which no longer is subject to the jurisdiction and authority of a township treasurer or trustees of schools of a township because the district has withdrawn from the jurisdiction and authority of the township treasurer and trustees of schools of the township or because those offices have been abolished as provided in subsection (b) or (c) of Section 5-1 shall be payable to the school board of such district and conditioned upon the faithful discharge of his duties. The bond shall be submitted for approval or rejection to the school board of the district or to the township trustees to which such bond is payable. The penalty of the bond or bonds shall be 25% of the amount of such bond issue, whether individuals act as surety or whether the surety is given by a surety company authorized to transact business in this State. The bond shall be in substantially the same form as that required by Section 8-2 of this Act and when so given shall fully describe the bond issue which it specifically covers and shall remain in force until the funds of the bond issue are fully disbursed in accordance with the law. Upon receiving such moneys the treasurer shall deliver the bonds issued therefor to the persons entitled to receive them, and shall credit the funds received to the district issuing the bonds. The treasurer shall record the amount received for each bond issued. When any bonds are paid the treasurer shall cancel them and shall enter, against the record of the bonds, the words, "paid and cancelled the .... day of ...., 1 ....," filling the blanks with the day, month, and year corresponding to the date of payment.
(Source: P.A. 89-212, eff. 8-4-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19-7) (from Ch. 122, par. 19-7)
    Sec. 19-7. Certified copy of resolution filed with county clerk-Registry of bonds-Extension of tax. Whenever any school district having a population of less than 500,000 inhabitants is authorized to issue bonds, the recording officer thereof shall file in the office of the county clerk of each county in which any portion of the district is situated a certified copy of the resolution providing for their issuance and levying a tax to pay them. The county clerk shall prepare and keep in his office a registry of all such bonds which shall show the name of the issuing body and the date, amount, purpose, rate of interest and maturity of the bonds to be issued, and the county clerk, subject to the provisions of Section 7-14 of this Act, annually shall extend taxes against all the taxable property situated in the county and contained in the district in amounts sufficient to pay maturing principal and interest, and such taxes shall be computed, extended and collected in the same manner as is now or may hereafter be provided for the computation, extension and collection of taxes for general corporate purposes for the issuing district. If no such certified copy of resolution has been filed with reference to any bonds heretofore authorized one shall promptly be filed.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19-8) (from Ch. 122, par. 19-8)
    Sec. 19-8. Bonds to pay claims. Any school district or non-high district operating under general law or special charter having a population of 500,000 or less is authorized to issue bonds for the purpose of paying orders issued for the wages of teachers, for the payment of claims against any such district, or for providing funds to effect liquidation or defeasance of the obligations of a Financial Oversight Panel pursuant to the provisions of Section 1H-115 of this Code.
    Such bonds may be issued in an amount, including existing indebtedness, in excess of any statutory limitation as to debt.
(Source: P.A. 97-429, eff. 8-16-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19-9) (from Ch. 122, par. 19-9)
    Sec. 19-9. Resolution to issue bonds - Submission to voters. Before any district as described in Section 19-8 shall avail itself of the provisions of that section the governing body thereof shall examine and consider the several teachers' orders or claims or liabilities of a Financial Oversight Panel established pursuant to Article 1H of this Code, or any or all of these, proposed to be paid and if it appears that they were authorized and allowed for proper school purposes it shall adopt a resolution so declaring and set forth and describe in detail such teachers' orders and claims and liabilities of a Financial Oversight Panel established pursuant to Article 1H of this Code and the adoption of the resolution shall establish the validity thereof, notwithstanding the amount of such orders and claims and liabilities of a Financial Oversight Panel established pursuant to Article 1H of this Code may exceed in whole or in part any applicable statutory debt limit in force at the time the indebtedness evidenced by such orders and claims and liabilities of a Financial Oversight Panel established pursuant to Article 1H of this Code was incurred. The resolution shall also declare the intention of the district to issue bonds for the purpose of paying such teachers' orders or claims or liabilities of a Financial Oversight Panel established pursuant to Article 1H of this Code, and direct that notice of such intention be published at least once in a newspaper published within the district and if there be no newspaper published within the district then notice shall be published in a newspaper having general circulation within the district. The notice shall set forth (1) the time within which a petition may be filed requesting the submission of the proposition to issue the bonds as hereinafter in this Section provided; (2) the specific number of voters required to sign the petition; and the date of the prospective referendum. The recording officer of the district shall provide a petition form to any individual requesting one. If within 30 days after such publication of such notice a petition is filed with the recording officer of the district, signed by the voters of the district equal to 10% or more of the registered voters of the district requesting that the proposition to issue bonds as authorized by Section 19-8 be submitted to the voters thereof, then the district shall not be authorized to issue bonds as provided by Section 19-8 until the proposition has been submitted to and approved by a majority of the voters voting on the proposition at a regular scheduled election. The board shall certify the proposition to the proper election authorities for submission in accordance with the general election law. If no such petition with the requisite number of signatures is filed within said 30 days, or if any and all petitions filed are invalid, then the district shall thereafter be authorized to issue bonds for the purposes and as provided in Section 19-8.
(Source: P.A. 97-429, eff. 8-16-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19-10) (from Ch. 122, par. 19-10)
    Sec. 19-10. Payment of liabilities resulting from division of assets.
    Any school district having a population of 500,000 or less is authorized to issue bonds for the purpose of the payment of any liabilities or obligations imposed on such district resulting from the division of assets as provided by Article 7 of this Act or Article 5 of this Act as it existed prior to July 1, 1952.
    Within 90 days after the final order of the county board of school trustees dividing assets as a result of creating a new district the school board of such newly created district or the school board of a district a portion of whose territory is included within the newly created district shall pay any amounts due.
    The school board of a district obligated or liable under the provisions of this Section shall issue bonds to the extent necessary to enable the district to discharge its obligations unless funds can otherwise be made available for such purpose, and such bonds may be issued in an amount, including existing indebtedness, in excess of any statutory limitation as to debt but subject to the 5% constitutional limit.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19-11) (from Ch. 122, par. 19-11)
    Sec. 19-11. Amount of indebtedness - Interest and maturity. Any district which has complied with Section 19-9 and which is authorized to issue bonds under Sections 19-8, 19-9 and 19-10 shall adopt a resolution specifying the amount of indebtedness to be funded, whether for the purpose of paying claims, or for paying teachers' orders, or for paying liabilities or obligations imposed on any district resulting from the division of assets as provided by Article 7 of this Act or Article 5 of this Act as it existed prior to July 1, 1952. The resolution shall set forth the date, denomination, rate of interest and maturities of the bonds, fix all details with respect to the issue and execution thereof, and provide for the levy of a tax sufficient to pay both principal and interest of the bonds as they mature. The bonds shall bear interest at a rate not to exceed the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, payable annually or semi-annually, as the governing body may determine, and mature in not more than 20 years from the date thereof or as otherwise authorized by law.
    With respect to instruments for the payment of money issued under this Section either before, on, or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1989, it is and always has been the intention of the General Assembly (i) that the Omnibus Bond Acts are and always have been supplementary grants of power to issue instruments in accordance with the Omnibus Bond Acts, regardless of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts, (ii) that the provisions of this Section are not a limitation on the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts, and (iii) that instruments issued under this Section within the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts are not invalid because of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts.
(Source: P.A. 100-531, eff. 9-22-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19-12) (from Ch. 122, par. 19-12)
    Sec. 19-12. Filing copy of resolution-Extension of taxes. A certified copy of the resolution authorizing the issue of bonds under Sections 19-8 through 19-11 shall be filed with the county clerk of each county in which any portion of any such district is situated and the county clerk shall annually extend taxes against all of the taxable property situated in the county and contained in such district in amounts sufficient to pay maturing principal and interest of such bonds without limitation as to rate or amount and in addition to and in excess of any taxes that may now or hereafter be authorized to be levied by Sections 12-11 and 12-11.1 or 17-2 through 17-9.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19-13) (from Ch. 122, par. 19-13)
    Sec. 19-13. Sale or exchange of bonds. Any bonds issued under Sections 19-8 to 19-11, inclusive, may be exchanged par for par for claims or unpaid orders for wages of teachers, or both, or may be sold and the proceeds received used to pay such claims or orders.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19-14) (from Ch. 122, par. 19-14)
    Sec. 19-14. Validity of indebtedness-Validity of bonds. Purchasers of such bonds shall not be obligated to inquire into the validity of the indebtedness funded, and bonds issued under sections 19-8 through 19-11 shall be the valid and binding obligations of the school district, notwithstanding the fact that the bonds, together with existing indebtedness, either in whole or in part, exceed any statutory debt limitation in force at the time the bonds are issued.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/prec. Sec. 19-15 heading)
REFUNDING BONDS

    (105 ILCS 5/19-15) (from Ch. 122, par. 19-15)
    Sec. 19-15. Authority to refund bonds. When a school district has issued bonds or other evidence of indebtedness for any purposes which are binding and subsisting legal obligations and remaining outstanding, the school board of the district may, upon the surrender of the bonds or other evidences of indebtedness, issue in lieu thereof to the holders or owners thereof or to other persons for money with which to pay them, new bonds or other evidences of indebtedness, according to the subsequent provisions of this Article.
    For the purposes of Sections 19-15 through 19-26 "school district" includes any non-high school district.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19-16) (from Ch. 122, par. 19-16)
    Sec. 19-16. Resolution for issuance. The corporate authorities of any school district, without submitting the question to the electors thereof for approval, may authorize by resolution the issuance of refunding bonds (1) to refund its bonds prior to their maturity; (2) to refund its unpaid matured bonds; (3) to refund matured coupons evidencing interest upon its unpaid bonds; (4) to refund interest at the coupon rate upon its unpaid matured bonds that has accrued since the maturity of those bonds; (5) to refund its bonds which by their terms are subject to redemption before maturity; and (6) to refund other valid and subsisting evidences of indebtedness that are due and payable. The refunding bonds and the procedure for issuing them shall comply with Sections 19-5 through 19-7.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19-17) (from Ch. 122, par. 19-17)
    Sec. 19-17. Registrability - Interest - Time and place of payment. The refunding bonds may be made registerable as to principal and may bear interest at a rate not to exceed the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, if issued before January 1, 1972 and not to exceed the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, if issued after January 1, 1972, payable at such time and place as may be provided in the bond resolution. They shall remain valid even though one or more of the officers executing the bonds ceases to hold his or their offices before the bonds are delivered.
    With respect to instruments for the payment of money issued under this Section either before, on, or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1989, it is and always has been the intention of the General Assembly (i) that the Omnibus Bond Acts are and always have been supplementary grants of power to issue instruments in accordance with the Omnibus Bond Acts, regardless of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts, (ii) that the provisions of this Section are not a limitation on the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts, and (iii) that instruments issued under this Section within the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts are not invalid because of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts.
(Source: P.A. 86-4.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19-18) (from Ch. 122, par. 19-18)
    Sec. 19-18. Details prescribed-Levy and collection of tax.
    The resolution authorizing refunding bonds shall prescribe all details thereof and shall provide for the levy and collection of a direct annual tax upon all the taxable property within the school district sufficient to pay the principal thereof and interest thereon as it matures. The tax shall be levied and collected in like manner as the general taxes for the school district and shall not be included within any limitation of rate for general purposes as now or hereafter provided by law but shall be excluded therefrom and be in addition thereto and in excess thereof.
    A certified copy of the bond resolution shall be filed with the county clerk of the county in which the school district or any portion thereof is situated, and shall constitute the authority for the extension and collection of refunding bond and interest taxes as required by the constitution.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19-19) (from Ch. 122, par. 19-19)
    Sec. 19-19. Sale or exchange-Use of proceeds-Cancellation.
    The refunding bonds may be exchanged for the bonds to be refunded on the basis of dollar for dollar for the par value of the bonds, interest coupons, and interest not represented by coupons, if any, or they may be sold at not less than their par value and accrued interest. The proceeds received from their sale shall be used to pay the bonds, interest coupons, and interest not represented by coupons, if any, without any prior appropriation therefor under any budget law.
    Bonds and interest coupons which have been received in exchange or paid shall be cancelled and the obligation for interest, not represented by coupons, which has been discharged, shall be evidenced by a written acknowledgment of the exchange or payment thereof.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19-20) (from Ch. 122, par. 19-20)
    Sec. 19-20. Execution-Maturity-Callable. The refunding bonds shall be of such form and denomination, payable at such place, bear such date, and be executed by such officials as may be provided by the corporate authorities of the school district in the bond resolution. They shall mature within not to exceed 20 years from their date, and may be made callable on any interest payment date at par and accrued interest after notice has been given at the time and in the manner provided in the bond resolution; however, the limitation shall be 25 years for bonds issued by Valley View Community Unit School District 365U that refund (i) bonds authorized under Section 19-3 of this Code or (ii) bonds refunding or continuing to refund bonds authorized under Section 19-3 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 96-1546, eff. 3-10-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19-21) (from Ch. 122, par. 19-21)
    Sec. 19-21. Redemption of bonds.
    If there is no default in payment of the principal of or interest upon the refunding bonds, and a sum of money equal to the amount of interest that will accrue on the refunding bonds and a sum of money equal to the amount of principal that will become due thereon within the next 6 months period has been set aside, the treasurer of the school district shall use the money available from the proceeds of taxes levied for the payment of the refunding bonds in calling them for payment, if, by their terms, they are subject to redemption. However, a school district may provide in the bond resolution that whenever the school district is not in default in payment of the principal of or interest upon the refunding bonds and has set aside the sums of money provided in this section for interest accruing and principal maturing within the next 6 months period, the money available from the proceeds of taxes levied for the payment of refunding bonds shall be used, first, in the purchase of the refunding bonds at the lowest price obtainable, but not to exceed their par value and accrued interest, after sealed tenders for their purchase have been advertised for as may be directed by the corporate authorities thereof.
    Refunding bonds called for payment and paid or purchased under this section shall be marked paid and cancelled.
(Source: Laws 1963, p. 3062.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19-22) (from Ch. 122, par. 19-22)
    Sec. 19-22. Reduction of tax levy-Bonds purchased and cancelled. Whenever refunding bonds are purchased and cancelled as provided in Section 19-21, the taxes thereafter to be extended for payment of the principal of and the interest on the remainder of the issue shall be reduced in an amount equal to the principal of and the interest that would have thereafter accrued upon the refunding bonds so cancelled. A resolution shall be adopted by the corporate authorities of the school district finding these facts. A certified copy of this resolution shall be filed with the county clerk specified in Section 19-18, whereupon he shall reduce and extend such tax levies in accordance therewith.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19-23) (from Ch. 122, par. 19-23)
    Sec. 19-23. Reduction of tax for payment of bonds refunded-Use of tax receipts. Whenever refunding bonds are issued, proper reduction of taxes theretofore levied for the payment of the bonds refunded and next to be extended for collection shall be made by the county clerk upon receipt of a certificate signed by the treasurer of the school district, or by the president and clerk or other corresponding officers of the school district, showing the bonds refunded and the tax to be abated.
    Money which becomes available from taxes that were levied for prior years for payment of bonds or interest coupons that were paid or refunded before those taxes were collected, after payment of all warrants that may have been issued in anticipation of these taxes, shall be placed in the sinking fund account provided in Section 19-24. It shall be used to purchase, call for payment, or to pay at maturity refunding bonds and interest thereon as herein provided.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19-24) (from Ch. 122, par. 19-24)
    Sec. 19-24. Proceeds of taxes-Special fund-Use-Investment. Money received from the proceeds of taxes levied for payment of the principal of and interest upon refunding bonds shall be deposited in a special fund of the school district, designated as the "Refunding Bond and Interest Sinking Fund Account of ....". This fund shall be applied to the purchase or payment of refunding bonds and the interest thereon as provided in Sections 19-16 through 19-26.
    If the money in this fund is not immediately necessary for the payment of refunding bonds or if refunding bonds can not be purchased before maturity, then, under the direction of the corporate authorities of the school district, the money may be invested by the treasurer of the school district in bonds or other interest bearing obligations of the United States or in bonds of the State of Illinois.
    The maturity date of the securities in which this money is invested shall be prior to the due date of any issue of refunding bonds of the investing school district. The corporate authorities may sell these securities whenever necessary to obtain cash to meet bond and interest payments.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19-25) (from Ch. 122, par. 19-25)
    Sec. 19-25. Information to owners of bonds-Refunding agreements.
    The corporate authorities of a school district may take any action that may be necessary to inform the owners of unpaid bonds regarding the financial condition of the school district, the necessity of refunding its unpaid bonds and readjusting the maturities thereof in order that sufficient taxes may be collected to take care of these bonds, and thus re-establish the credit of the school district. The corporate authorities may enter into any agreement required to prepare and carry out any refunding plan and, without any previous appropriation therefor under any budget law, may incur and pay expenditures that may be necessary in order to accomplish the refunding of the bonds of the school district.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19-26) (from Ch. 122, par. 19-26)
    Sec. 19-26. Construction and application of provisions. Sections 19-16 through 19-25 apply to any school district, regardless of the population of said school district and of the law under which it is organized and operating, and constitute complete authority for issuing refunding bonds as therein provided without reference to other laws. Those sections shall be construed as conferring powers in addition to, but not as limiting powers granted under, other laws or other provisions of this Act.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/prec. Sec. 19-27 heading)
REFUNDING SURPLUS AFTER BONDS PAID

    (105 ILCS 5/19-27) (from Ch. 122, par. 19-27)
    Sec. 19-27. Payment to treasurer.
    Whenever all the bonds of any school district have been paid and cancelled upon the records of the school treasurer and there remains in the hands of the county collector or any ex-county collector, the county treasurer, or ex-county treasurer, any balance to the credit of the bond fund of the school township, the county collector or ex-county collector, county treasurer or ex-county treasurer shall pay to the school treasurer the balance of such funds in his hands and the school treasurer shall give his receipt therefor.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19-28) (from Ch. 122, par. 19-28)
    Sec. 19-28. Distribution and apportionment. At the first regular semi-annual meeting of the trustees of the township after the receipt of the funds mentioned in Section 19-27, they shall distribute and apportion the funds among the districts or fractions of districts of the township whose treasurer is the township treasurer, and among the school boards or board of incorporated cities, towns or school districts in such township having a treasurer other than the township treasurer, in proportion to the number of children under 21 years of age in each. The funds thus apportioned shall be placed on the books of the treasurer to the credit of the respective districts and the same shall be paid out by the treasurer on the legal orders of the school boards of the proper districts, except such part of the fund as may be payable to the boards of education of incorporated cities, towns or school districts having a treasurer other than the township treasurer, which portion of the fund shall be paid by the township treasurer to the treasurer of the board of education.
(Source: P.A. 86-1441.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19-29) (from Ch. 122, par. 19-29)
    Sec. 19-29. Computation of debt incurring power. In computing the debt incurring power of any school district where there has been included in any such school district only a part of any former school district which at the time of such inclusion has outstanding bonded indebtedness, a proportionate amount of such bonded indebtedness shall be chargeable to such school district based upon the ratio that the assessed valuation of taxable property as equalized and determined by the Department of Revenue in that part of the territory of such former school district that has been included in any such school district bears to the total assessed valuation of the former school district as equalized and determined by the Department of Revenue for the year in which the change occurred, and the proportionate amount of such bonded indebtedness shall be chargeable against such school district in determining its debt incurring power.
(Source: P.A. 81-1509.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19-30) (from Ch. 122, par. 19-30)
    Sec. 19-30. Any school district which, pursuant to Section 10-22.31b of this Act, has entered into a joint agreement with one or more school districts to acquire, build, establish and maintain sites and buildings for area vocational purposes may by proper resolution borrow money for the purpose of acquiring sites and buildings and building, equipping, improving and remodeling buildings and sites for vocational education purposes and as evidence of such indebtedness issue bonds without referendum, provided that the project which is the subject of such joint agreement has been designated by the State Board of Vocational Education and Rehabilitation as an Area Secondary Vocational Center, and further provided (a) that such district has been authorized by referendum to impose the tax under Section 17-2.4 of this Act, or (b) that such district, not having been so authorized by such referendum, by resolution has authorized the payment of its proportionate share of the cost of the area vocational center under such agreement from funds raised by building tax levies. The proceeds of the sale of such bonds may, in the discretion of the school board of the district issuing such bonds, be transferred to the Capital Development Board, any other school district which is a party to such joint agreement or the State or any of its agencies provided, however, that such board first determines that such transfer is necessary in order to accomplish the purposes for which such bonds are issued. The amount of the bonds issued by any such participating school district shall not exceed the district's estimated proportionate share of the cost of the area vocational center as budgeted under such agreement and as certified by the State Board of Vocational Education and Rehabilitation, and provided that (a) any such participating district which has been authorized by referendum to impose the tax under Section 17-2.4 of this Act, shall thereafter reduce the maximum statutory amount which may be raised by such levy under Section 17-2.4 to the extent of the total amount to be yielded by the imposition of the tax authorized by this Section, and (b) any such participating district, not having been so authorized by such referendum, but having by resolution authorized the payment of its proportionate share of the cost of the area vocational center under such joint agreement from funds raised by building tax levies, shall thereafter, annually reduce the maximum statutory amount which may be raised by such building tax levies to the extent of the amount to be yielded annually by the imposition of the tax authorized by this Section. Such bonds shall bear interest at a rate of not to exceed the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, and shall mature within 20 years from date.
    The failure on the part of a school district to abate or reduce such taxes as described in (a) and (b) shall not constitute a forfeiture by the district of its right to levy the direct annual tax authorized by this Section.
    In order to authorize and issue such bonds, the school board shall adopt a resolution fixing the amount of the bonds, the date thereof, maturities thereof, rates of interest thereof, place of payment and denomination, which shall be in denominations of not less than $100 and not more than $5,000 and provide for the levy and collection of a direct annual tax upon all the taxable property in the school district sufficient to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds to maturity. Upon the filing in the office of the County Clerk or Clerks of the County or Counties in which the school district is located of a certified copy of such resolution it shall be the duty of such County Clerk or Clerks to extend the tax therefor, in addition to and in excess of all other taxes heretofore or hereafter authorized to be levied by such school district.
    This Section shall be cumulative and it shall constitute complete authority for site acquisitions and building programs and for the issuance of bonds as provided for hereunder, notwithstanding any other statute or law to the contrary.
    With respect to instruments for the payment of money issued under this Section either before, on, or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1989, it is and always has been the intention of the General Assembly (i) that the Omnibus Bond Acts are and always have been supplementary grants of power to issue instruments in accordance with the Omnibus Bond Acts, regardless of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts, (ii) that the provisions of this Section are not a limitation on the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts, and (iii) that instruments issued under this Section within the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts are not invalid because of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts.
(Source: P.A. 86-4.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19-31) (from Ch. 122, par. 19-31)
    Sec. 19-31. Any school district which, pursuant to Section 10-22.31b of this Act, or under the provisions of the "Intergovernmental Cooperation Act", has entered into a joint agreement or contract with one or more school districts to acquire, build, establish and maintain sites and buildings for the education of one or more of the types of children with disabilities as defined in Sections 14-1.02 through 14-1.07 of this Act, may by proper resolution of the board borrow money for the purpose of acquiring sites and buildings and building, equipping, improving and remodeling buildings and sites for such special education purposes, and as evidence of such indebtedness issue bonds, provided that the project which is the subject of such joint agreement has been approved by the State Board of Education. The proceeds of the sale of such bonds may, in the discretion of the school board of the district issuing such bonds, be transferred to the Capital Development Board, any other school district which is a party to such joint agreement, or the State or any of its agencies provided, however, that such board first determines that such transfer is necessary in order to accomplish the purposes for which such bonds are issued. The amount of the bonds issued by any such participating school district shall not exceed the district's estimated proportionate share of the cost of such special education purposes as budgeted under such joint agreement or contract, and shall be amortized over a period not exceeding the number of years of levy remaining available to such participating school district under Section 17-2.2a of this Act, and provided further that any such participating district shall thereafter reduce the maximum statutory amount which may be raised by the tax levy authorized under Section 17-2.2a of this Act to the extent of the total amount to be yielded by the imposition of the tax authorized by this Section. The failure on the part of a school district to abate or reduce such taxes shall not however constitute a forfeiture by the district of its right to levy the direct annual tax authorized by this Section.
    Such bonds shall bear interest at a rate of not to exceed the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, and shall mature within 8 years from the date of issuance. In order to authorize and issue such bonds, the school board shall adopt a resolution fixing the amount of the bonds, the date thereof, maturities thereof, rates of interest thereof, place of payment and denomination, which shall be in denominations of not less than $100 and not more than $5,000 and provide for the levy and collection of a direct annual tax upon all the taxable property in the school district sufficient to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds to maturity, but not to exceed the levy authorized under Section 17-2.2a. Upon the filing in the office of the County Clerk or Clerks of the County or Counties in which the school district is located of a certified copy of such resolution it shall be the duty of such County Clerk or Clerks to extend the tax therefor, in addition to and in excess of all other taxes heretofore or hereafter authorized to be levied by such school district.
    This Section shall be cumulative and it shall constitute complete authority for site acquisitions and building programs and for the issuance of bonds as provided for hereunder, notwithstanding any other statute or law to the contrary.
    Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Section, any school district qualifying for a special education construction grant pursuant to the Capital Development Board Act may finance the construction project by levying the tax authorized by Section 17-2.2a and issuing bonds in the manner provided for in this Section at a rate not to exceed the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, with a maturity date not more than 20 years from the date of issuance.
    With respect to instruments for the payment of money issued under this Section either before, on, or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1989, it is and always has been the intention of the General Assembly (i) that the Omnibus Bond Acts are and always have been supplementary grants of power to issue instruments in accordance with the Omnibus Bond Acts, regardless of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts, (ii) that the provisions of this Section are not a limitation on the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts, and (iii) that instruments issued under this Section within the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts are not invalid because of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts.
(Source: P.A. 89-397, eff. 8-20-95.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 19a heading)
ARTICLE 19a. REVENUE BONDS FOR EXHIBITION FACILITIES

    (105 ILCS 5/19a-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 19a-1)
    Sec. 19a-1. In this Article, "exhibition facility" means a building or stadium constructed to be used primarily for athletic spectator sports and not facilities built primarily for physical education instruction.
(Source: Laws 1967, p. 2778.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19a-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 19a-2)
    Sec. 19a-2. Revenue bonds for exhibition facilities. Any school board is authorized to:
    a. Acquire by purchase, construct, enlarge, improve, equip, complete, operate, control and manage an exhibition facility.
    b. Charge for the use of such a facility.
    c. Hold in its treasury all funds derived from the operation of the facility and apply them toward the retirement of any revenue bonds issued in connection with the facility.
    d. Enter into contracts touching in any manner any matter within the objects and purposes of this Article.
    e. Pledge the revenues raised from such a facility for the payment of any bonds issued to pay for the facility as provided in this Article.
    f. Borrow money and issue and sell bonds at such price as the school board may determine to finance and to refund or refinance any and all bonds issued and sold by the board pursuant to this Article. No bonds issued under this Article, however, may bear interest in excess of the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, computed to the maturity of the bonds.
    With respect to instruments for the payment of money issued under this Section either before, on, or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1989, it is and always has been the intention of the General Assembly (i) that the Omnibus Bond Acts are and always have been supplementary grants of power to issue instruments in accordance with the Omnibus Bond Acts, regardless of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts, (ii) that the provisions of this Section are not a limitation on the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts, and (iii) that instruments issued under this Section within the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts are not invalid because of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts.
(Source: P.A. 86-4.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19a-3) (from Ch. 122, par. 19a-3)
    Sec. 19a-3. Whenever bonds are issued pursuant to this Article, the school board must establish charges or fees for the use of the exhibition facility to pay the principal and interest on the bonds.
(Source: Laws 1967, p. 2778.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19a-4) (from Ch. 122, par. 19a-4)
    Sec. 19a-4. If the school board determines subsequent to the original issue of bonds under this Article that the income from the facility is insufficient to pay the principal and interest on those bonds, the board, after submitting the question to referendum in accordance with the general election law, may pay the deficit by issuing general obligation bonds in the manner prescribed by Article 19 of this Act.
(Source: P.A. 81-1489.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19a-5) (from Ch. 122, par. 19a-5)
    Sec. 19a-5. Members of a school board issuing bonds pursuant to this Article incur no personal liability thereby.
(Source: Laws 1967, p. 2778.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 19b heading)
ARTICLE 19b. SCHOOL ENERGY CONSERVATION AND SAVING MEASURES

    (105 ILCS 5/19b-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 19b-1)
    Sec. 19b-1. Definitions. In this Article words and phrases have the meanings set forth in the following Sections preceding Section 19b-2.
(Source: P.A. 87-1106.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19b-1.05)
    Sec. 19b-1.05. Area vocational center. "Area vocational center" means an area vocational center created by joint agreement between school districts.
(Source: P.A. 92-767, eff. 8-6-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19b-1.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 19b-1.1)
    Sec. 19b-1.1. Energy conservation measure. "Energy conservation measure" means any improvement, repair, alteration, or betterment of any building or facility owned or operated by a school district or area vocational center or any equipment, fixture, or furnishing to be added to or used in any such building or facility, subject to the building code authorized in Section 2-3.12 of this Code, that is designed to reduce energy consumption or operating costs, and may include, without limitation, one or more of the following:
        (1) Insulation of the building structure or systems
    	
within the building.
        (2) Storm windows or doors, caulking or
    	
weatherstripping, multiglazed windows or doors, heat absorbing or heat reflective glazed and coated window or door systems, additional glazing, reductions in glass area, or other window and door system modifications that reduce energy consumption.
        (3) Automated or computerized energy control systems.
        (4) Heating, ventilating, or air conditioning system
    	
modifications or replacements.
        (5) Replacement or modification of lighting fixtures
    	
to increase the energy efficiency of the lighting system without increasing the overall illumination of a facility, unless an increase in illumination is necessary to conform to the applicable State or local building code for the lighting system after the proposed modifications are made.
        (6) Energy recovery systems.
        (7) Energy conservation measures that provide
    	
long-term operating cost reductions.
(Source: P.A. 95-612, eff. 9-11-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19b-1.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 19b-1.2)
    Sec. 19b-1.2. Guaranteed energy savings contract. "Guaranteed energy savings contract" means a contract for: (i) the implementation of an energy audit, data collection, and other related analyses preliminary to the undertaking of energy conservation measures; (ii) the evaluation and recommendation of energy conservation measures; (iii) the implementation of one or more energy conservation measures; and (iv) the implementation of project monitoring and data collection to verify post-installation energy consumption and energy-related operating costs. The contract shall provide that all payments, except obligations on termination of the contract before its expiration, are to be made over time and that the savings are guaranteed to the extent necessary to pay the costs of the energy conservation measures. Energy saving may include energy reduction and offsetting sources of renewable energy funds including renewable energy credits and carbon credits.
(Source: P.A. 96-1197, eff. 7-22-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19b-1.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 19b-1.3)
    Sec. 19b-1.3. Qualified provider. "Qualified provider" means a person or business whose employees are experienced and trained in the design, implementation, or installation of energy conservation measures. The minimum training required for any person or employee under this Section shall be the satisfactory completion of at least 40 hours of course instruction dealing with energy conservation measures. A qualified provider to whom the contract is awarded shall give a sufficient bond to the school district or area vocational center for its faithful performance.
(Source: P.A. 92-767, eff. 8-6-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19b-1.4) (from Ch. 122, par. 19b-1.4)
    Sec. 19b-1.4. Request for proposals. "Request for proposals" means a competitive selection achieved by negotiated procurement. The request for proposals shall be submitted to the administrators of the Capital Development Board Procurement Bulletin for publication and through at least one public notice, at least 30 days before the request date in a newspaper published in the district or vocational center area, or if no newspaper is published in the district or vocational center area, in a newspaper of general circulation in the area of the district or vocational center, from a school district or area vocational center that will administer the program, requesting innovative solutions and proposals for energy conservation measures. Proposals submitted shall be sealed. The request for proposals shall include all of the following:
        (1) The name and address of the school district or
    	
area vocation center.
        (2) The name, address, title, and phone number of a
    	
contact person.
        (3) Notice indicating that the school district or
    	
area vocational center is requesting qualified providers to propose energy conservation measures through a guaranteed energy savings contract.
        (4) The date, time, and place where proposals must be
    	
received.
        (5) The evaluation criteria for assessing the
    	
proposals.
        (6) Any other stipulations and clarifications the
    	
school district or area vocational center may require.
(Source: P.A. 95-612, eff. 9-11-07; 96-1197, eff. 7-22-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19b-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 19b-2)
    Sec. 19b-2. Evaluation of proposal. Before entering into a guaranteed energy savings contract under Section 19b-3, a school district or area vocational center shall submit a request for proposals. The school district or area vocational center shall evaluate any sealed proposal from a qualified provider. The evaluation shall analyze the estimates of all costs of installations, modifications or remodeling, including, without limitation, costs of a pre-installation energy audit or analysis, design, engineering, installation, maintenance, repairs, debt service, conversions to a different energy or fuel source, or post-installation project monitoring, data collection, and reporting. The evaluation shall include a detailed analysis of whether either the energy consumed or the operating costs, or both, will be reduced. If technical assistance is not available by a licensed architect or registered professional engineer on the school district or area vocational center staff, then the evaluation of the proposal shall be done by a registered professional engineer or architect, who is retained by the school district or area vocational center. A licensed architect or registered professional engineer evaluating a proposal under this Section must not have any financial or contractual relationship with a qualified provider or other source that would constitute a conflict of interest. The school district or area vocational center may pay a reasonable fee for evaluation of the proposal or include the fee as part of the payments made under Section 19b-4.
(Source: P.A. 95-612, eff. 9-11-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19b-3) (from Ch. 122, par. 19b-3)
    Sec. 19b-3. Award of guaranteed energy savings contract. Sealed proposals must be opened by a member or employee of the school board or governing board of the area vocational center, whichever is applicable, at a public opening at which the contents of the proposals must be announced. Each person or entity submitting a sealed proposal must receive at least 13 days notice of the time and place of the opening. The school district or area vocational center shall select the qualified provider that best meets the needs of the district or area vocational center. The school district or area vocational center shall provide public notice of the meeting at which it proposes to award a guaranteed energy savings contract of the names of the parties to the proposed contract and of the purpose of the contract. The public notice shall be made at least 10 days prior to the meeting. After evaluating the proposals under Section 19b-2, a school district or area vocational center may enter into a guaranteed energy savings contract with a qualified provider if it finds that the amount it would spend on the energy conservation measures recommended in the proposal would not exceed the amount to be saved in either energy or operational costs, or both, within a 20-year period from the date of installation, if the recommendations in the proposal are followed. Contracts let or awarded must be submitted to the administrators of the Capital Development Board Procurement Bulletin for publication.
(Source: P.A. 95-612, eff. 9-11-07; 96-1197, eff. 7-22-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19b-4) (from Ch. 122, par. 19b-4)
    Sec. 19b-4. Guarantee. The guaranteed energy savings contract shall include a written guarantee of the qualified provider that either the energy or operational cost savings, or both, will meet or exceed within 20 years the costs of the energy conservation measures. The qualified provider shall reimburse the school district or area vocational center for any shortfall of guaranteed energy savings projected in the contract. A qualified provider shall provide a sufficient bond to the school district or area vocational center for the installation and the faithful performance of all the measures included in the contract. The guaranteed energy savings contract may provide for payments over a period of time, not to exceed 20 years from the date of final installation of the measures.
(Source: P.A. 92-767, eff. 8-6-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19b-5) (from Ch. 122, par. 19b-5)
    Sec. 19b-5. Installment payment contract; lease purchase agreement. A school district or school districts in combination or an area vocational center may enter into an installment payment contract or lease purchase agreement with a qualified provider or with a third party, as authorized by law, for the funding or financing of the purchase and installation of energy conservation measures by a qualified provider. Every school district or area vocational center may issue certificates evidencing the indebtedness incurred pursuant to the contracts or agreements. Any such contract or agreement shall be valid whether or not an appropriation with respect thereto is first included in any annual or supplemental budget adopted by the school district or area vocational center. Each contract or agreement entered into by a school district or area vocational center pursuant to this Section shall be authorized by official action of the school board or governing board of the area vocational center, whichever is applicable. The authority granted in this Section is in addition to any other authority granted by law.
    If an energy audit is performed by an energy services contractor for a school district within the 3 years immediately preceding the solicitation, then the school district must publish as a reference document in the solicitation for energy conservation measures the following:
        (1) an executive summary of the energy audit provided
    	
that the school district may exclude any proprietary or trademarked information or practices; or
        (2) the energy audit provided that the school
    	
district may redact any proprietary or trademarked information or practices.
A school district may not withhold the disclosure of information related to (i) the school district's consumption of energy, (ii) the physical condition of the school district's facilities, and (iii) any limitations prescribed by the school district.
    The solicitation must include a written disclosure that identifies any energy services contractor that participated in the preparation of the specifications issued by the school district. If no energy services contractor participated in the preparation of the specifications issued by the school district, then the solicitation must include a written disclosure that no energy services contractor participated in the preparation of the specifications for the school district. The written disclosure shall be published in the Capital Development Board Procurement Bulletin with the Request for Proposal.
(Source: P.A. 96-1197, eff. 7-22-10; 97-333, eff. 8-12-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19b-6) (from Ch. 122, par. 19b-6)
    Sec. 19b-6. Term; budget and appropriations. Guaranteed energy savings contracts may extend beyond the fiscal year in which they become effective. The school district or area vocational center shall include in its annual budget and appropriations measures for each subsequent fiscal year any amounts payable under guaranteed energy savings contracts during that fiscal year. Sections 2-3.12, 3-14.20, and 10-22.36 of the School Code shall apply to this Article 19b.
(Source: P.A. 92-767, eff. 8-6-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19b-7) (from Ch. 122, par. 19b-7)
    Sec. 19b-7. Operational and energy cost savings. The school district or area vocational center shall document the operational and energy cost savings specified in the guaranteed energy savings contract and designate and appropriate that amount for an annual payment of the contract. If the annual energy savings are less than projected under the guaranteed energy savings contract the qualified provider shall pay the difference as provided in Section 19b-4.
(Source: P.A. 92-767, eff. 8-6-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19b-8) (from Ch. 122, par. 19b-8)
    Sec. 19b-8. Available funds. A school district or area vocational center may use funds designated for operating or capital expenditures for any guaranteed energy savings contract including purchases using installment payment contracts or lease purchase agreements. A school district or area vocational center that enters into such a contract or agreement may covenant in such contract or agreement that payments made thereunder shall be payable from the first funds legally available in each fiscal year.
(Source: P.A. 92-767, eff. 8-6-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19b-9) (from Ch. 122, par. 19b-9)
    Sec. 19b-9. Funding. State aid and other amounts appropriated for distribution to or reimbursement of a school district or area vocational center shall not be reduced as a result of energy savings realized from a guaranteed energy savings contract or a lease purchase agreement for the purchase and installation of energy conservation measures.
(Source: P.A. 92-767, eff. 8-6-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19b-10)
    Sec. 19b-10. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 89-397, eff. 8-20-95. Repealed by P.A. 92-767, eff. 8-6-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19b-15)
    Sec. 19b-15. Applicable laws. Other State laws and related administrative requirements apply to this Article, including, but not limited to, the following laws and related administrative requirements: the Illinois Human Rights Act, the Prevailing Wage Act, the Public Construction Bond Act, the Public Works Preference Act (repealed on June 16, 2010 by Public Act 96-929), the Employment of Illinois Workers on Public Works Act, the Freedom of Information Act, the Open Meetings Act, the Illinois Architecture Practice Act of 1989, the Professional Engineering Practice Act of 1989, the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989, the Local Government Professional Services Selection Act, and the Contractor Unified License and Permit Bond Act.
(Source: P.A. 97-333, eff. 8-12-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/19b-20)
    Sec. 19b-20. Historic preservation. In order to protect the integrity of historic buildings, no provision of this Article shall be interpreted to require the implementation of energy conservation measures that conflict with respect to any property eligible for, nominated to, or entered on the National Register of Historic Places, pursuant to the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, or the Illinois Register of Historic Places, pursuant to the Illinois Historic Preservation Act.
(Source: P.A. 95-612, eff. 9-11-07.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 20 heading)
ARTICLE 20. WORKING CASH FUND

    (105 ILCS 5/20-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 20-1)
    Sec. 20-1. Authority to create working cash fund. In each school district, whether organized under general law or special charter, having a population of less than 500,000 inhabitants, a fund to be known as a "Working Cash Fund" may be created and maintained consistent with the limitations of this Article, for the purpose of enabling the district to have in its treasury at all times sufficient money to meet demands thereon for expenditures for corporate purposes.
(Source: P.A. 98-756, eff. 7-16-14.)

    (105 ILCS 5/20-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 20-2)
    Sec. 20-2. Indebtedness and bonds. For the purpose of creating, re-creating, or increasing a working cash fund, the school board of any such district may incur an indebtedness and issue bonds as evidence thereof in an amount or amounts not exceeding in the aggregate 85% of the taxes permitted to be levied for educational purposes for the then current year to be determined by multiplying the maximum educational tax rate or rates applicable to such school district by the last assessed valuation or assessed valuations as determined at the time of the issue of said bonds, plus 85% of the last known entitlement of such district to taxes as by law now or hereafter enacted or amended, imposed by the General Assembly of the State of Illinois to replace revenue lost by units of local government and school districts as a result of the abolition of ad valorem personal property taxes, pursuant to Article IX, Section 5, paragraph (c) of the Constitution of the State of Illinois, plus 85% of the most recent amount of funding received by the school district under Section 18-8.15. The bonds shall bear interest at not more than the maximum rate authorized by law and shall mature within 20 years from the date thereof. Subject to the foregoing limitations as to amount, the bonds may be issued in an amount including existing indebtedness which will not exceed the constitutional limitation as to debt, notwithstanding any statutory debt limitation to the contrary. The school board shall before or at the time of issuing the bonds provide for the collection of a direct annual tax upon all the taxable property within the district sufficient to pay the principal thereof at maturity and to pay the interest thereon as it falls due, which tax shall be in addition to the maximum amount of all other taxes, either educational; transportation; operations and maintenance; or fire prevention and safety fund taxes, now or hereafter authorized and in addition to any limitations upon the levy of taxes as provided by Sections 17-2 through 17-9.
    With respect to instruments for the payment of money issued under this Section either before, on, or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1989, it is and always has been the intention of the General Assembly (i) that the Omnibus Bond Acts are and always have been supplementary grants of power to issue instruments in accordance with the Omnibus Bond Acts, regardless of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts, (ii) that the provisions of this Section are not a limitation on the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts, and (iii) that instruments issued under this Section within the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts are not invalid because of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts.
(Source: P.A. 101-416, eff. 8-16-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/20-3) (from Ch. 122, par. 20-3)
    Sec. 20-3. Tax levy. For the purpose of providing moneys for a working cash fund, the school board of any such school district may also levy annually upon all the taxable property of their district a tax, known as the "working cash fund tax," not to exceed 0.05% of value, as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue; provided that no such tax shall be levied if bonds are issued in amount or amounts equal in the aggregate to the limitation set forth in Section 20-2 for the creation, re-creation, or increase of a working cash fund. The collection of the tax shall not be anticipated by the issuance of any warrants drawn against it. The tax shall be levied and collected, except as otherwise provided in this Section, in like manner as the general taxes of the district, and shall be in addition to the maximum of all other taxes, either educational; transportation; operations and maintenance; or fire prevention and safety fund taxes, now or hereafter to be levied for school purposes. It may be levied by separate resolution by the last Tuesday in December in each year or it may be included in the certificate of tax levy filed under Section 17-11.
(Source: P.A. 96-1277, eff. 7-26-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/20-4) (from Ch. 122, par. 20-4)
    Sec. 20-4. Use and reimbursement of fund. This Section shall not apply in any school district which does not operate a working cash fund.
    Moneys derived from the issuance of bonds as authorized by Section 20-2, or from any tax levied pursuant to Section 20-3, shall be used only for the purposes and in the manner provided in this Article. Moneys in the fund shall not be regarded as current assets available for school purposes. The school board may appropriate moneys to the working cash fund up to the maximum amount allowable in the fund, and the working cash fund may receive such appropriations and any other contributions. Moneys in the fund may be used by the school board for any and all school purposes and may be transferred in whole or in part to the general funds or both of the school district and disbursed therefrom in anticipation of the collection of taxes lawfully levied for any or all purposes, in anticipation of such taxes as by law now or hereafter enacted or amended are imposed by the General Assembly of the State of Illinois to replace revenue lost by units of local government and school districts as a result of the abolition of ad valorem personal property taxes, pursuant to Article IX, Section 5(c) of the Constitution of the State of Illinois, or in anticipation of funding received by the school district under Section 18-8.15. Moneys so transferred to any other fund shall be deemed to be transferred in anticipation of the collection of that part of the taxes so levied or to be received which is in excess of the amount thereof required to pay any warrants or notes and the interest thereon theretofore and thereafter issued in anticipation of the collection thereof and such taxes when collected shall be applied to the payment of any such warrants and the interest thereon, the amount estimated to be required to satisfy debt service and pension or retirement obligations, as set forth in Section 12 of the State Revenue Sharing Act and then to the reimbursement of such working cash fund as hereinafter provided.
    Upon receipt by the school district of any taxes or State funding in anticipation of the collection whereof moneys of the working cash fund have been so transferred for disbursement, the fund shall immediately be reimbursed therefrom until the full amount so transferred has been retransferred to the fund. Unless the taxes so received and applied to the reimbursement of the working cash fund prior to the first day of the eighth month following the month in which due and unpaid real property taxes begin to bear interest are sufficient to effect a complete reimbursement of such fund for any moneys transferred therefrom in anticipation of the collection of such taxes, the working cash fund shall be reimbursed for the amount of the deficiency therein from any other revenues accruing to the educational fund, and the school board shall make provisions for the immediate reimbursement of the amount of any such deficiency in its next annual tax levy.
(Source: P.A. 101-416, eff. 8-16-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/20-5) (from Ch. 122, par. 20-5)
    Sec. 20-5. Transfer to other fund. This Section shall not apply in any school district which does not operate a working cash fund.
    Moneys in the working cash fund shall be transferred from the working cash fund to another fund of the district only upon the authority of the school board which shall from time to time by separate resolution direct the school treasurer to make transfers of such sums as may be required for the purposes herein authorized.
    The resolution shall set forth (a) the taxes and State funding in anticipation of which such transfer is to be made and from which the working cash fund is to be reimbursed; (b) the entire amount of taxes extended, or which the school board estimates will be extended or received, for any year in anticipation of the collection of all or part of which such transfer is to be made; (c) the aggregate amount of warrants or notes theretofore issued in anticipation of the collection of such taxes together with the amount of interest accrued and which the school board estimates will accrue thereon; (d) the aggregate amount of receipts from taxes imposed to replace revenue lost by units of local government and school districts as a result of the abolition of ad valorem personal property taxes, pursuant to Article IX, Section 5(c) of the Constitution of the State of Illinois, which the corporate authorities estimate will be set aside for the payment of the proportionate amount of debt service and pension or retirement obligations, as required by Section 12 of the State Revenue Sharing Act; (e) the aggregate amount of money theretofore transferred from the working cash fund to the other fund in anticipation of the collection of such taxes and State funding; and (f) the aggregate amount of funding received by the school district under Section 18-8.15. The amount which any such resolution shall direct the treasurer so to transfer, in anticipation of the collection of taxes levied or to be received for any year, together with the aggregate amount of such anticipation tax warrants or notes theretofore drawn against such taxes and the amount of interest accrued and estimated to accrue thereon and the aggregate amount of such transfers to be made in anticipation of the collection of such taxes and the amount estimated to be required to satisfy debt service and pension or retirement obligations, as set forth in Section 12 of the State Revenue Sharing Act, shall not exceed 85% of the actual or estimated amount of such taxes extended or to be extended or to be received as set forth in such resolution. At any time moneys are available in the working cash fund they shall be transferred to such other funds of the district and used for any and all school purposes so as to avoid, whenever possible, the issuance of anticipation tax warrants or notes.
    Moneys earned as interest from the investment of the working cash fund, or any portion thereof, may be transferred from the working cash fund to another fund of the district that is most in need of the interest without any requirement of repayment to the working cash fund, upon the authority of the school board by separate resolution directing the school treasurer to make such transfer and stating the purpose in accordance with subsection (c) of Section 9 of the Local Government Debt Reform Act.
(Source: P.A. 101-416, eff. 8-16-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/20-6) (from Ch. 122, par. 20-6)
    Sec. 20-6. Willful violation of law. Any member of the school board of any school district to which this Article is applicable, or any other person holding any office, trust, or employment under such school district who wilfully violates any of the provisions of this Article shall be guilty of a business offense and fined not exceeding $10,000, and shall forfeit his right to his office, trust or employment and shall be removed therefrom. Any such member or other person shall be liable for any sum that may be unlawfully diverted from the working cash fund or otherwise used, to be recovered by such school district or by any taxpayer in the name and for the benefit of such school district in an appropriate civil action; provided that the taxpayer shall file a bond for all costs and be liable for all costs taxed against the school district in such suit, and judgment shall be rendered accordingly. Nothing herein shall bar any other remedies.
(Source: P.A. 79-1366.)

    (105 ILCS 5/20-7) (from Ch. 122, par. 20-7)
    Sec. 20-7. Resolution for issuance of bonds - Submission to voters - Ballot. No school district may issue bonds under this Article unless it adopts a resolution declaring its intention to issue bonds for the purpose therein provided and directs that notice of such intention be published at least once in a newspaper published and having a general circulation in the district, if there be one, but if there is no newspaper published in such district then by publishing such notice in a newspaper having a general circulation in the district. The notice shall set forth (1) the intention of the district to issue bonds in accordance with this Article; (2) the time within which a petition may be filed requesting the submission of the proposition to issue the bonds; (3) the specific number of voters required to sign the petition; and (4) the date of the prospective referendum. At the time of publication of the notice and for 30 days thereafter, the recording officer of the district shall provide a petition form to any individual requesting one. If within 30 days after the publication a petition is filed with the recording officer of the district, signed by the voters of the district equal to 10% or more of the registered voters of the district requesting that the proposition to issue bonds as authorized by this Article be submitted to the voters thereof, then the district shall not be authorized to issue such bonds until the proposition has been certified to the proper election authorities and has been submitted to and approved by a majority of the voters voting on the proposition at a regular scheduled election in accordance with the general election law. If no such petition is so filed, or if any and all petitions filed are invalid, the district may issue the bonds. In addition to the requirements of the general election law the notice of the election shall set forth the intention of the district to issue bonds under this Article. The proposition shall be in substantially the following form:
OFFICIAL BALLOT
--------------------------------------------------------------
    Shall the Board of ....
of School District number ....          YES
County, Illinois, be authorized
to issue bonds for a working       ---------------------------
cash fund as provided for
by Article 20 of the                    NO
School Code?
--------------------------------------------------------------
(Source: P.A. 96-1277, eff. 7-26-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/20-8) (from Ch. 122, par. 20-8)
    Sec. 20-8. Abolishment of working cash fund. Any school district may abolish its working cash fund, upon the adoption of a resolution so providing, and direct the transfer of any balance in such fund to the educational fund at the close of the then current school year. Any outstanding loans to other funds of the district shall be paid or become payable to the educational fund at the close of the then current school year. Thereafter, all outstanding taxes of such school district levied pursuant to Section 20-3 shall be collected and paid into the educational fund.
    Any balance in any working cash fund that is created in any school district on or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1991 (including all outstanding loans from any such working cash fund to other funds of the district and all outstanding taxes levied by the district under Section 20-3 to provide moneys for any such working cash fund) may, when such working cash fund is abolished, be used and applied for the purpose of reducing, by the balance in that working cash fund at the close of the school year in which the fund so created is abolished, the amount of the taxes that the school board of the school district otherwise would be authorized or required to levy for educational purposes for the immediately succeeding school year.
    Any obligation incurred by any school district pursuant to Section 20-2 shall be discharged as therein provided.
(Source: P.A. 96-1277, eff. 7-26-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/20-9) (from Ch. 122, par. 20-9)
    Sec. 20-9. A school district which has abolished or abated its working cash fund has the authority to again create a working cash fund at any time in the manner provided in this Article.
(Source: P.A. 96-1277, eff. 7-26-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/20-10)
    Sec. 20-10. Abatement of working cash fund. Any school district may abate its working cash fund at any time, upon the adoption of a resolution so providing, and direct the transfer at any time of moneys in that fund to any fund or funds of the district most in need of the money, provided that the district maintains an amount to the credit of the working cash fund, including taxes levied pursuant to Section 20-3 and not yet collected and amounts transferred pursuant to Section 20-4 and to be reimbursed to the working cash fund, at least equal to 0.05% of the then current value, as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue, of the taxable property in the district. If necessary to effectuate the abatement, any outstanding loans to other funds of the district may be paid or become payable to the fund or funds to which the abatement is made. Any abatement of a school district's working cash fund prior to the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 96th General Assembly that would have complied with the provisions of this Section is hereby validated.
(Source: P.A. 96-1277, eff. 7-26-10.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 21 heading)
ARTICLE 21. CERTIFICATION OF TEACHERS

    (105 ILCS 5/21-0.01)
    Sec. 21-0.01. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 91-102, eff. 7-12-99. Repealed by P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-1)
    Sec. 21-1. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 96-431, eff. 8-13-09. Repealed by P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-1a) (from Ch. 122, par. 21-1a)
    Sec. 21-1a. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11. Repealed internally, eff. 6-30-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-1b) (from Ch. 122, par. 21-1b)
    Sec. 21-1b. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-813, eff. 7-13-12. Repealed internally, eff. 6-30-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-1c)
    Sec. 21-1c. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 93-1036, eff. 9-14-04. Repealed by P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 21-2)
    Sec. 21-2. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11. Repealed internally, eff. 6-30-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-2.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 21-2.1)
    Sec. 21-2.1. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11. Repealed internally, eff. 6-30-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-2a) (from Ch. 122, par. 21-2a)
    Sec. 21-2a. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11. Repealed internally, eff. 6-30-13. )

    (105 ILCS 5/21-2b)
    Sec. 21-2b. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 84-126. Repealed by P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-3) (from Ch. 122, par. 21-3)
    Sec. 21-3. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11. Repealed internally, eff. 6-30-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-4) (from Ch. 122, par. 21-4)
    Sec. 21-4. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11. Repealed internally, eff. 6-30-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-5) (from Ch. 122, par. 21-5)
    Sec. 21-5. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11. Repealed internally, eff. 6-30-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-5a)
    Sec. 21-5a. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 96-862, eff. 1-15-10. Repealed by P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-5b)
    Sec. 21-5b. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 98-603, eff. 6-1-14. Repealed internally, eff. 1-1-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-5c)
    Sec. 21-5c. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 98-688, eff. 6-30-14. Repealed internally, eff. 1-1-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-5d)
    Sec. 21-5d. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11. Repealed internally, eff. 9-1-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-5e)
    Sec. 21-5e. Alternative Route to Administrative Certification for National Board Certified Teachers.
    (a) It shall be the policy of the State of Illinois to improve the recruitment and preparation of instructional leaders.
    (b) On or before July 1, 2007, the State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Teacher Certification Board, may establish and implement one or more alternative route to administrative certification for teacher leaders, to be known as the Alternative Route to an Administrative Certificate for National Board Certified Teachers. "Teacher leader" means a certified teacher who has already received National Board certification through the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards and who has a teacher leader endorsement under Section 21-7.5 of this Code. Persons who meet the requirements of and successfully complete a program established by this Section shall be issued a standard administrative certificate for serving in schools in this State. The State Board may approve a course of study that persons must successfully complete in order to satisfy one criterion for issuance of the administrative certificate under this Section. The Alternative Route to an Administrative Certificate for National Board Certified Teachers must include content and skills contained in the Illinois Professional School Leader Standards for State certification, with the exception of content and skills that a candidate has already demonstrated meeting through National Board certification or through a teacher leadership master's degree program.
    (c) The Alternative Route to an Administrative Certificate for National Board Certified Teachers shall be comprised of the following 4 phases:
        (1) National Board certification and an endorsement
    	
in teacher leadership in accordance with Section 21-7.5 of this Code;
        (2) a master's degree in a teacher leader program;
        (3) 15 hours of coursework in which the candidate
    	
must show evidence of meeting competencies for organizational management and development, finance, supervision and evaluation, policy and legal issues, and leadership, as stated in the Illinois Professional School Leader Standards for principals; and
        (4) a passing score on the Illinois Administrator
    	
Assessment.
    (d) Successful completion of the Alternative Route to an Administrative Certificate for National Board Certified Teachers shall be deemed to satisfy all requirements to receive an administrative certificate established by law. The State Board shall adopt rules that are consistent with this Section and that the State Board deems necessary for the establishment and implementation of the program.
(Source: P.A. 96-862, eff. 1-15-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-7.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 21-7.1)
    Sec. 21-7.1. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-813, eff. 7-13-12. Repealed internally, 6-30-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-7.5)
    Sec. 21-7.5. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11. Repealed internally, eff. 1-1-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-7.6)
    Sec. 21-7.6. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 96-903, eff. 7-1-10; 97-607, eff. 8-26-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-7.10)
    Sec. 21-7.10. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 96-373, eff. 8-13-09. Repealed by P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-7.15)
    Sec. 21-7.15. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 94-1039, eff. 7-20-06. Repealed internally, eff. 7-2-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-9) (from Ch. 122, par. 21-9)
    Sec. 21-9. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11. Repealed internally, eff. 6-30-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-10) (from Ch. 122, par. 21-10)
    Sec. 21-10. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11. Repealed internally, eff. 6-30-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-11) (from Ch. 122, par. 21-11)
    Sec. 21-11. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 81-1508. Repealed by P.A. 91-102, eff. 7-12-99.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-11.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 21-11.1)
    Sec. 21-11.1. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11. Repealed internally, eff. 6-30-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-11.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 21-11.2)
    Sec. 21-11.2. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11. Repealed internally, eff. 6-30-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-11.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 21-11.3)
    Sec. 21-11.3. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11. Repealed internally, eff. 6-30-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-11.4)
    Sec. 21-11.4. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11. Repealed internally, eff. 9-1-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-12) (from Ch. 122, par. 21-12)
    Sec. 21-12. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11. Repealed internally, eff. 6-30-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-13)
    Sec. 21-13. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 87-694. Repealed by P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-14)
    Sec. 21-14. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 98-144, eff. 8-2-13. Repealed by P.A. 98-610, eff. 12-27-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-15)
    Sec. 21-15. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31. Repealed by P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-16) (from Ch. 122, par. 21-16)
    Sec. 21-16. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11. Repealed internally, eff. 6-30-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-17)
    Sec. 21-17. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 93-679, eff. 6-30-04. Repealed by P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-18)
    Sec. 21-18. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 93-679, eff. 6-30-04. Repealed by P.A. 95-793, eff. 1-1-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-19)
    Sec. 21-19. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 81-1508. Repealed by P.A. 95-496, eff. 8-28-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-21)
    Sec. 21-21. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 91-102, eff. 7-12-99. Repealed by P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-21.1)
    Sec. 21-21.1. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 89-397, eff. 8-20-95. Repealed by P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-22) (from Ch. 122, par. 21-22)
    Sec. 21-22. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11. Repealed internally, eff. 6-30-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-23)
    Sec. 21-23. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-8, eff. 6-13-11. Repealed by P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-23a)
    Sec. 21-23a. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 96-1551, eff. 7-1-11. Repealed by P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-23b)
    Sec. 21-23b. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 87-1001. Repealed by P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-24)
    Sec. 21-24. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 84-551. Repealed by P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-25) (from Ch. 122, par. 21-25)
    Sec. 21-25. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 98-413, eff. 8-16-13. Repealed internally, eff. 6-30-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-26)
    Sec. 21-26. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 84-126. Repealed by P.A. 95-793, eff. 1-1-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-27)
    Sec. 21-27. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11. Repealed internally, eff. 6-30-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-28)
    Sec. 21-28. Special education teachers; certification.
    (a) In order to create a special education workforce with the broad-based knowledge necessary to educate students with a variety of disabilities, the State Board of Education and State Teacher Certification Board shall certify a special education teacher under one of the following:
        (1) Learning behavior specialist I.
        (2) Learning behavior specialist II.
        (3) Teacher of students who are blind or visually
    	
impaired.
        (4) Teacher of students who are deaf or hard of
    	
hearing.
        (5) Speech-language pathologist.
        (6) Early childhood special education teacher.
    (b) The State Board of Education is authorized to provide for the assignment of individuals to special education positions by short-term, emergency certification. Short-term, emergency certification shall not be renewed.
    (c) The State Board of Education is authorized to use peremptory rulemaking, in accordance with Section 5-50 of the Illinois Administrative Procedure Act, to place into the Illinois Administrative Code the certification policies and standards related to special education, as authorized under this Section, that the State Board has been required to implement pursuant to federal court orders dated February 27, 2001, August 15, 2001, and September 11, 2002 in the matter of Corey H., et al. v. Board of Education of the City of Chicago, et al.
(Source: P.A. 97-227, eff. 1-1-12; 97-461, eff. 8-19-11; 97-813, eff. 7-13-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21-29)
    Sec. 21-29. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 95-938, eff. 8-29-08. Repealed by P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 21A heading)
ARTICLE 21A. NEW TEACHER INDUCTION AND MENTORING

    (105 ILCS 5/21A-5)
    Sec. 21A-5. Definitions. In this Article:
    "New teacher" means the holder of a professional educator license, as set forth in Section 21B-20 of this Code, who is employed by a public school and who has not previously participated in a new teacher induction and mentoring program required by this Article, except as provided in Section 21A-25 of this Code.
    "Public school" means any school operating pursuant to the authority of this Code, including without limitation a school district, a charter school, a cooperative or joint agreement with a governing body or board of control, and a school operated by a regional office of education or State agency.
(Source: P.A. 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21A-10)
    Sec. 21A-10. Development of program required. During the 2003-2004 school year, each public school or 2 or more public schools acting jointly shall develop, in conjunction with its exclusive representative or their exclusive representatives, if any, a new teacher induction and mentoring program that meets the requirements set forth in Section 21A-20 of this Code to assist new teachers in developing the skills and strategies necessary for instructional excellence, provided that funding is made available by the State Board of Education from an appropriation made for this purpose. A public school that has an existing induction and mentoring program that does not meet the requirements set forth in Section 21A-20 of this Code may have school years 2003-2004 and 2004-2005 to develop a program that does meet those requirements and may receive funding as described in Section 21A-25 of this Code, provided that the funding is made available by the State Board of Education from an appropriation made for this purpose. A public school with such an existing induction and mentoring program may receive funding for the 2005-2006 school year for each new teacher in the second year of a 2-year program that does not meet the requirements set forth in Section 21A-20, as long as the public school has established the required new program by the beginning of that school year as described in Section 21A-15 and provided that funding is made available by the State Board of Education from an appropriation made for this purpose as described in Section 21A-25.
(Source: P.A. 93-355, eff. 1-1-04.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21A-15)
    Sec. 21A-15. When program is to be established and implemented. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, by the beginning of the 2004-2005 school year (or by the beginning of the 2005-2006 school year for a public school that has been given an extension of time to develop a program under Section 21A-10 of this Code), each public school or 2 or more public schools acting jointly shall establish and implement, in conjunction with its exclusive representative or their exclusive representatives, if any, the new teacher induction and mentoring program required to be developed under Section 21A-10 of this Code, provided that funding is made available by the State Board of Education, from an appropriation made for this purpose, as described in Section 21A-25 of this Code. A public school may contract with an institution of higher education or other independent party to assist in implementing the program.
(Source: P.A. 93-355, eff. 1-1-04.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21A-20)
    Sec. 21A-20. Program requirements. Each new teacher induction and mentoring program must be based on a plan that at least does all of the following:
        (1) Assigns a mentor teacher to each new teacher for
    	
a period of at least 2 school years.
        (2) Aligns with the Illinois Professional Teaching
    	
Standards, content area standards, and applicable local school improvement and professional development plans, if any.
        (3) Addresses all of the following elements and how
    	
they will be provided:
            (A) Mentoring and support of the new teacher.
            (B) Professional development specifically
        	
designed to ensure the growth of the new teacher's knowledge and skills.
            (C) Formative assessment designed to ensure
        	
feedback and reflection, which must not be used in any evaluation of the new teacher.
        (4) Describes the role of mentor teachers, the
    	
criteria and process for their selection, and how they will be trained, provided that each mentor teacher shall demonstrate the best practices in teaching his or her respective field of practice. A mentor teacher may not directly or indirectly participate in the evaluation of a new teacher pursuant to Article 24A of this Code or the evaluation procedure of the public school.
(Source: P.A. 93-355, eff. 1-1-04.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21A-25)
    Sec. 21A-25. Funding. From a separate appropriation made for the purposes of this Article, for each new teacher participating in a new teacher induction and mentoring program that meets the requirements set forth in Section 21A-20 of this Code or in an existing program that is in the process of transition to a program that meets those requirements, the State Board of Education shall pay the public school $1,200 annually for each of 2 school years for the purpose of providing one or more of the following:
        (1) Mentor teacher compensation.
        (2) Mentor teacher training or new teacher training
    	
or both.
        (3) Release time.
However, if a new teacher, after participating in the new teacher induction and mentoring program for one school year, becomes employed by another public school, the State Board of Education shall pay the teacher's new school $1,200 for the second school year and the teacher shall continue to be a new teacher as defined in this Article. Each public school shall determine, in conjunction with its exclusive representative, if any, how the $1,200 per school year for each new teacher shall be used, provided that if a mentor teacher receives additional release time to support a new teacher, the total workload of other teachers regularly employed by the public school shall not increase in any substantial manner. If the appropriation is insufficient to cover the $1,200 per school year for each new teacher, public schools are not required to develop or implement the program established by this Article. In the event of an insufficient appropriation, a public school or 2 or more schools acting jointly may submit an application for a grant administered by the State Board of Education and awarded on a competitive basis to establish a new teacher induction and mentoring program that meets the criteria set forth in Section 21A-20 of this Code. The State Board of Education may retain up to $1,000,000 of the appropriation for new teacher induction and mentoring programs to train mentor teachers, administrators, and other personnel, to provide best practices information, and to conduct an evaluation of these programs' impact and effectiveness.
(Source: P.A. 93-355, eff. 1-1-04.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21A-30)
    Sec. 21A-30. Evaluation of programs. The State Board of Education and the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board shall jointly contract with an independent party to conduct a comprehensive evaluation of new teacher induction and mentoring programs established pursuant to this Article. The first report of this evaluation shall be presented to the General Assembly on or before January 1, 2009. Subsequent evaluations shall be conducted and reports presented to the General Assembly on or before January 1 of every third year thereafter.
(Source: P.A. 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21A-35)
    Sec. 21A-35. Rules. The State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board, shall adopt rules for the implementation of this Article.
(Source: P.A. 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 21B heading)
ARTICLE 21B. EDUCATOR LICENSURE
(Source: P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21B-5)
    Sec. 21B-5. Licensure powers of the State Board of Education.
    (a) Recognizing that the education of our citizens is the single most important influence on the prosperity and success of this State and recognizing that new developments in education require a flexible approach to our educational system, the State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board, shall have the power and authority to do all of the following:
        (1) Set standards for teaching, supervising, or
    	
otherwise holding licensed employment in the public schools of this State and administer the licensure process as provided in this Article.
        (2) Approve, evaluate, and sanction educator
    	
preparation programs.
        (3) Enter into agreements with other states relative
    	
to reciprocal approval of educator preparation programs.
        (4) Establish standards for the issuance of new types
    	
of educator licenses.
        (5) Establish a code of ethics for all educators.
        (6) Maintain a system of licensure examination
    	
aligned with standards determined by the State Board of Education.
        (7) Take such other action relating to the
    	
improvement of instruction in the public schools as is appropriate and consistent with applicable laws.
    (b) Only the State Board of Education, acting in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Article and rules, shall have the authority to issue or endorse any license required for teaching, supervising, or otherwise holding licensed employment in the public schools; and no other State agency shall have any power or authority (i) to establish or prescribe any qualifications or other requirements applicable to the issuance or endorsement of any such license or (ii) to establish or prescribe any licensure or equivalent requirement that must be satisfied in order to teach, supervise, or hold licensed employment in the public schools.
(Source: P.A. 100-596, eff. 7-1-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21B-10)
    Sec. 21B-10. State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board.
    (a) The State Teacher Certification Board, which had been established under Section 21-13 of the School Code prior to this amendatory Act of the 97th General Assembly, shall be renamed the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board. References in law to the State Teacher Certification Board shall mean the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board. The State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board shall consist of the State Superintendent of Education or a representative appointed by him or her, who shall be ex-officio chairperson, 5 administrative or faculty members of public or private colleges or universities located in this State, 3 administrators and 10 classroom teachers employed in the public schools (5 of whom must be members of and nominated by a statewide professional teachers' organization and 5 of whom must be members of and nominated by a different statewide professional teachers' organization), and one regional superintendent of schools, all of whom shall be appointed by the State Board of Education; provided that at least one of the administrators and at least 3 of the classroom teachers so appointed must be employees of a school district that is subject to the provisions of Article 34 of this Code. A statewide professional teachers' organization and a different statewide professional teachers' organization shall submit to the State Board of Education for consideration at least 3 names of accomplished teachers for every one vacancy or expiring term in a classroom teacher position. The nominations submitted to the State Board of Education under this Section to fill a vacancy or an expiring term shall be advisory. Nomination for State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board members must be submitted to the State Board of Education within 30 days after the vacancy or vacancies occur. Nominations to fill an expiring term must be submitted to the State Board of Education at least 30 days before the expiration of that term. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Section, if a sufficient number of nominations are not received by the State Board of Education for a vacancy or expiring term within the 30-day period, then the State Board of Education may appoint any qualified person, in the same manner as the original appointment, to fill the vacancy or expiring term. The regular term of each member is 3 years, and an individual may be appointed for no more than 2 consecutive terms. The term of an appointed member of the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board shall expire on June 30 of his or her final year.
    (b) The State Board of Education shall appoint a secretary of the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board.
    (c) The State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board shall hold regular meetings at least quarterly and such other special meetings as may be necessary.
    (d) The necessary expenses of the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board shall be provided through the State Board of Education. The State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board, may adopt such rules as may be necessary for the administration of this Article.
    (e) (Blank).
(Source: P.A. 100-596, eff. 7-1-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21B-15)
    Sec. 21B-15. Qualifications of educators.
    (a) No one may be licensed to teach or supervise or be otherwise employed in the public schools of this State who is not of good character and at least 19 years of age.
    In determining good character under this Section, the State Superintendent of Education shall take into consideration the disciplinary actions of other states or national entities against certificates or licenses issued by those states and held by individuals from those states. In addition, any felony conviction of the applicant may be taken into consideration; however, no one may be licensed to teach or supervise in the public schools of this State who has been convicted of (i) an offense set forth in subsection (b) of Section 21B-80 of this Code until 7 years following the end of the sentence for the criminal offense or (ii) an offense set forth in subsection (c) of Section 21B-80 of this Code. Unless the conviction is for an offense set forth in Section 21B-80 of this Code, an applicant must be permitted to submit character references or other written material before such a conviction or other information regarding the applicant's character may be used by the State Superintendent of Education as a basis for denying the application.
    (b) No person otherwise qualified shall be denied the right to be licensed or to receive training for the purpose of becoming an educator because of a physical disability, including, but not limited to, visual and hearing disabilities; nor shall any school district refuse to employ a teacher on such grounds, provided that the person is able to carry out the duties of the position for which he or she applies.
    (c) No person may be granted or continue to hold an educator license who has knowingly altered or misrepresented his or her qualifications, in this State or any other state, in order to acquire or renew the license. Any other license issued under this Article held by the person may be suspended or revoked by the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board, depending upon the severity of the alteration or misrepresentation.
    (d) No one may teach or supervise in the public schools nor receive for teaching or supervising any part of any public school fund who does not hold an educator license granted by the State Superintendent of Education as provided in this Article. However, the provisions of this Article do not apply to a member of the armed forces who is employed as a teacher of subjects in the Reserve Officers' Training Corps of any school, nor to an individual teaching a dual credit course as provided for in the Dual Credit Quality Act.
    (e) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the school board of a school district may grant to a teacher of the district a leave of absence with full pay for a period of not more than one year to permit the teacher to teach in a foreign state under the provisions of the Exchange Teacher Program established under Public Law 584, 79th Congress, and Public Law 402, 80th Congress, as amended. The school board granting the leave of absence may employ, with or without pay, a national of the foreign state wherein the teacher on the leave of absence is to teach if the national is qualified to teach in that foreign state and if that national is to teach in a grade level similar to the one that was taught in the foreign state. The State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board, may adopt rules as may be necessary to implement this subsection (e).
    (f) No person shall be denied a license issued under this Article solely based on his or her citizenship status or immigration status. The General Assembly finds and declares that this subsection (f) is a State law within the meaning of subsection (d) of Section 1621 of Title 8 of the United States Code. Nothing in this subsection shall affect the requirements to obtain a license that are not directly related to citizenship status or immigration status. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to grant eligibility for obtaining any public benefit other than a license issued under this Article.
(Source: P.A. 99-667, eff. 7-29-16; 100-13, eff. 7-1-17; 100-1078, eff. 1-1-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21B-20)
    Sec. 21B-20. Types of licenses. The State Board of Education shall implement a system of educator licensure, whereby individuals employed in school districts who are required to be licensed must have one of the following licenses: (i) a professional educator license; (ii) an educator license with stipulations; (iii) a substitute teaching license; or (iv) until June 30, 2023, a short-term substitute teaching license. References in law regarding individuals certified or certificated or required to be certified or certificated under Article 21 of this Code shall also include individuals licensed or required to be licensed under this Article. The first year of all licenses ends on June 30 following one full year of the license being issued.
    The State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board, may adopt such rules as may be necessary to govern the requirements for licenses and endorsements under this Section.
        (1) Professional Educator License. Persons who (i)
    	
have successfully completed an approved educator preparation program and are recommended for licensure by the Illinois institution offering the educator preparation program, (ii) have successfully completed the required testing under Section 21B-30 of this Code, (iii) have successfully completed coursework on the psychology of, the identification of, and the methods of instruction for the exceptional child, including without limitation children with learning disabilities, (iv) have successfully completed coursework in methods of reading and reading in the content area, and (v) have met all other criteria established by rule of the State Board of Education shall be issued a Professional Educator License. All Professional Educator Licenses are valid until June 30 immediately following 5 years of the license being issued. The Professional Educator License shall be endorsed with specific areas and grade levels in which the individual is eligible to practice. For an early childhood education endorsement, an individual may satisfy the student teaching requirement of his or her early childhood teacher preparation program through placement in a setting with children from birth through grade 2, and the individual may be paid and receive credit while student teaching. The student teaching experience must meet the requirements of and be approved by the individual's early childhood teacher preparation program.
        Individuals can receive subsequent endorsements on
    	
the Professional Educator License. Subsequent endorsements shall require a minimum of 24 semester hours of coursework in the endorsement area and passage of the applicable content area test, unless otherwise specified by rule.
        (2) Educator License with Stipulations. An Educator
    	
License with Stipulations shall be issued an endorsement that limits the license holder to one particular position or does not require completion of an approved educator program or both.
        An individual with an Educator License with
    	
Stipulations must not be employed by a school district or any other entity to replace any presently employed teacher who otherwise would not be replaced for any reason.
        An Educator License with Stipulations may be issued
    	
with the following endorsements:
            (A) (Blank).
            (B) Alternative provisional educator. An
        	
alternative provisional educator endorsement on an Educator License with Stipulations may be issued to an applicant who, at the time of applying for the endorsement, has done all of the following:
                (i) Graduated from a regionally accredited
            	
college or university with a minimum of a bachelor's degree.
                (ii) Successfully completed the first phase
            	
of the Alternative Educator Licensure Program for Teachers, as described in Section 21B-50 of this Code.
                (iii) Passed a content area test, as required
            	
under Section 21B-30 of this Code.
        The alternative provisional educator endorsement is
    	
valid for 2 years of teaching and may be renewed for a third year by an individual meeting the requirements set forth in Section 21B-50 of this Code.
            (C) Alternative provisional superintendent. An
        	
alternative provisional superintendent endorsement on an Educator License with Stipulations entitles the holder to serve only as a superintendent or assistant superintendent in a school district's central office. This endorsement may only be issued to an applicant who, at the time of applying for the endorsement, has done all of the following:
                (i) Graduated from a regionally accredited
            	
college or university with a minimum of a master's degree in a management field other than education.
                (ii) Been employed for a period of at least
            	
5 years in a management level position in a field other than education.
                (iii) Successfully completed the first phase
            	
of an alternative route to superintendent endorsement program, as provided in Section 21B-55 of this Code.
                (iv) Passed a content area test required
            	
under Section 21B-30 of this Code.
            The endorsement is valid for 2 fiscal years in
        	
order to complete one full year of serving as a superintendent or assistant superintendent.
            (D) (Blank).
            (E) Career and technical educator. A career and
        	
technical educator endorsement on an Educator License with Stipulations may be issued to an applicant who has a minimum of 60 semester hours of coursework from a regionally accredited institution of higher education or an accredited trade and technical institution and has a minimum of 2,000 hours of experience outside of education in each area to be taught.
            The career and technical educator endorsement on
        	
an Educator License with Stipulations is valid until June 30 immediately following 5 years of the endorsement being issued and may be renewed.
            An individual who holds a valid career and
        	
technical educator endorsement on an Educator License with Stipulations but does not hold a bachelor's degree may substitute teach in career and technical education classrooms.
            (F) Part-time provisional career and technical
        	
educator or provisional career and technical educator. A part-time provisional career and technical educator endorsement or a provisional career and technical educator endorsement on an Educator License with Stipulations may be issued to an applicant who has a minimum of 8,000 hours of work experience in the skill for which the applicant is seeking the endorsement. It is the responsibility of each employing school board and regional office of education to provide verification, in writing, to the State Superintendent of Education at the time the application is submitted that no qualified teacher holding a Professional Educator License or an Educator License with Stipulations with a career and technical educator endorsement is available and that actual circumstances require such issuance.
            The provisional career and technical educator
        	
endorsement on an Educator License with Stipulations is valid until June 30 immediately following 5 years of the endorsement being issued and may be renewed for 5 years.
            A part-time provisional career and technical
        	
educator endorsement on an Educator License with Stipulations may be issued for teaching no more than 2 courses of study for grades 6 through 12. The part-time provisional career and technical educator endorsement on an Educator License with Stipulations is valid until June 30 immediately following 5 years of the endorsement being issued and may be renewed for 5 years if the individual makes application for renewal.
            An individual who holds a provisional or
        	
part-time provisional career and technical educator endorsement on an Educator License with Stipulations but does not hold a bachelor's degree may substitute teach in career and technical education classrooms.
            (G) Transitional bilingual educator. A
        	
transitional bilingual educator endorsement on an Educator License with Stipulations may be issued for the purpose of providing instruction in accordance with Article 14C of this Code to an applicant who provides satisfactory evidence that he or she meets all of the following requirements:
                (i) Possesses adequate speaking, reading, and
            	
writing ability in the language other than English in which transitional bilingual education is offered.
                (ii) Has the ability to successfully
            	
communicate in English.
                (iii) Either possessed, within 5 years
            	
previous to his or her applying for a transitional bilingual educator endorsement, a valid and comparable teaching certificate or comparable authorization issued by a foreign country or holds a degree from an institution of higher learning in a foreign country that the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board determines to be the equivalent of a bachelor's degree from a regionally accredited institution of higher learning in the United States.
            A transitional bilingual educator endorsement
        	
shall be valid for prekindergarten through grade 12, is valid until June 30 immediately following 5 years of the endorsement being issued, and shall not be renewed.
            Persons holding a transitional bilingual educator
        	
endorsement shall not be employed to replace any presently employed teacher who otherwise would not be replaced for any reason.
            (H) Language endorsement. In an effort to
        	
alleviate the shortage of teachers speaking a language other than English in the public schools, an individual who holds an Educator License with Stipulations may also apply for a language endorsement, provided that the applicant provides satisfactory evidence that he or she meets all of the following requirements:
                (i) Holds a transitional bilingual
            	
endorsement.
                (ii) Has demonstrated proficiency in the
            	
language for which the endorsement is to be issued by passing the applicable language content test required by the State Board of Education.
                (iii) Holds a bachelor's degree or higher
            	
from a regionally accredited institution of higher education or, for individuals educated in a country other than the United States, holds a degree from an institution of higher learning in a foreign country that the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board determines to be the equivalent of a bachelor's degree from a regionally accredited institution of higher learning in the United States.
                (iv) (Blank).
            A language endorsement on an Educator License
        	
with Stipulations is valid for prekindergarten through grade 12 for the same validity period as the individual's transitional bilingual educator endorsement on the Educator License with Stipulations and shall not be renewed.
            (I) Visiting international educator. A visiting
        	
international educator endorsement on an Educator License with Stipulations may be issued to an individual who is being recruited by a particular school district that conducts formal recruitment programs outside of the United States to secure the services of qualified teachers and who meets all of the following requirements:
                (i) Holds the equivalent of a minimum of a
            	
bachelor's degree issued in the United States.
                (ii) Has been prepared as a teacher at the
            	
grade level for which he or she will be employed.
                (iii) Has adequate content knowledge in the
            	
subject to be taught.
                (iv) Has an adequate command of the English
            	
language.
            A holder of a visiting international educator
        	
endorsement on an Educator License with Stipulations shall be permitted to teach in bilingual education programs in the language that was the medium of instruction in his or her teacher preparation program, provided that he or she passes the English Language Proficiency Examination or another test of writing skills in English identified by the State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board.
            A visiting international educator endorsement on
        	
an Educator License with Stipulations is valid for 5 years and shall not be renewed.
            (J) Paraprofessional educator. A
        	
paraprofessional educator endorsement on an Educator License with Stipulations may be issued to an applicant who holds a high school diploma or its recognized equivalent and either holds an associate's degree or a minimum of 60 semester hours of credit from a regionally accredited institution of higher education or has passed a paraprofessional competency test under subsection (c-5) of Section 21B-30. The paraprofessional educator endorsement is valid until June 30 immediately following 5 years of the endorsement being issued and may be renewed through application and payment of the appropriate fee, as required under Section 21B-40 of this Code. An individual who holds only a paraprofessional educator endorsement is not subject to additional requirements in order to renew the endorsement.
            (K) Chief school business official. A chief
        	
school business official endorsement on an Educator License with Stipulations may be issued to an applicant who qualifies by having a master's degree or higher, 2 years of full-time administrative experience in school business management or 2 years of university-approved practical experience, and a minimum of 24 semester hours of graduate credit in a program approved by the State Board of Education for the preparation of school business administrators and by passage of the applicable State tests, including an applicable content area test.
            The chief school business official endorsement
        	
may also be affixed to the Educator License with Stipulations of any holder who qualifies by having a master's degree in business administration, finance, accounting, or public administration and who completes an additional 6 semester hours of internship in school business management from a regionally accredited institution of higher education and passes the applicable State tests, including an applicable content area test. This endorsement shall be required for any individual employed as a chief school business official.
            The chief school business official endorsement on
        	
an Educator License with Stipulations is valid until June 30 immediately following 5 years of the endorsement being issued and may be renewed if the license holder completes renewal requirements as required for individuals who hold a Professional Educator License endorsed for chief school business official under Section 21B-45 of this Code and such rules as may be adopted by the State Board of Education.
            The State Board of Education shall adopt any
        	
rules necessary to implement Public Act 100-288.
            (L) Provisional in-state educator. A provisional
        	
in-state educator endorsement on an Educator License with Stipulations may be issued to a candidate who has completed an Illinois-approved educator preparation program at an Illinois institution of higher education and who has not successfully completed an evidence-based assessment of teacher effectiveness but who meets all of the following requirements:
                (i) Holds at least a bachelor's degree.
                (ii) Has completed an approved educator
            	
preparation program at an Illinois institution.
                (iii) Has passed an applicable content area
            	
test, as required by Section 21B-30 of this Code.
                (iv) Has attempted an evidence-based
            	
assessment of teacher effectiveness and received a minimum score on that assessment, as established by the State Board of Education in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board.
            A provisional in-state educator endorsement on an
        	
Educator License with Stipulations is valid for one full fiscal year after the date of issuance and may not be renewed.
            (M) (Blank).
            (N) Specialized services. A specialized services
        	
endorsement on an Educator License with Stipulations may be issued as defined and specified by rule.
        (3) Substitute Teaching License. A Substitute
    	
Teaching License may be issued to qualified applicants for substitute teaching in all grades of the public schools, prekindergarten through grade 12. Substitute Teaching Licenses are not eligible for endorsements. Applicants for a Substitute Teaching License must hold a bachelor's degree or higher from a regionally accredited institution of higher education.
        Substitute Teaching Licenses are valid for 5 years.
        Substitute Teaching Licenses are valid for substitute
    	
teaching in every county of this State. If an individual has had his or her Professional Educator License or Educator License with Stipulations suspended or revoked, then that individual is not eligible to obtain a Substitute Teaching License.
        A substitute teacher may only teach in the place of a
    	
licensed teacher who is under contract with the employing board. If, however, there is no licensed teacher under contract because of an emergency situation, then a district may employ a substitute teacher for no longer than 30 calendar days per each vacant position in the district if the district notifies the appropriate regional office of education within 5 business days after the employment of the substitute teacher in the emergency situation. An emergency situation is one in which an unforeseen vacancy has occurred and (i) a teacher is unable to fulfill his or her contractual duties or (ii) teacher capacity needs of the district exceed previous indications, and the district is actively engaged in advertising to hire a fully licensed teacher for the vacant position.
        There is no limit on the number of days that a
    	
substitute teacher may teach in a single school district, provided that no substitute teacher may teach for longer than 90 school days for any one licensed teacher under contract in the same school year. A substitute teacher who holds a Professional Educator License or Educator License with Stipulations shall not teach for more than 120 school days for any one licensed teacher under contract in the same school year. The limitations in this paragraph (3) on the number of days a substitute teacher may be employed do not apply to any school district operating under Article 34 of this Code.
        A school district may not require an individual who
    	
holds a valid Professional Educator License or Educator License with Stipulations to seek or hold a Substitute Teaching License to teach as a substitute teacher.
        (4) Short-Term Substitute Teaching License. Beginning
    	
on July 1, 2018 and until June 30, 2023, the State Board of Education may issue a Short-Term Substitute Teaching License. A Short-Term Substitute Teaching License may be issued to a qualified applicant for substitute teaching in all grades of the public schools, prekindergarten through grade 12. Short-Term Substitute Teaching Licenses are not eligible for endorsements. Applicants for a Short-Term Substitute Teaching License must hold an associate's degree or have completed at least 60 credit hours from a regionally accredited institution of higher education.
        Short-Term Substitute Teaching Licenses are valid for
    	
substitute teaching in every county of this State. If an individual has had his or her Professional Educator License or Educator License with Stipulations suspended or revoked, then that individual is not eligible to obtain a Short-Term Substitute Teaching License.
        The provisions of Sections 10-21.9 and 34-18.5 of
    	
this Code apply to short-term substitute teachers.
        An individual holding a Short-Term Substitute
    	
Teaching License may teach no more than 5 consecutive days per licensed teacher who is under contract. For teacher absences lasting 6 or more days per licensed teacher who is under contract, a school district may not hire an individual holding a Short-Term Substitute Teaching License. An individual holding a Short-Term Substitute Teaching License must complete the training program under Section 10-20.67 or 34-18.60 of this Code to be eligible to teach at a public school. This paragraph (4) is inoperative on and after July 1, 2023.
(Source: P.A. 100-8, eff. 7-1-17; 100-13, eff. 7-1-17; 100-288, eff. 8-24-17; 100-596, eff. 7-1-18; 100-821, eff. 9-3-18; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18; 101-81, eff. 7-12-19; 101-220, eff. 8-7-19; 101-594, eff. 12-5-19; 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21B-25)
    Sec. 21B-25. Endorsement on licenses. All licenses issued under paragraph (1) of Section 21B-20 of this Code shall be specifically endorsed by the State Board of Education for each content area, school support area, and administrative area for which the holder of the license is qualified. Recognized institutions approved to offer educator preparation programs shall be trained to add endorsements to licenses issued to applicants who meet all of the requirements for the endorsement or endorsements, including passing any required tests. The State Superintendent of Education shall randomly audit institutions to ensure that all rules and standards are being followed for entitlement or when endorsements are being recommended.
        (1) The State Board of Education, in consultation
    	
with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board, shall establish, by rule, the grade level and subject area endorsements to be added to the Professional Educator License. These rules shall outline the requirements for obtaining each endorsement.
        (2) In addition to any and all grade level and
    	
content area endorsements developed by rule, the State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board, shall develop the requirements for the following endorsements:
            (A) (Blank).
            (B) Principal endorsement. A principal
        	
endorsement shall be affixed to a Professional Educator License of any holder who qualifies by having all of the following:
                (i) Successful completion of a principal
            	
preparation program approved in accordance with Section 21B-60 of this Code and any applicable rules.
                (ii) At least 4 total years of teaching or 4
            	
total years of working in the capacity of school support personnel in an Illinois public school or nonpublic school recognized by the State Board of Education, in a school under the supervision of the Department of Corrections, or in an out-of-state public school or out-of-state nonpublic school meeting out-of-state recognition standards comparable to those approved by the State Superintendent of Education; however, the State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board, shall allow, by rules, for fewer than 4 years of experience based on meeting standards set forth in such rules, including without limitation a review of performance evaluations or other evidence of demonstrated qualifications.
                (iii) A master's degree or higher from a
            	
regionally accredited college or university.
            (C) Chief school business official endorsement.
        	
A chief school business official endorsement shall be affixed to the Professional Educator License of any holder who qualifies by having a master's degree or higher, 2 years of full-time administrative experience in school business management or 2 years of university-approved practical experience, and a minimum of 24 semester hours of graduate credit in a program approved by the State Board of Education for the preparation of school business administrators and by passage of the applicable State tests. The chief school business official endorsement may also be affixed to the Professional Educator License of any holder who qualifies by having a master's degree in business administration, finance, accounting, or public administration and who completes an additional 6 semester hours of internship in school business management from a regionally accredited institution of higher education and passes the applicable State tests. This endorsement shall be required for any individual employed as a chief school business official.
            (D) Superintendent endorsement. A superintendent
        	
endorsement shall be affixed to the Professional Educator License of any holder who has completed a program approved by the State Board of Education for the preparation of superintendents of schools, has had at least 2 years of experience employed full-time in a general administrative position or as a full-time principal, director of special education, or chief school business official in the public schools or in a State-recognized nonpublic school in which the chief administrator is required to have the licensure necessary to be a principal in a public school in this State and where a majority of the teachers are required to have the licensure necessary to be instructors in a public school in this State, and has passed the required State tests; or of any holder who has completed a program that is not an Illinois-approved educator preparation program at an Illinois institution of higher education and that has recognition standards comparable to those approved by the State Superintendent of Education and holds the general administrative, principal, or chief school business official endorsement and who has had 2 years of experience as a principal, director of special education, or chief school business official while holding a valid educator license or certificate comparable in validity and educational and experience requirements and has passed the appropriate State tests, as provided in Section 21B-30 of this Code. The superintendent endorsement shall allow individuals to serve only as a superintendent or assistant superintendent.
            (E) Teacher leader endorsement. It shall be the
        	
policy of this State to improve the quality of instructional leaders by providing a career pathway for teachers interested in serving in leadership roles, but not as principals. The State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board, may issue a teacher leader endorsement under this subdivision (E). Persons who meet and successfully complete the requirements of the endorsement shall be issued a teacher leader endorsement on the Professional Educator License for serving in schools in this State. Teacher leaders may qualify to serve in such positions as department chairs, coaches, mentors, curriculum and instruction leaders, or other leadership positions as defined by the district. The endorsement shall be available to those teachers who (i) hold a Professional Educator License, (ii) hold a master's degree or higher from a regionally accredited institution, (iii) have completed a program of study that has been approved by the State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board, and (iv) have successfully demonstrated competencies as defined by rule.
            A teacher who meets the requirements set forth in
        	
this Section and holds a teacher leader endorsement may evaluate teachers pursuant to Section 24A-5 of this Code, provided that the individual has completed the evaluation component required by Section 24A-3 of this Code and a teacher leader is allowed to evaluate personnel under the respective school district's collective bargaining agreement.
            The State Board of Education, in consultation
        	
with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board, may adopt such rules as may be necessary to establish and implement the teacher leader endorsement program and to specify the positions for which this endorsement shall be required.
            (F) Special education endorsement. A special
        	
education endorsement in one or more areas shall be affixed to a Professional Educator License for any individual that meets those requirements established by the State Board of Education in rules. Special education endorsement areas shall include without limitation the following:
                (i) Learning Behavior Specialist I;
                (ii) Learning Behavior Specialist II;
                (iii) Speech Language Pathologist;
                (iv) Blind or Visually Impaired;
                (v) Deaf-Hard of Hearing;
                (vi) Early Childhood Special Education; and
                (vii) Director of Special Education.
        Notwithstanding anything in this Code to the
        	
contrary, the State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board, may add additional areas of special education by rule.
            (G) School support personnel endorsement. School
        	
support personnel endorsement areas shall include, but are not limited to, school counselor, marriage and family therapist, school psychologist, school speech and language pathologist, school nurse, and school social worker. This endorsement is for individuals who are not teachers or administrators, but still require licensure to work in an instructional support position in a public or State-operated elementary school, secondary school, or cooperative or joint agreement with a governing body or board of control or a charter school operating in compliance with the Charter Schools Law. The school support personnel endorsement shall be affixed to the Professional Educator License and shall meet all of the requirements established in any rules adopted to implement this subdivision (G). The holder of such an endorsement is entitled to all of the rights and privileges granted holders of any other Professional Educator License, including teacher benefits, compensation, and working conditions.
(Source: P.A. 100-13, eff. 7-1-17; 100-267, eff. 8-22-17; 100-288, eff. 8-24-17; 100-596, eff. 7-1-18; 100-780, eff. 1-1-19; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18; 101-81, eff. 7-12-19; 101-220, eff. 8-7-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21B-30)
    Sec. 21B-30. Educator testing.
    (a) (Blank).
    (b) The State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board, shall design and implement a system of examinations, which shall be required prior to the issuance of educator licenses. These examinations and indicators must be based on national and State professional teaching standards, as determined by the State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board. The State Board of Education may adopt such rules as may be necessary to implement and administer this Section.
    (c) (Blank).
    (c-5) The State Board must adopt rules to implement a paraprofessional competency test. This test would allow an applicant seeking an Educator License with Stipulations with a paraprofessional educator endorsement to obtain the endorsement if he or she passes the test and meets the other requirements of subparagraph (J) of paragraph (2) of Section 21B-20 other than the higher education requirements.
    (d) All applicants seeking a State license shall be required to pass a test of content area knowledge for each area of endorsement for which there is an applicable test. There shall be no exception to this requirement. No candidate shall be allowed to student teach or serve as the teacher of record until he or she has passed the applicable content area test.
    (e) (Blank).
    (f) Except as otherwise provided in this Article, beginning on September 1, 2015, all candidates completing teacher preparation programs in this State and all candidates subject to Section 21B-35 of this Code are required to pass a teacher performance assessment approved by the State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board. Subject to appropriation, an individual who holds a Professional Educator License and is employed for a minimum of one school year by a school district designated as Tier 1 under Section 18-8.15 may, after application to the State Board, receive from the State Board a refund for any costs associated with completing the teacher performance assessment under this subsection.
    (g) The content area knowledge test and the teacher performance assessment shall be the tests that from time to time are designated by the State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board, and may be tests prepared by an educational testing organization or tests designed by the State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board. The test of content area knowledge shall assess content knowledge in a specific subject field. The tests must be designed to be racially neutral to ensure that no person taking the tests is discriminated against on the basis of race, color, national origin, or other factors unrelated to the person's ability to perform as a licensed employee. The score required to pass the tests shall be fixed by the State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board. The tests shall be administered not fewer than 3 times a year at such time and place as may be designated by the State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board.
    The State Board shall implement a test or tests to assess the speaking, reading, writing, and grammar skills of applicants for an endorsement or a license issued under subdivision (G) of paragraph (2) of Section 21B-20 of this Code in the English language and in the language of the transitional bilingual education program requested by the applicant.
    (h) Except as provided in Section 34-6 of this Code, the provisions of this Section shall apply equally in any school district subject to Article 34 of this Code.
    (i) The rules developed to implement and enforce the testing requirements under this Section shall include without limitation provisions governing test selection, test validation and determination of a passing score, administration of the tests, frequency of administration, applicant fees, frequency of applicants taking the tests, the years for which a score is valid, and appropriate special accommodations. The State Board of Education shall develop such rules as may be needed to ensure uniformity from year to year in the level of difficulty for each form of an assessment.
(Source: P.A. 100-596, eff. 7-1-18; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18; 100-932, eff. 8-17-18; 101-81, eff. 7-12-19; 101-220, eff. 8-7-19; 101-594, eff. 12-5-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21B-35)
    Sec. 21B-35. Minimum requirements for educators trained in other states or countries.
    (a) Any applicant who has not been entitled by an Illinois-approved educator preparation program at an Illinois institution of higher education applying for a Professional Educator License endorsed in a teaching field or school support personnel area must meet the following requirements:
        (1) the applicant must:
            (A) hold a comparable and valid educator license
        	
or certificate, as defined by rule, with similar grade level and content area credentials from another state, with the State Board of Education having the authority to determine what constitutes similar grade level and content area credentials from another state;
            (B) have a bachelor's degree from a regionally
        	
accredited institution of higher education; and
            (C) have demonstrated proficiency in the English
        	
language by either passing the English language proficiency test required by the State Board of Education or providing evidence of completing a postsecondary degree at an institution in which the mode of instruction was English; or
        (2) the applicant must:
            (A) have completed a state-approved program for
        	
the licensure area sought, including coursework concerning methods of instruction of the exceptional child, methods of reading and reading in the content area, and instructional strategies for English learners;
            (B) have a bachelor's degree from a regionally
        	
accredited institution of higher education;
            (C) have successfully met all Illinois
        	
examination requirements, except that:
                (i) (blank);
                (ii) an applicant who has successfully
            	
completed a test of content, as defined by rules, at the time of initial licensure in another state is not required to complete a test of content; and
                (iii) an applicant for a teaching endorsement
            	
who has successfully completed an evidence-based assessment of teacher effectiveness, as defined by rules, at the time of initial licensure in another state is not required to complete an evidence-based assessment of teacher effectiveness; and
            (D) for an applicant for a teaching endorsement,
        	
have completed student teaching or an equivalent experience or, for an applicant for a school service personnel endorsement, have completed an internship or an equivalent experience.
    (b) In order to receive a Professional Educator License endorsed in a teaching field or school support personnel area, applicants trained in another country must meet all of the following requirements:
        (1) Have completed a comparable education program in
    	
another country.
        (2) Have had transcripts evaluated by an evaluation
    	
service approved by the State Superintendent of Education.
        (3) Have a degree comparable to a degree from a
    	
regionally accredited institution of higher education.
        (4) Have completed coursework aligned to standards
    	
concerning methods of instruction of the exceptional child, methods of reading and reading in the content area, and instructional strategies for English learners.
        (5) (Blank).
        (6) (Blank).
        (7) Have successfully met all State licensure
    	
examination requirements. Applicants who have successfully completed a test of content, as defined by rules, at the time of initial licensure in another country shall not be required to complete a test of content. Applicants for a teaching endorsement who have successfully completed an evidence-based assessment of teacher effectiveness, as defined by rules, at the time of initial licensure in another country shall not be required to complete an evidence-based assessment of teacher effectiveness.
        (8) Have completed student teaching or an equivalent
    	
experience.
        (9) Have demonstrated proficiency in the English
    	
language by either passing the English language proficiency test required by the State Board of Education or providing evidence of completing a postsecondary degree at an institution in which the mode of instruction was English.
    (b-5) All applicants who have not been entitled by an Illinois-approved educator preparation program at an Illinois institution of higher education and applicants trained in another country applying for a Professional Educator License endorsed for principal or superintendent must hold a master's degree from a regionally accredited institution of higher education, pass the English language proficiency test required by the State Board of Education, and hold a comparable and valid educator license or certificate with similar grade level and subject matter credentials, with the State Board of Education having the authority to determine what constitutes similar grade level and subject matter credentials from another state, or must meet all of the following requirements:
        (1) Have completed an educator preparation program
    	
approved by another state or comparable educator program in another country leading to the receipt of a license or certificate for the Illinois endorsement sought.
        (2) Have successfully met all State licensure
    	
examination requirements, as required by Section 21B-30 of this Code. Applicants who have successfully completed a test of content, as defined by rules, at the time of initial licensure in another state or country shall not be required to complete a test of content.
        (2.5) Have completed an internship, as defined by
    	
rule.
        (3) (Blank).
        (4) Have completed coursework aligned to standards
    	
concerning methods of instruction of the exceptional child, methods of reading and reading in the content area, and instructional strategies for English learners.
        (4.5) Have demonstrated proficiency in the English
    	
language by either passing the English language proficiency test required by the State Board of Education or providing evidence of completing a postsecondary degree at an institution in which the mode of instruction was English.
        (5) Have completed a master's degree.
        (6) Have successfully completed teaching, school
    	
support, or administrative experience as defined by rule.
    (b-7) All applicants who have not been entitled by an Illinois-approved educator preparation program at an Illinois institution of higher education applying for a Professional Educator License endorsed for Director of Special Education must hold a master's degree from a regionally accredited institution of higher education and must hold a comparable and valid educator license or certificate with similar grade level and subject matter credentials, with the State Board of Education having the authority to determine what constitutes similar grade level and subject matter credentials from another state, or must meet all of the following requirements:
        (1) Have completed a master's degree.
        (2) Have 2 years of full-time experience
    	
providing special education services.
        (3) Have successfully completed all examination
    	
requirements, as required by Section 21B-30 of this Code. Applicants who have successfully completed a test of content, as identified by rules, at the time of initial licensure in another state or country shall not be required to complete a test of content.
        (4) Have completed coursework aligned to
    	
standards concerning methods of instruction of the exceptional child, methods of reading and reading in the content area, and instructional strategies for English learners.
    (b-10) All applicants who have not been entitled by an Illinois-approved educator preparation program at an Illinois institution of higher education applying for a Professional Educator License endorsed for chief school business official must hold a master's degree from a regionally accredited institution of higher education and must hold a comparable and valid educator license or certificate with similar grade level and subject matter credentials, with the State Board of Education having the authority to determine what constitutes similar grade level and subject matter credentials from another state, or must meet all of the following requirements:
        (1) Have completed a master's degree in school
    	
business management, finance, or accounting.
        (2) Have successfully completed an internship in
    	
school business management or have 2 years of experience as a school business administrator.
        (3) Have successfully met all State examination
    	
requirements, as required by Section 21B-30 of this Code. Applicants who have successfully completed a test of content, as identified by rules, at the time of initial licensure in another state or country shall not be required to complete a test of content.
        (4) Have completed modules aligned to standards
    	
concerning methods of instruction of the exceptional child, methods of reading and reading in the content area, and instructional strategies for English learners.
    (c) The State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board, may adopt such rules as may be necessary to implement this Section.
(Source: P.A. 100-13, eff. 7-1-17; 100-584, eff. 4-6-18; 100-596, eff. 7-1-18; 101-220, eff. 8-7-19; 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21B-40)
    Sec. 21B-40. Fees.
    (a) Beginning with the start of the new licensure system established pursuant to this Article, the following fees shall be charged to applicants:
        (1) A $100 application fee for a Professional
    	
Educator License or an Educator License with Stipulations.
        (1.5) A $50 application fee for a Substitute Teaching
    	
License. If the application for a Substitute Teaching License is made and granted after July 1, 2017, the licensee may apply for a refund of the application fee within 18 months of issuance of the new license and shall be issued that refund by the State Board of Education if the licensee provides evidence to the State Board of Education that the licensee has taught pursuant to the Substitute Teaching License at least 10 full school days within one year of issuance.
        (1.7) A $25 application fee for a Short-Term
    	
Substitute Teaching License. The Short-Term Substitute Teaching License must be registered in at least one region in this State, but does not require a registration fee. The licensee may apply for a refund of the application fee within 18 months of issuance of the new license and shall be issued that refund by the State Board of Education if the licensee provides evidence to the State Board of Education that the licensee has taught pursuant to the Short-Term Substitute Teaching License at least 10 full school days within one year of issuance.
        (2) A $150 application fee for individuals who have
    	
not been entitled by an Illinois-approved educator preparation program at an Illinois institution of higher education and are seeking any of the licenses set forth in subdivision (1) of this subsection (a).
        (3) A $50 application fee for each endorsement or
    	
approval.
        (4) A $10 per year registration fee for the course
    	
of the validity cycle to register the license, which shall be paid to the regional office of education having supervision and control over the school in which the individual holding the license is to be employed. If the individual holding the license is not yet employed, then the license may be registered in any county in this State. The registration fee must be paid in its entirety the first time the individual registers the license for a particular validity period in a single region. No additional fee may be charged for that validity period should the individual subsequently register the license in additional regions. An individual must register the license (i) immediately after initial issuance of the license and (ii) at the beginning of each renewal cycle if the individual has satisfied the renewal requirements required under this Code.
        Beginning on July 1, 2017, at the beginning of each
    	
renewal cycle, individuals who hold a Substitute Teaching License may apply for a reimbursement of the registration fee within 18 months of renewal and shall be issued that reimbursement by the State Board of Education from funds appropriated for that purpose if the licensee provides evidence to the State Board of Education that the licensee has taught pursuant to the Substitute Teaching License at least 10 full school days within one year of renewal.
        (5) The license renewal fee for an Educator License
    	
with Stipulations with a paraprofessional educator endorsement is $25.
    (b) All application fees paid pursuant to subdivisions (1) through (3) of subsection (a) of this Section shall be deposited into the Teacher Certificate Fee Revolving Fund and shall be used, subject to appropriation, by the State Board of Education to provide the technology and human resources necessary for the timely and efficient processing of applications and for the renewal of licenses. Funds available from the Teacher Certificate Fee Revolving Fund may also be used by the State Board of Education to support the recruitment and retention of educators, to support educator preparation programs as they seek national accreditation, and to provide professional development aligned with the requirements set forth in Section 21B-45 of this Code. A majority of the funds in the Teacher Certificate Fee Revolving Fund must be dedicated to the timely and efficient processing of applications and for the renewal of licenses. The Teacher Certificate Fee Revolving Fund is not subject to administrative charge transfers, authorized under Section 8h of the State Finance Act, from the Teacher Certificate Fee Revolving Fund into any other fund of this State, and moneys in the Teacher Certificate Fee Revolving Fund shall not revert back to the General Revenue Fund at any time.
    The regional superintendent of schools shall deposit the registration fees paid pursuant to subdivision (4) of subsection (a) of this Section into the institute fund established pursuant to Section 3-11 of this Code.
    (c) The State Board of Education and each regional office of education are authorized to charge a service or convenience fee for the use of credit cards for the payment of license fees. This service or convenience fee shall not exceed the amount required by the credit card processing company or vendor that has entered into a contract with the State Board or regional office of education for this purpose, and the fee must be paid to that company or vendor.
    (d) If, at the time a certificate issued under Article 21 of this Code is exchanged for a license issued under this Article, a person has paid registration fees for any years of the validity period of the certificate and these years have not expired when the certificate is exchanged, then those fees must be applied to the registration of the new license.
(Source: P.A. 100-550, eff. 11-8-17; 100-596, eff. 7-1-18; 100-772, eff. 8-10-18; 101-81, eff. 7-12-19; 101-570, eff. 8-23-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21B-45)
    Sec. 21B-45. Professional Educator License renewal.
    (a) Individuals holding a Professional Educator License are required to complete the licensure renewal requirements as specified in this Section, unless otherwise provided in this Code.
    Individuals holding a Professional Educator License shall meet the renewal requirements set forth in this Section, unless otherwise provided in this Code. If an individual holds a license endorsed in more than one area that has different renewal requirements, that individual shall follow the renewal requirements for the position for which he or she spends the majority of his or her time working.
    (b) All Professional Educator Licenses not renewed as provided in this Section shall lapse on September 1 of that year. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Section, if a license holder's electronic mail address is available, the State Board of Education shall send him or her notification electronically that his or her license will lapse if not renewed, to be sent no more than 6 months prior to the license lapsing. Lapsed licenses may be immediately reinstated upon (i) payment by the applicant of a $500 penalty to the State Board of Education or (ii) the demonstration of proficiency by completing 9 semester hours of coursework from a regionally accredited institution of higher education in the content area that most aligns with one or more of the educator's endorsement areas. Any and all back fees, including without limitation registration fees owed from the time of expiration of the license until the date of reinstatement, shall be paid and kept in accordance with the provisions in Article 3 of this Code concerning an institute fund and the provisions in Article 21B of this Code concerning fees and requirements for registration. Licenses not registered in accordance with Section 21B-40 of this Code shall lapse after a period of 6 months from the expiration of the last year of registration or on January 1 of the fiscal year following initial issuance of the license. An unregistered license is invalid after September 1 for employment and performance of services in an Illinois public or State-operated school or cooperative and in a charter school. Any license or endorsement may be voluntarily surrendered by the license holder. A voluntarily surrendered license shall be treated as a revoked license. An Educator License with Stipulations with only a paraprofessional endorsement does not lapse.
    (c) From July 1, 2013 through June 30, 2014, in order to satisfy the requirements for licensure renewal provided for in this Section, each professional educator licensee with an administrative endorsement who is working in a position requiring such endorsement shall complete one Illinois Administrators' Academy course, as described in Article 2 of this Code, per fiscal year.
    (c-5) All licenses issued by the State Board of Education under this Article that expire on June 30, 2020 and have not been renewed by the end of the 2020 renewal period shall be extended for one year and shall expire on June 30, 2021.
    (d) Beginning July 1, 2014, in order to satisfy the requirements for licensure renewal provided for in this Section, each professional educator licensee may create a professional development plan each year. The plan shall address one or more of the endorsements that are required of his or her educator position if the licensee is employed and performing services in an Illinois public or State-operated school or cooperative. If the licensee is employed in a charter school, the plan shall address that endorsement or those endorsements most closely related to his or her educator position. Licensees employed and performing services in any other Illinois schools may participate in the renewal requirements by adhering to the same process.
    Except as otherwise provided in this Section, the licensee's professional development activities shall align with one or more of the following criteria:
        (1) activities are of a type that engage participants
    	
over a sustained period of time allowing for analysis, discovery, and application as they relate to student learning, social or emotional achievement, or well-being;
        (2) professional development aligns to the licensee's
    	
performance;
        (3) outcomes for the activities must relate to
    	
student growth or district improvement;
        (4) activities align to State-approved standards; and
        (5) higher education coursework.
    (e) For each renewal cycle, each professional educator licensee shall engage in professional development activities. Prior to renewal, the licensee shall enter electronically into the Educator Licensure Information System (ELIS) the name, date, and location of the activity, the number of professional development hours, and the provider's name. The following provisions shall apply concerning professional development activities:
        (1) Each licensee shall complete a total of 120 hours
    	
of professional development per 5-year renewal cycle in order to renew the license, except as otherwise provided in this Section.
        (2) Beginning with his or her first full 5-year
    	
cycle, any licensee with an administrative endorsement who is not working in a position requiring such endorsement is not required to complete Illinois Administrators' Academy courses, as described in Article 2 of this Code. Such licensees must complete one Illinois Administrators' Academy course within one year after returning to a position that requires the administrative endorsement.
        (3) Any licensee with an administrative endorsement
    	
who is working in a position requiring such endorsement or an individual with a Teacher Leader endorsement serving in an administrative capacity at least 50% of the day shall complete one Illinois Administrators' Academy course, as described in Article 2 of this Code, each fiscal year in addition to 100 hours of professional development per 5-year renewal cycle in accordance with this Code.
        (4) Any licensee holding a current National Board for
    	
Professional Teaching Standards (NBPTS) master teacher designation shall complete a total of 60 hours of professional development per 5-year renewal cycle in order to renew the license.
        (5) Licensees working in a position that does not
    	
require educator licensure or working in a position for less than 50% for any particular year are considered to be exempt and shall be required to pay only the registration fee in order to renew and maintain the validity of the license.
        (6) Licensees who are retired and qualify for
    	
benefits from a State of Illinois retirement system shall notify the State Board of Education using ELIS, and the license shall be maintained in retired status. For any renewal cycle in which a licensee retires during the renewal cycle, the licensee must complete professional development activities on a prorated basis depending on the number of years during the renewal cycle the educator held an active license. If a licensee retires during a renewal cycle, the licensee must notify the State Board of Education using ELIS that the licensee wishes to maintain the license in retired status and must show proof of completion of professional development activities on a prorated basis for all years of that renewal cycle for which the license was active. An individual with a license in retired status shall not be required to complete professional development activities or pay registration fees until returning to a position that requires educator licensure. Upon returning to work in a position that requires the Professional Educator License, the licensee shall immediately pay a registration fee and complete renewal requirements for that year. A license in retired status cannot lapse. Beginning on January 6, 2017 (the effective date of Public Act 99-920) through December 31, 2017, any licensee who has retired and whose license has lapsed for failure to renew as provided in this Section may reinstate that license and maintain it in retired status upon providing proof to the State Board of Education using ELIS that the licensee is retired and is not working in a position that requires a Professional Educator License.
        (7) For any renewal cycle in which professional
    	
development hours were required, but not fulfilled, the licensee shall complete any missed hours to total the minimum professional development hours required in this Section prior to September 1 of that year. Professional development hours used to fulfill the minimum required hours for a renewal cycle may be used for only one renewal cycle. For any fiscal year or renewal cycle in which an Illinois Administrators' Academy course was required but not completed, the licensee shall complete any missed Illinois Administrators' Academy courses prior to September 1 of that year. The licensee may complete all deficient hours and Illinois Administrators' Academy courses while continuing to work in a position that requires that license until September 1 of that year.
        (8) Any licensee who has not fulfilled the
    	
professional development renewal requirements set forth in this Section at the end of any 5-year renewal cycle is ineligible to register his or her license and may submit an appeal to the State Superintendent of Education for reinstatement of the license.
        (9) If professional development opportunities were
    	
unavailable to a licensee, proof that opportunities were unavailable and request for an extension of time beyond August 31 to complete the renewal requirements may be submitted from April 1 through June 30 of that year to the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board. If an extension is approved, the license shall remain valid during the extension period.
        (10) Individuals who hold exempt licenses prior to
    	
December 27, 2013 (the effective date of Public Act 98-610) shall commence the annual renewal process with the first scheduled registration due after December 27, 2013 (the effective date of Public Act 98-610).
        (11) Notwithstanding any other provision of this
    	
subsection (e), if a licensee earns more than the required number of professional development hours during a renewal cycle, then the licensee may carry over any hours earned from April 1 through June 30 of the last year of the renewal cycle. Any hours carried over in this manner must be applied to the next renewal cycle. Illinois Administrators' Academy courses or hours earned in those courses may not be carried over.
    (f) At the time of renewal, each licensee shall respond to the required questions under penalty of perjury.
    (f-5) The State Board of Education shall conduct random audits of licensees to verify a licensee's fulfillment of the professional development hours required under this Section. Upon completion of a random audit, if it is determined by the State Board of Education that the licensee did not complete the required number of professional development hours or did not provide sufficient proof of completion, the licensee shall be notified that his or her license has lapsed. A license that has lapsed under this subsection may be reinstated as provided in subsection (b).
    (g) The following entities shall be designated as approved to provide professional development activities for the renewal of Professional Educator Licenses:
        (1) The State Board of Education.
        (2) Regional offices of education and intermediate
    	
service centers.
        (3) Illinois professional associations representing
    	
the following groups that are approved by the State Superintendent of Education:
            (A) school administrators;
            (B) principals;
            (C) school business officials;
            (D) teachers, including special education
        	
teachers;
            (E) school boards;
            (F) school districts;
            (G) parents; and
            (H) school service personnel.
        (4) Regionally accredited institutions of higher
    	
education that offer Illinois-approved educator preparation programs and public community colleges subject to the Public Community College Act.
        (5) Illinois public school districts, charter schools
    	
authorized under Article 27A of this Code, and joint educational programs authorized under Article 10 of this Code for the purposes of providing career and technical education or special education services.
        (6) A not-for-profit organization that, as of
    	
December 31, 2014 (the effective date of Public Act 98-1147), has had or has a grant from or a contract with the State Board of Education to provide professional development services in the area of English Learning to Illinois school districts, teachers, or administrators.
        (7) State agencies, State boards, and State
    	
commissions.
        (8) Museums as defined in Section 10 of the Museum
    	
Disposition of Property Act.
    (h) Approved providers under subsection (g) of this Section shall make available professional development opportunities that satisfy at least one of the following:
        (1) increase the knowledge and skills of school and
    	
district leaders who guide continuous professional development;
        (2) improve the learning of students;
        (3) organize adults into learning communities whose
    	
goals are aligned with those of the school and district;
        (4) deepen educator's content knowledge;
        (5) provide educators with research-based
    	
instructional strategies to assist students in meeting rigorous academic standards;
        (6) prepare educators to appropriately use various
    	
types of classroom assessments;
        (7) use learning strategies appropriate to the
    	
intended goals;
        (8) provide educators with the knowledge and skills
    	
to collaborate;
        (9) prepare educators to apply research to decision
    	
making; or
        (10) provide educators with training on inclusive
    	
practices in the classroom that examines instructional and behavioral strategies that improve academic and social-emotional outcomes for all students, with or without disabilities, in a general education setting.
    (i) Approved providers under subsection (g) of this Section shall do the following:
        (1) align professional development activities to the
    	
State-approved national standards for professional learning;
        (2) meet the professional development criteria for
    	
Illinois licensure renewal;
        (3) produce a rationale for the activity that
    	
explains how it aligns to State standards and identify the assessment for determining the expected impact on student learning or school improvement;
        (4) maintain original documentation for completion of
    	
activities;
        (5) provide license holders with evidence of
    	
completion of activities;
        (6) request an Illinois Educator Identification
    	
Number (IEIN) for each educator during each professional development activity; and
        (7) beginning on July 1, 2019, register annually with
    	
the State Board of Education prior to offering any professional development opportunities in the current fiscal year.
    (j) The State Board of Education shall conduct annual audits of a subset of approved providers, except for school districts, which shall be audited by regional offices of education and intermediate service centers. The State Board of Education shall ensure that each approved provider, except for a school district, is audited at least once every 5 years. The State Board of Education may conduct more frequent audits of providers if evidence suggests the requirements of this Section or administrative rules are not being met.
        (1) (Blank).
        (2) Approved providers shall comply with the
    	
requirements in subsections (h) and (i) of this Section by annually submitting data to the State Board of Education demonstrating how the professional development activities impacted one or more of the following:
            (A) educator and student growth in regards to
        	
content knowledge or skills, or both;
            (B) educator and student social and emotional
        	
growth; or
            (C) alignment to district or school improvement
        	
plans.
        (3) The State Superintendent of Education shall
    	
review the annual data collected by the State Board of Education, regional offices of education, and intermediate service centers in audits to determine if the approved provider has met the criteria and should continue to be an approved provider or if further action should be taken as provided in rules.
    (k) Registration fees shall be paid for the next renewal cycle between April 1 and June 30 in the last year of each 5-year renewal cycle using ELIS. If all required professional development hours for the renewal cycle have been completed and entered by the licensee, the licensee shall pay the registration fees for the next cycle using a form of credit or debit card.
    (l) Any professional educator licensee endorsed for school support personnel who is employed and performing services in Illinois public schools and who holds an active and current professional license issued by the Department of Financial and Professional Regulation or a national certification board, as approved by the State Board of Education, related to the endorsement areas on the Professional Educator License shall be deemed to have satisfied the continuing professional development requirements provided for in this Section. Such individuals shall be required to pay only registration fees to renew the Professional Educator License. An individual who does not hold a license issued by the Department of Financial and Professional Regulation shall complete professional development requirements for the renewal of a Professional Educator License provided for in this Section.
    (m) Appeals to the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board must be made within 30 days after receipt of notice from the State Superintendent of Education that a license will not be renewed based upon failure to complete the requirements of this Section. A licensee may appeal that decision to the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board in a manner prescribed by rule.
        (1) Each appeal shall state the reasons why the State
    	
Superintendent's decision should be reversed and shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the State Board of Education.
        (2) The State Educator Preparation and Licensure
    	
Board shall review each appeal regarding renewal of a license within 90 days after receiving the appeal in order to determine whether the licensee has met the requirements of this Section. The State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board may hold an appeal hearing or may make its determination based upon the record of review, which shall consist of the following:
            (A) the regional superintendent of education's
        	
rationale for recommending nonrenewal of the license, if applicable;
            (B) any evidence submitted to the State
        	
Superintendent along with the individual's electronic statement of assurance for renewal; and
            (C) the State Superintendent's rationale for
        	
nonrenewal of the license.
        (3) The State Educator Preparation and Licensure
    	
Board shall notify the licensee of its decision regarding license renewal by certified mail, return receipt requested, no later than 30 days after reaching a decision. Upon receipt of notification of renewal, the licensee, using ELIS, shall pay the applicable registration fee for the next cycle using a form of credit or debit card.
    (n) The State Board of Education may adopt rules as may be necessary to implement this Section.
(Source: P.A. 100-13, eff. 7-1-17; 100-339, eff. 8-25-17; 100-596, eff. 7-1-18; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18; 101-85, eff. 1-1-20; 101-531, eff. 8-23-19; 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21B-50)
    Sec. 21B-50. Alternative Educator Licensure Program.
    (a) There is established an alternative educator licensure program, to be known as the Alternative Educator Licensure Program for Teachers.
    (b) The Alternative Educator Licensure Program for Teachers may be offered by a recognized institution approved to offer educator preparation programs by the State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board.
    The program shall be comprised of 4 phases:
        (1) A course of study that at a minimum includes
    	
instructional planning; instructional strategies, including special education, reading, and English language learning; classroom management; and the assessment of students and use of data to drive instruction.
        (2) A year of residency, which is a candidate's
    	
assignment to a full-time teaching position or as a co-teacher for one full school year. An individual must hold an Educator License with Stipulations with an alternative provisional educator endorsement in order to enter the residency and must complete additional program requirements that address required State and national standards, pass the State Board's teacher performance assessment no later than the end of the first semester of the second year of residency, as required under phase (3) of this subsection (b), and be recommended by the principal or qualified equivalent of a principal, as required under subsection (d) of this Section, and the program coordinator to continue with the second year of the residency.
        (3) A second year of residency, which shall include
    	
the candidate's assignment to a full-time teaching position for one school year. The candidate must be assigned an experienced teacher to act as a mentor and coach the candidate through the second year of residency.
        (4) A comprehensive assessment of the candidate's
    	
teaching effectiveness, as evaluated by the principal or qualified equivalent of a principal, as required under subsection (d) of this Section, and the program coordinator, at the end of the second year of residency. If there is disagreement between the 2 evaluators about the candidate's teaching effectiveness, the candidate may complete one additional year of residency teaching under a professional development plan developed by the principal or qualified equivalent and the preparation program. At the completion of the third year, a candidate must have positive evaluations and a recommendation for full licensure from both the principal or qualified equivalent and the program coordinator or no Professional Educator License shall be issued.
    Successful completion of the program shall be deemed to satisfy any other practice or student teaching and content matter requirements established by law.
    (c) An alternative provisional educator endorsement on an Educator License with Stipulations is valid for 2 years of teaching in the public schools, including without limitation a preschool educational program under Section 2-3.71 of this Code or charter school, or in a State-recognized nonpublic school in which the chief administrator is required to have the licensure necessary to be a principal in a public school in this State and in which a majority of the teachers are required to have the licensure necessary to be instructors in a public school in this State, but may be renewed for a third year if needed to complete the Alternative Educator Licensure Program for Teachers. The endorsement shall be issued only once to an individual who meets all of the following requirements:
        (1) Has graduated from a regionally accredited
    	
college or university with a bachelor's degree or higher.
        (2) (Blank).
        (3) Has completed a major in the content area if
    	
seeking a middle or secondary level endorsement or, if seeking an early childhood, elementary, or special education endorsement, has completed a major in the content area of reading, English/language arts, mathematics, or one of the sciences. If the individual does not have a major in a content area for any level of teaching, he or she must submit transcripts to the State Board of Education to be reviewed for equivalency.
        (4) Has successfully completed phase (1) of
    	
subsection (b) of this Section.
        (5) Has passed a content area test required for the
    	
specific endorsement for admission into the program, as required under Section 21B-30 of this Code.
    A candidate possessing the alternative provisional educator endorsement may receive a salary, benefits, and any other terms of employment offered to teachers in the school who are members of an exclusive bargaining representative, if any, but a school is not required to provide these benefits during the years of residency if the candidate is serving only as a co-teacher. If the candidate is serving as the teacher of record, the candidate must receive a salary, benefits, and any other terms of employment. Residency experiences must not be counted towards tenure.
    (d) The recognized institution offering the Alternative Educator Licensure Program for Teachers must partner with a school district, including without limitation a preschool educational program under Section 2-3.71 of this Code or charter school, or a State-recognized, nonpublic school in this State in which the chief administrator is required to have the licensure necessary to be a principal in a public school in this State and in which a majority of the teachers are required to have the licensure necessary to be instructors in a public school in this State. A recognized institution that partners with a public school district administering a preschool educational program under Section 2-3.71 of this Code must require a principal to recommend or evaluate candidates in the program. A recognized institution that partners with an eligible entity administering a preschool educational program under Section 2-3.71 of this Code and that is not a public school district must require a principal or qualified equivalent of a principal to recommend or evaluate candidates in the program. The program presented for approval by the State Board of Education must demonstrate the supports that are to be provided to assist the provisional teacher during the 2-year residency period. These supports must provide additional contact hours with mentors during the first year of residency.
    (e) Upon completion of the 4 phases outlined in subsection (b) of this Section and all assessments required under Section 21B-30 of this Code, an individual shall receive a Professional Educator License.
    (f) The State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board, may adopt such rules as may be necessary to establish and implement the Alternative Educator Licensure Program for Teachers.
(Source: P.A. 100-596, eff. 7-1-18; 100-822, eff. 1-1-19; 101-220, eff. 8-7-19; 101-570, eff. 8-23-19; 101-643, eff. 6-18-20; 101-654, eff. 3-8-21.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21B-55)
    Sec. 21B-55. Alternative route to superintendent endorsement.
    (a) The State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board, may approve programs designed to provide an alternative route to superintendent endorsement on a Professional Educator License.
    (b) Entities offering an alternative route to superintendent endorsement program must have the program approved by the State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board.
    (c) All programs approved under this Section shall be comprised of the following 3 phases:
        (1) A course of study offered on an intensive basis
    	
in education management, governance, organization, and instructional and district planning.
        (2) The person's assignment to a full-time position
    	
for one school year as a superintendent.
        (3) A comprehensive assessment of the person's
    	
performance by school officials and a recommendation to the State Board of Education that the person be issued a superintendent endorsement on a Professional Educator License.
    (d) In order to serve as a superintendent under phase (2) of subsection (c) of this Section, an individual must be issued an alternative provisional superintendent endorsement on an Educator License with Stipulations, to be valid for only one year of serving as a superintendent. In order to receive the provisional alternative superintendent endorsement under this Section, an individual must meet all of the following requirements:
        (1) Have graduated from a regionally accredited
    	
college or university with a minimum of a master's degree in a management field.
        (2) Have been employed for a period of at least 5
    	
years in a management level position other than education.
        (3) Have successfully completed phase (1) of
    	
subsection (c) of this Section.
        (4) Have passed a content area test for admission
    	
into the program, as required by Section 21B-30 of this Code.
    (e) Successful completion of an alternative route to superintendent endorsement program shall be deemed to satisfy any other supervisory, administrative, or management experience requirements established by law, and, once completed, an individual shall be eligible for a superintendent endorsement on a Professional Educator License.
    (f) The State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board, may adopt such rules as may be needed to establish and implement these alternative route to superintendent endorsement programs.
(Source: P.A. 100-596, eff. 7-1-18; 101-220, eff. 8-7-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21B-60)
    Sec. 21B-60. Principal preparation programs.
    (a) It is the policy of this State that an essential element of improving student learning is supporting and employing highly effective school principals in leadership roles who improve teaching and learning and increase academic achievement and the development of all students.
    (b) No later than September 1, 2014, recognized institutions approved by the State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board, to offer principal preparation programs must do all of the following:
        (1) Meet the standards and requirements for such
    	
programs in accordance with this Section and any rules adopted by the State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board.
        (2) Prepare candidates to meet required standards for
    	
principal skills, knowledge, and responsibilities, which shall include a focus on instruction and student learning and which must be used for principal professional development, mentoring, and evaluation.
        (3) Include specific requirements for (i) the
    	
selection and assessment of candidates, (ii) training in the evaluation of staff, (iii) an internship, and (iv) a partnership with one or more school districts or State-recognized, nonpublic schools in which the chief administrator is required to have the licensure necessary to be a principal in a public school in this State and in which a majority of the teachers are required to have the licensure necessary to be instructors in a public school in this State.
    (c) Candidates successfully completing a principal preparation program established pursuant to this Section shall obtain a principal endorsement on a Professional Educator License and are eligible to work as a principal or an assistant principal or in related or similar positions, as determined by the State Superintendent of Education, in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board.
    (d) The State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board, may adopt such rules as may be necessary to implement and administer principal preparation programs under this Section.
(Source: P.A. 99-58, eff. 7-16-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21B-65)
    Sec. 21B-65. National Board for Professional Teaching Standards. Individuals holding certification issued by the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards shall be issued a National Board for Professional Teaching Standards designation on an existing Professional Educator License. The designation shall be issued automatically and added to an individual's Professional Educator License, and individuals need not submit an application.
    The National Board for Professional Teaching Standards designation must be issued only for the same validity period as the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards certification, and the designation must be removed from the Professional Educator License when the educator no longer holds the certification from the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards.
    Beginning on July 1, 2013, individuals holding an Illinois National Board for Professional Teaching Standards endorsement issued pursuant to the requirements of Section 21-2 of this Code must have a current certificate issued by the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards in order to maintain the Illinois National Board for Professional Teaching Standards endorsement.
    Any individual who, on or after July 1, 2012, has been issued a Master Certificate pursuant to Section 21-2 of this Code or a National Board for Professional Teaching Standards designation on a Professional Educator License pursuant to this Section may work as a teacher only in an area for which he or she holds the required Illinois endorsement. Any individual who, prior to June 30, 2012, has been issued an endorsement for a particular area on a Master Certificate may work as a teacher in that area even without having been issued the required Illinois endorsement.
(Source: P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21B-70)
    Sec. 21B-70. Illinois Teaching Excellence Program.
    (a) As used in this Section:
    "Diverse candidate" means a candidate who identifies with any of the ethnicities reported on the Illinois Report Card other than White.
    "National Board certified teacher candidate cohort facilitator" means a National Board certified teacher who collaborates to advance the goal of supporting all other candidate cohorts other than diverse candidate cohorts through the Illinois National Board for Professional Teaching Standards Comprehensive Support System.
    "National Board certified teacher diverse candidate cohort facilitator" means a National Board certified teacher who collaborates to advance the goal of supporting racially and ethnically diverse candidates through the Illinois National Board for Professional Teaching Standards Comprehensive Support System.
    "National Board certified teacher diverse liaison" means an individual or entity that supports the National Board certified teacher leading a diverse candidate cohort.
    "National Board certified teacher liaison" means an individual or entity that supports the National Board certified teacher leading candidate cohorts other than diverse candidate cohorts.
    "National Board certified teacher rural or remote or distant candidate cohort facilitator" means a National Board certified teacher who collaborates to advance the goal of supporting rural or remote candidates through the Illinois National Board for Professional Teaching Standards Comprehensive Support System.
    "National Board certified teacher rural or remote or distant liaison" means an individual or entity that supports the National Board certified teacher leading a rural or remote candidate cohort.
    "Qualified educator" means a teacher or school counselor currently employed in a school district who is in the process of obtaining certification through the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards or who has completed certification and holds a current Professional Educator License with a National Board for Professional Teaching Standards designation or a retired teacher or school counselor who holds a Professional Educator License with a National Board for Professional Teaching Standards designation.
    "Rural or remote" or "rural or remote or distant" means local codes 32, 33, 41, 42, and 43 of the New Urban-Centric Locale Codes, as defined by the National Center for Education Statistics.
    "Tier 1" has the meaning given to that term under Section 18-8.15.
    "Tier 2" has the meaning given to that term under Section 18-8.15.
    (b) Any funds appropriated for the Illinois Teaching Excellence Program must be used to provide monetary assistance and incentives for qualified educators who are employed by or retired from school districts and who have or are in the process of obtaining licensure through the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards. The goal of the program is to improve instruction and student performance.
    The State Board of Education shall allocate an amount as annually appropriated by the General Assembly for the Illinois Teaching Excellence Program for (i) application or re-take fees for each qualified educator seeking to complete certification through the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards, to be paid directly to the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards, and (ii) incentives under paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of subsection (c) for each qualified educator, to be distributed to the respective school district, and incentives under paragraph (5) of subsection (c), to be distributed to the respective school district or directly to the qualified educator. The school district shall distribute this payment to each eligible teacher or school counselor as a single payment.
    The State Board of Education's annual budget must set out by separate line item the appropriation for the program. Unless otherwise provided by appropriation, qualified educators are eligible for monetary assistance and incentives outlined in subsections (c) and (d) of this Section.
    (c) When there are adequate funds available, monetary assistance and incentives shall include the following:
        (1) A maximum of $2,000 towards the application or
    	
re-take fee for teachers or school counselors in a Tier 1 school district who apply on a first-come, first-serve basis for National Board certification.
        (2) A maximum of $2,000 towards the application or
    	
re-take fee for teachers or school counselors in a school district other than a Tier 1 school district who apply on a first-come, first-serve basis for National Board certification.
        (3) A maximum of $1,000 towards the National Board
    	
for Professional Teaching Standards' renewal application fee.
        (4) (Blank).
        (5) An annual incentive of no more than $1,500
    	
prorated at $50 per hour, which shall be paid to each qualified educator currently employed in a school district who holds both a National Board for Professional Teaching Standards designation and a current corresponding certificate issued by the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards and who agrees, in writing, to provide up to 30 hours of mentoring or National Board for Professional Teaching Standards professional development or both during the school year to classroom teachers or school counselors, as applicable. Funds must be disbursed on a first-come, first-serve basis, with priority given to Tier 1 school districts. Mentoring shall include, either singly or in combination, the following:
            (A) National Board for Professional Teaching
        	
Standards certification candidates.
            (B) National Board for Professional Teaching
        	
Standards re-take candidates.
            (C) National Board for Professional Teaching
        	
Standards renewal candidates.
            (D) (Blank).
    Funds may also be used for instructional leadership training for qualified educators interested in supporting implementation of the Illinois Learning Standards or teaching and learning priorities of the State Board of Education or both.
    (d) In addition to the monetary assistance and incentives provided under subsection (c), if adequate funds are available, incentives shall include the following incentives for the program in rural or remote schools or school districts or for programs working with diverse candidates, to be distributed to the respective school district or directly to the qualified educator or entity:
        (1) A one-time incentive of $3,000 payable to
    	
National Board certified teachers teaching in Tier 1 or Tier 2 rural or remote school districts or rural or remote schools in Tier 1 or Tier 2 school districts, with priority given to teachers teaching in Tier 1 rural or remote school districts or rural or remote schools in Tier 1 school districts.
        (2) An annual incentive of $3,200 for National Board
    	
certified teacher rural or remote or distant candidate cohort facilitators, diverse candidate cohort facilitators, and candidate cohort facilitators. Priority shall be given to rural or remote candidate cohort facilitators and diverse candidate cohort facilitators.
        (3) An annual incentive of $2,500 for National Board
    	
certified teacher rural or remote or distant liaisons, diverse liaisons, and liaisons. Priority shall be given to rural or remote liaisons and diverse liaisons.
(Source: P.A. 100-201, eff. 8-18-17; 101-333, eff. 1-1-20; 101-654, eff. 3-8-21.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21B-75)
    Sec. 21B-75. Suspension or revocation of license.
    (a) As used in this Section, "teacher" means any school district employee regularly required to be licensed, as provided in this Article, in order to teach or supervise in the public schools.
    (b) The State Superintendent of Education has the exclusive authority, in accordance with this Section and any rules adopted by the State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board, to initiate the suspension of up to 5 calendar years or revocation of any license issued pursuant to this Article for abuse or neglect of a child, immorality, a condition of health detrimental to the welfare of pupils, incompetency, unprofessional conduct (which includes the failure to disclose on an employment application any previous conviction for a sex offense, as defined in Section 21B-80 of this Code, or any other offense committed in any other state or against the laws of the United States that, if committed in this State, would be punishable as a sex offense, as defined in Section 21B-80 of this Code), the neglect of any professional duty, willful or negligent failure to report an instance of suspected child abuse or neglect as required by the Abused and Neglected Child Reporting Act, or other just cause. Negligent failure to report an instance of suspected child abuse or neglect occurs when a teacher personally observes an instance of suspected child abuse or neglect and reasonably believes, in his or her professional or official capacity, that the instance constitutes an act of child abuse or neglect under the Abused and Neglected Child Reporting Act, and he or she, without willful intent, fails to immediately report or cause a report to be made of the suspected abuse or neglect to the Department of Children and Family Services, as required by the Abused and Neglected Child Reporting Act. Unprofessional conduct shall include the refusal to attend or participate in institutes, teachers' meetings, or professional readings or to meet other reasonable requirements of the regional superintendent of schools or State Superintendent of Education. Unprofessional conduct also includes conduct that violates the standards, ethics, or rules applicable to the security, administration, monitoring, or scoring of or the reporting of scores from any assessment test or examination administered under Section 2-3.64a-5 of this Code or that is known or intended to produce or report manipulated or artificial, rather than actual, assessment or achievement results or gains from the administration of those tests or examinations. Unprofessional conduct shall also include neglect or unnecessary delay in the making of statistical and other reports required by school officers. Incompetency shall include, without limitation, 2 or more school terms of service for which the license holder has received an unsatisfactory rating on a performance evaluation conducted pursuant to Article 24A of this Code within a period of 7 school terms of service. In determining whether to initiate action against one or more licenses based on incompetency and the recommended sanction for such action, the State Superintendent shall consider factors that include without limitation all of the following:
        (1) Whether the unsatisfactory evaluation ratings
    	
occurred prior to June 13, 2011 (the effective date of Public Act 97-8).
        (2) Whether the unsatisfactory evaluation ratings
    	
occurred prior to or after the implementation date, as defined in Section 24A-2.5 of this Code, of an evaluation system for teachers in a school district.
        (3) Whether the evaluator or evaluators who performed
    	
an unsatisfactory evaluation met the pre-licensure and training requirements set forth in Section 24A-3 of this Code.
        (4) The time between the unsatisfactory evaluation
    	
ratings.
        (5) The quality of the remediation plans associated
    	
with the unsatisfactory evaluation ratings and whether the license holder successfully completed the remediation plans.
        (6) Whether the unsatisfactory evaluation ratings
    	
were related to the same or different assignments performed by the license holder.
        (7) Whether one or more of the unsatisfactory
    	
evaluation ratings occurred in the first year of a teaching or administrative assignment.
When initiating an action against one or more licenses, the State Superintendent may seek required professional development as a sanction in lieu of or in addition to suspension or revocation. Any such required professional development must be at the expense of the license holder, who may use, if available and applicable to the requirements established by administrative or court order, training, coursework, or other professional development funds in accordance with the terms of an applicable collective bargaining agreement entered into after June 13, 2011 (the effective date of Public Act 97-8), unless that agreement specifically precludes use of funds for such purpose.
    (c) The State Superintendent of Education shall, upon receipt of evidence of abuse or neglect of a child, immorality, a condition of health detrimental to the welfare of pupils, incompetency (subject to subsection (b) of this Section), unprofessional conduct, the neglect of any professional duty, or other just cause, further investigate and, if and as appropriate, serve written notice to the individual and afford the individual opportunity for a hearing prior to suspension, revocation, or other sanction; provided that the State Superintendent is under no obligation to initiate such an investigation if the Department of Children and Family Services is investigating the same or substantially similar allegations and its child protective service unit has not made its determination, as required under Section 7.12 of the Abused and Neglected Child Reporting Act. If the State Superintendent of Education does not receive from an individual a request for a hearing within 10 days after the individual receives notice, the suspension, revocation, or other sanction shall immediately take effect in accordance with the notice. If a hearing is requested within 10 days after notice of an opportunity for hearing, it shall act as a stay of proceedings until the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board issues a decision. Any hearing shall take place in the educational service region where the educator is or was last employed and in accordance with rules adopted by the State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board, and such rules shall include without limitation provisions for discovery and the sharing of information between parties prior to the hearing. The standard of proof for any administrative hearing held pursuant to this Section shall be by the preponderance of the evidence. The decision of the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board is a final administrative decision and is subject to judicial review by appeal of either party.
    The State Board of Education may refuse to issue or may suspend the license of any person who fails to file a return or to pay the tax, penalty, or interest shown in a filed return or to pay any final assessment of tax, penalty, or interest, as required by any tax Act administered by the Department of Revenue, until such time as the requirements of any such tax Act are satisfied.
    The exclusive authority of the State Superintendent of Education to initiate suspension or revocation of a license pursuant to this Section does not preclude a regional superintendent of schools from cooperating with the State Superintendent or a State's Attorney with respect to an investigation of alleged misconduct.
    (d) The State Superintendent of Education or his or her designee may initiate and conduct such investigations as may be reasonably necessary to establish the existence of any alleged misconduct. At any stage of the investigation, the State Superintendent may issue a subpoena requiring the attendance and testimony of a witness, including the license holder, and the production of any evidence, including files, records, correspondence, or documents, relating to any matter in question in the investigation. The subpoena shall require a witness to appear at the State Board of Education at a specified date and time and shall specify any evidence to be produced. The license holder is not entitled to be present, but the State Superintendent shall provide the license holder with a copy of any recorded testimony prior to a hearing under this Section. Such recorded testimony must not be used as evidence at a hearing, unless the license holder has adequate notice of the testimony and the opportunity to cross-examine the witness. Failure of a license holder to comply with a duly issued, investigatory subpoena may be grounds for revocation, suspension, or denial of a license.
    (e) All correspondence, documentation, and other information so received by the regional superintendent of schools, the State Superintendent of Education, the State Board of Education, or the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board under this Section is confidential and must not be disclosed to third parties, except (i) as necessary for the State Superintendent of Education or his or her designee to investigate and prosecute pursuant to this Article, (ii) pursuant to a court order, (iii) for disclosure to the license holder or his or her representative, or (iv) as otherwise required in this Article and provided that any such information admitted into evidence in a hearing is exempt from this confidentiality and non-disclosure requirement.
    (f) The State Superintendent of Education or a person designated by him or her shall have the power to administer oaths to witnesses at any hearing conducted before the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board pursuant to this Section. The State Superintendent of Education or a person designated by him or her is authorized to subpoena and bring before the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board any person in this State and to take testimony either orally or by deposition or by exhibit, with the same fees and mileage and in the same manner as prescribed by law in judicial proceedings in civil cases in circuit courts of this State.
    (g) Any circuit court, upon the application of the State Superintendent of Education or the license holder, may, by order duly entered, require the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant books and papers as part of any investigation or at any hearing the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board is authorized to conduct pursuant to this Section, and the court may compel obedience to its orders by proceedings for contempt.
    (h) The State Board of Education shall receive an annual line item appropriation to cover fees associated with the investigation and prosecution of alleged educator misconduct and hearings related thereto.
(Source: P.A. 100-872, eff. 8-14-18; 101-531, eff. 8-23-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21B-80)
    Sec. 21B-80. Conviction of certain offenses as grounds for disqualification for licensure or suspension or revocation of a license.
    (a) As used in this Section:
    "Drug offense" means any one or more of the following offenses:
        (1) Any offense defined in the Cannabis Control Act,
    	
except those defined in subdivisions (a), (b), and (c) of Section 4 and subdivisions (a) and (b) of Section 5 of the Cannabis Control Act and any offense for which the holder of a license is placed on probation under the provisions of Section 10 of the Cannabis Control Act, provided that if the terms and conditions of probation required by the court are not fulfilled, the offense is not eligible for this exception.
        (2) Any offense defined in the Illinois Controlled
    	
Substances Act, except any offense for which the holder of a license is placed on probation under the provisions of Section 410 of the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, provided that if the terms and conditions of probation required by the court are not fulfilled, the offense is not eligible for this exception.
        (3) Any offense defined in the Methamphetamine
    	
Control and Community Protection Act, except any offense for which the holder of a license is placed on probation under the provision of Section 70 of that Act, provided that if the terms and conditions of probation required by the court are not fulfilled, the offense is not eligible for this exception.
        (4) Any attempt to commit any of the offenses listed
    	
in items (1) through (3) of this definition.
        (5) Any offense committed or attempted in any other
    	
state or against the laws of the United States that, if committed or attempted in this State, would have been punishable as one or more of the offenses listed in items (1) through (4) of this definition.
The changes made by Public Act 96-431 to this definition are declaratory of existing law.
    "Sentence" includes any period of supervised release or probation that was imposed either alone or in combination with a period of incarceration.
    "Sex or other offense" means any one or more of the following offenses:
        (A) Any offense defined in Sections 11-6, 11-9
    	
through 11-9.5, inclusive, and 11-30 (if punished as a Class 4 felony) of the Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012; Sections 11-14.1 through 11-21, inclusive, of the Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012; Sections 11-23 (if punished as a Class 3 felony), 11-24, 11-25, and 11-26 of the Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012; Section 10-5.1, subsection (c) of Section 10-9, and Sections 11-6.6, 11-11, 12-3.05, 12-3.3, 12-6.4, 12-7.1, 12-34, 12-34.5, and 12-35 of the Criminal Code of 2012; and Sections 11-1.20, 11-1.30, 11-1.40, 11-1.50, 11-1.60, 12-13, 12-14, 12-14.1, 12-15, 12-16, 12-32, 12-33, 12C-45, and 26-4 (if punished pursuant to subdivision (4) or (5) of subsection (d) of Section 26-4) of the Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012.
        (B) Any attempt to commit any of the offenses listed
    	
in item (A) of this definition.
        (C) Any offense committed or attempted in any other
    	
state that, if committed or attempted in this State, would have been punishable as one or more of the offenses listed in items (A) and (B) of this definition.
    (b) Whenever the holder of any license issued pursuant to this Article or applicant for a license to be issued pursuant to this Article has been convicted of any drug offense, other than as provided in subsection (c) of this Section, the State Superintendent of Education shall forthwith suspend the license or deny the application, whichever is applicable, until 7 years following the end of the sentence for the criminal offense. If the conviction is reversed and the holder is acquitted of the offense in a new trial or the charges against him or her are dismissed, the State Superintendent of Education shall forthwith terminate the suspension of the license.
    (b-5) Whenever the holder of a license issued pursuant to this Article or applicant for a license to be issued pursuant to this Article has been charged with attempting to commit, conspiring to commit, soliciting, or committing any sex or other offense, as enumerated under item (A) of subsection (a), first degree murder, or a Class X felony or any offense committed or attempted in any other state or against the laws of the United States that, if committed or attempted in this State, would have been punishable as one or more of the foregoing offenses, the State Superintendent of Education shall immediately suspend the license or deny the application until the person's criminal charges are adjudicated through a court of competent jurisdiction. If the person is acquitted, his or her license or application shall be immediately reinstated.
    (c) Whenever the holder of a license issued pursuant to this Article or applicant for a license to be issued pursuant to this Article has been convicted of attempting to commit, conspiring to commit, soliciting, or committing any sex or other offense, as enumerated under item (A) of subsection (a), first degree murder, or a Class X felony or any offense committed or attempted in any other state or against the laws of the United States that, if committed or attempted in this State, would have been punishable as one or more of the foregoing offenses, the State Superintendent of Education shall forthwith suspend the license or deny the application, whichever is applicable. If the conviction is reversed and the holder is acquitted of that offense in a new trial or the charges that he or she committed that offense are dismissed, the State Superintendent of Education shall forthwith terminate the suspension of the license. When the conviction becomes final, the State Superintendent of Education shall forthwith revoke the license.
(Source: P.A. 101-531, eff. 8-23-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21B-85)
    Sec. 21B-85. Conviction of felony.
    (a) Whenever the holder of any license issued under this Article is employed by the school board of a school district, including a special charter district or a school district organized under Article 34 of this Code, and is convicted, either after a bench trial, trial by jury, or plea of guilty, of any offense for which a sentence to death or a term of imprisonment in a penitentiary for one year or more is provided, the school board shall promptly notify the State Superintendent of Education, in writing, of the name of the license holder, the fact of the conviction, and the name and location of the court in which the conviction occurred.
    (b) Whenever the State Superintendent of Education receives notice of a conviction under subsection (a) of this Section or otherwise learns that any person who is a teacher, as that term is defined in Section 16-106 of the Illinois Pension Code, has been convicted, either after a bench trial, trial by jury, or plea of guilty, of any offense for which a sentence to death or a term of imprisonment in a penitentiary for one year or more is provided, the State Superintendent of Education shall promptly notify, in writing, the board of trustees of the Teachers' Retirement System of the State of Illinois and the board of trustees of the Public School Teachers' Pension and Retirement Fund of the City of Chicago of the name of the license holder, the fact of the conviction, the name and location of the court in which the conviction occurred, and the number assigned in that court to the case in which the conviction occurred.
(Source: P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21B-90)
    Sec. 21B-90. Administrative Review Law. In this Section, "administrative decision" has the meaning ascribed to that term in Section 3-101 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
    The provisions of the Administrative Review Law and the rules adopted pursuant to the Administrative Review Law shall apply to and govern all proceedings instituted for the judicial review of final administrative decisions of the State Board of Education, the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board, and the regional superintendent of schools under this Article. The commencement of any action for review shall operate as a stay of enforcement, and no action based on any decision of the State Board of Education, the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board, or the regional superintendent of schools shall be taken pending final disposition of the review.
(Source: P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21B-95)
    Sec. 21B-95. Denial of recommendation for licensure. Each college or university providing an educator preparation program approved and recognized pursuant to the provisions of this Article shall establish procedures and standards to ensure that no student is denied the opportunity to receive an institutional recommendation for licensure or entitlement for reasons that are not directly related to the candidate's anticipated performance as a licensed educator. These standards and procedures shall include the specific criteria used by the institution for admission, retention, and recommendation or entitlement for licensure; periodic evaluations of the candidate's progress towards an institutional recommendation; counseling and other supportive services to correct any deficiencies that are considered remedial; and provisions to ensure that no person is discriminated against on the basis of race, color, national origin, or a disability unrelated to the person's ability to perform as a licensed educator. Each institution shall also establish a grievance procedure for those candidates who are denied the institutional recommendation or entitlement for licensure. Within 10 days after notification of such a denial, the college or university shall notify the candidate, in writing, of the reasons for the denial of recommendation for licensure. Within 30 days after notification of the denial, the candidate may request the college or university to review the denial.
(Source: P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21B-100)
    Sec. 21B-100. Licensure officers at higher education institutions. Licensure officers at higher education institutions shall adhere to this Code and any administrative rules adopted to implement this Code when entitling candidates for licensure or when adding endorsements. Violations of this Code or implementing rules regarding the entitlement of candidates by a licensure officer shall place the employing institution's educator preparation program in jeopardy, specifically regarding the institution's right to offer programs and recommend or entitle candidates for licensure.
    Licensure officers are required to attend training conducted by the State Superintendent of Education and review new legislation and administrative rules as such become available. The State Superintendent of Education shall communicate any policy changes to licensure officers when such changes occur.
(Source: P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21B-105)
    Sec. 21B-105. Granting of recognition; regional accreditation; definitions.
    (a) "Recognized", as used in this Article in connection with the word "school" or "institution", means such college, university, or for-profit or not-for-profit entity that meets requirements set by the State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board. Application for recognition of the school or institution as an educator preparation institution must be made to the State Board of Education. The State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board, shall set the criteria by which the school or institution is to be judged and, through the secretary of the State Board, arrange for an official inspection and shall grant recognition of such school or institution as may meet the required standards. If the standards include requirements with regard to education in acquiring skills in working with culturally distinctive students, as defined by the State Board of Education, then the rules of the State Board of Education shall include the criteria used to evaluate compliance with this requirement. No school or institution may make assignments of student teachers or teachers for practice teaching so as to promote segregation on the basis of race, creed, color, religion, sex, or national origin.
    Any for-profit or not-for-profit entity must also be approved by the Board of Higher Education.
    All recommendations or entitlements for educator licensure shall be made by a recognized institution operating a program of preparation for the license that is approved by the State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board. The State Board of Education, in consultation with the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board, shall have the power to define a major or minor when used as a basis for recognition and licensure purposes.
    (b) "Regionally accredited", or "accredited", as used in this Article in connection with a university or institution, means an institution of higher education accredited by the North Central Association or other comparable regional accrediting association.
(Source: P.A. 100-596, eff. 7-1-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21B-110)
    Sec. 21B-110. Public health emergency declaration.
    (a) This Section applies only during any time in which the Governor has declared a public health emergency under Section 7 of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act.
    (b) Notwithstanding any other requirements under this Article, the requirements under subsection (f) of Section 21B-30 are waived for an applicant seeking an educator license.
    (c) Notwithstanding any other requirements under this Article, during the implementation of remote learning days under Section 10-30, a candidate seeking an educator license may:
        (1) complete his or her required student teaching or
    	
equivalent experience remotely; or
        (2) complete his or her required school business
    	
management internship remotely.
(Source: P.A. 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21B-115)
    Sec. 21B-115. Spring 2020 student teaching or internship. Notwithstanding any other requirements under this Article, for the spring 2020 semester only, a candidate's requirement to complete student teaching or its equivalent or a school business management internship is waived.
(Source: P.A. 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/21B-200)
    Sec. 21B-200. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 98-860, eff. 1-1-15. Repealed by P.A. 100-1046, eff. 8-23-18.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 22 heading)
ARTICLE 22. GENERAL PROVISIONS--PENALTIES--LIABILITIES

    (105 ILCS 5/22-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 22-1)
    Sec. 22-1. Trustees and similar officers-No pecuniary compensation.
    Trustees of schools, school directors or other school officers performing like duties shall receive no pecuniary compensation.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 22-2)
    Sec. 22-2. Cost of official bonds.
    Every school district shall be subject to the provisions of "An Act relating to the payment of the cost of corporate suretyship and indemnity upon official bonds", approved June 7, 1897, as amended.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-3) (from Ch. 122, par. 22-3)
    Sec. 22-3. Enforcement of judgments - Service of process - Costs. If judgment is obtained against any county board of school trustees, trustees of schools or school board, the party entitled to the benefit of the judgment may have enforcement thereof as follows: the court in which the judgment is entered or to which it may be removed by transcript from the circuit court shall enter an order commanding the directors, trustees and school treasurer to cause the amount thereof with interest and costs to be paid to the party entitled to the benefit of the judgment, out of any moneys of the township or district unappropriated, or if there are no such moneys, out of the first moneys applicable to the payment of the kind of services or indebtedness for which the judgment is entered which shall be received for the use of the township or district. The court may enforce obedience to such order by body attachment or by mandamus, requiring such board to levy a tax for the payment of the judgment. All judicial processes to enforce payment, shall be served either on the president or the clerk of the board.
    No official shall charge any costs in any action in which any school officer, school corporation or any agent of any school fund, suing for the recovery thereof, or any interest due thereon, is plaintiff, and is unsuccessful in the action; nor in case the costs cannot be recovered from the defendant by reason of his or her insolvency.
(Source: P.A. 83-346.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-4)
    Sec. 22-4. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-5) (from Ch. 122, par. 22-5)
    Sec. 22-5. Interest of officers or teachers in books, apparatus or furniture. No State, county, township, or district school officer or teacher shall be interested in the sale, proceeds or profits of any book, apparatus or furniture used or to be used in any school with which such officer or teacher may be connected, except when the interest of the teacher is based upon authorship or development of instructional materials listed with the State Board of Education in compliance with the provisions of Article 28 of this Act and adopted for use by a school board subject to Section 10-20.8 of this Act. Each teacher having an interest in instructional materials shall file an annual statement so certifying with the secretary of the board of the school district which employs him. Any such officer or teacher who violates the provisions of this Section shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
(Source: P.A. 81-1508.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-6) (from Ch. 122, par. 22-6)
    Sec. 22-6. Conversion of funds by officers. If any county superintendent, trustee of schools, township treasurer, director or other person entrusted with the care, control, management or disposition of any school, college, seminary or township fund for the use of any county, township, district or school converts such funds, or any part thereof, to his own use he shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
(Source: P.A. 77-2267.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-6.5)
    Sec. 22-6.5. False statement or material omission; Class A misdemeanor. Any person who applies for employment as a teacher, principal, superintendent, or other certificated employee of a school board of any school district, including a special charter district and a district organized under Article 34 of the School Code, who willfully makes a false statement on his or her application for employment, material to his or her qualifications for employment, which he or she does not believe to be true, shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
    If a person's employment history or current or prior employers are required to be furnished on an application for employment, a person who makes a statement which he or she does not believe to be true or who knowingly omits or fails to include any employment history or employer required to be furnished on the application which is material to his or her qualifications for employment shall be deemed to have made a false statement on his or her application within the meaning of this Section.
    Each application for employment for a certificated position used by a school district shall state that failure to provide requested employment or employer history which is material to the applicant's qualifications for employment or the provision of statements which the applicant does not believe to be true may be a Class A misdemeanor.
(Source: P.A. 88-102.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-7) (from Ch. 122, par. 22-7)
    Sec. 22-7. Liability for loss of funds. County superintendents, trustees of schools, township treasurers and directors, or either of them, or any other officer having charge of school funds or property, shall be pecuniarily responsible for all losses sustained by any county or township fund by reason of any failure on his or their part to perform the duties required of him or them by this Act or by any rule authorized to be made by this Act, and each of such officers shall be liable for any such loss sustained, the amount of which may be recovered in a civil action brought in the circuit court, at the suit of the State of Illinois, for the use of the county, township or fund injured. The amount of the judgment obtained in such suit shall, when collected, be paid to the proper officer for the benefit of the county, township or fund injured.
(Source: P.A. 79-1366.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-8) (from Ch. 122, par. 22-8)
    Sec. 22-8. Failure of officers to discharge duties.
    If any county superintendent, trustee, director, or other officer negligently or wilfully fails or refuses to make, furnish or communicate statistics and information, or fails to discharge any other duties enjoined upon him, at the time and in the manner required by this Act, he shall be guilty of a petty offense and shall be liable to a fine of not less than $25, to be recovered before any circuit court at the suit of any person on complaint in the name of the People of the State of Illinois, and when collected the fine shall be paid to the county superintendent of schools.
(Source: P.A. 77-2267.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-9)
    Sec. 22-9. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 77-2267. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-10) (from Ch. 122, par. 22-10)
    Sec. 22-10. Payments and grants in aid of church or sectarian purpose.
    No county, city, town, township, school district or other public corporation shall make any appropriation, or pay from any school fund anything in aid of any church or sectarian purpose or to support or sustain any school, academy, seminary, college, university or other literary or scientific institution controlled by any church or sectarian denomination; nor shall any grant or donation of money or other personal property be made by any such corporation to any church or for any sectarian purpose. Any officer or other person having under his charge or direction school funds or property who perverts the same in the manner forbidden in this section shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
(Source: P.A. 77-2267.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-11) (from Ch. 122, par. 22-11)
    Sec. 22-11. Exclusion of children on account of color.
    Any school officer or other person who excludes or aids in excluding from the public schools, on account of color, any child who is entitled to the benefits of such school shall be guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $100.
(Source: P.A. 77-2267.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-12) (from Ch. 122, par. 22-12)
    Sec. 22-12. Preventing or interfering with a child's attendance at school. Whoever by threat, menace, or intimidation prevents any child entitled to attend a public or nonpublic school in this State from attending such school or interferes with any such child's attendance at that school shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
(Source: P.A. 92-96, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-13) (from Ch. 122, par. 22-13)
    Sec. 22-13. Use of Illinois mined coal.
    School boards shall comply with the provisions of "An Act concerning the use of Illinois mined coal in certain plants and institutions", filed July 13, 1937, as amended.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-14) (from Ch. 122, par. 22-14)
    Sec. 22-14. Scholastic records of discontinued districts.
    If any school district is discontinued under this Act and is not made a distinct part of another school district that makes arrangements to safely keep all scholastic records of the former pupils of the discontinued district, the last governing authorities of the discontinued district shall turn over all scholastic records of its former pupils to the county superintendent of schools of the county in which the school building of the district is located; and such county superintendent of schools shall take possession of and arrange for the safekeeping of such records for the purpose of reference by said former pupils.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-15) (from Ch. 122, par. 22-15)
    Sec. 22-15. Insurance on athletes.
    (a) In this Section, "IHSA" means the Illinois High School Association.
    (b) A public school district maintaining grades 9 through 12 shall provide catastrophic accident insurance coverage, with aggregate benefit limits of $3 million or 5 years, whichever occurs first, for eligible students in grades 9 through 12 who sustain an accidental injury while participating in school-sponsored or school-supervised interscholastic athletic events sanctioned by the IHSA (including direct and uninterrupted travel to and from the athletic event as well as during a temporary stay at the location of an athletic event held away from the student's school) that results in medical expenses in excess of $50,000. These benefit limits are to be in excess of any and all other insurance, coverage or benefit, in whatever form or designation. Any public school that requires students participating in school-sponsored or school-supervised interscholastic athletic events sanctioned by the IHSA (including direct and uninterrupted travel to and from the athletic event as well as during a temporary stay at the location of an athletic event held away from the student's school) to be covered under an individual or group policy of accident and health insurance is exempt from the requirements of this Section.
    Non-public schools maintaining grades 9 through 12 shall provide catastrophic accident insurance coverage, with aggregate benefit limits of $3 million or 5 years, whichever occurs first, for eligible students in grades 9 through 12 who sustain an accidental injury while participating in school-sponsored or school-supervised interscholastic athletic tournaments sanctioned by the IHSA (including direct and uninterrupted travel to and from the athletic tournament as well as during a temporary stay at the location of an athletic tournament held away from the student's school) that results in medical expenses in excess of $50,000. These benefit limits are to be in excess of any and all other insurance, coverage or benefit, in whatever form or designation. Any non-public school that requires students participating in school-sponsored or school-supervised interscholastic athletic events sanctioned by the IHSA (including direct and uninterrupted travel to and from the athletic event as well as during a temporary stay at the location of an athletic event held away from the student's school) to be covered under an individual or group policy of accident and health insurance is exempt from the requirements of this Section.
    (c) The IHSA has the exclusive authority to promulgate a plan of coverage necessary to ensure compliance with this Section. The IHSA shall provide a group policy providing the coverage necessary to comply with this Section. Public school districts and non-public schools may purchase the coverage necessary to comply with this Section by participating in the group policy.
    Alternatively, public school districts or non-public schools that do not participate in the group policy may obtain the coverage necessary to comply with this Section from other coverage providers, but must submit to the IHSA, 60 days before the coverage inception, a certificate of insurance from the coverage provider stating that the insurance provided by the coverage provider is in compliance with the plan of coverage approved by the IHSA. A public school district that manages schools located within a city of over 500,000 inhabitants may provide the catastrophic accident insurance coverage required by this Section through a program of self-insurance, and the public school district must submit to the IHSA, 60 days before coverage inception, proof that the program is in compliance with the plan of coverage.
    (d) A public school district maintaining grades kindergarten through 8 may provide medical or hospital service, or both, through accident and health insurance on a group or individual basis, or through non-profit hospital service corporations or medical service plan corporations or both, for pupils of the district in grades kindergarten through 8 injured while participating in any athletic activity under the jurisdiction of or sponsored or controlled by the district or the authorities of any school thereof. The cost of such insurance or of subscriptions to such non-profit corporations, when paid from the funds of the district, shall, to the extent such moneys are sufficient, be paid from moneys derived from athletic activities. To the extent that moneys derived from athletic activities are insufficient, such cost may be paid from the educational fund of the district. Such insurance may be purchased from or such subscriptions may be taken in only such companies or corporations as are authorized to do business in Illinois.
(Source: P.A. 98-166, eff. 8-5-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-16) (from Ch. 122, par. 22-16)
    Sec. 22-16. Acquisition of land outside school district. Whenever, in the opinion of the corporate authority of any school district, a lot or parcel of land situated not more than 2 miles outside of said school district or in the case of a building project under authority of Section 10-22.31b of this Act, within the boundaries of the joint agreement area or within 2 miles of the boundaries of any school district which is a party to the joint agreement, may be required for such school purposes, title to such lot or parcel of land may be acquired by such school district by purchase or in the manner provided by law for the exercise of the right of eminent domain.
(Source: P.A. 80-270.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-17) (from Ch. 122, par. 22-17)
    Sec. 22-17. Leasing property from building commission.
    In addition to other powers and authority now possessed by it, the corporate authority of any school district, including any special charter district, shall have power:
    (1) To lease from any public building commission created pursuant to the provisions of the Public Building Commission Act, approved July 5, 1955, and as amended from time to time, any real or personal property for the purpose of securing office or other space for its administrative or educational functions for a period of time not exceeding 40 years;
    (2) To pay for the use of this leased property in accordance with the terms of the lease; and
    (3) To enter into such lease without making a previous appropriation or provision in the budget for the expense thereby incurred.
(Source: P.A. 77-1351.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-18) (from Ch. 122, par. 22-18)
    Sec. 22-18. Apportionment of assets in district without property.
    Whenever there is no property within a school district subject to taxation for ordinary operating purposes, the county clerk shall so notify the trustees of the township or townships or county board of school trustees wherein the school district is located who shall apportion the assets of such district among the remaining school districts of such township or townships in proportion to the last preceding apportionment from the common school fund to such townships and shall notify the school treasurer to note such apportionment in the proper account of each district.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-19) (from Ch. 122, par. 22-19)
    Sec. 22-19. Upon the filing of a complaint with the State Board of Education, executed in duplicate and subscribed with the names and addresses of at least 50 residents of a school district or 10% of the residents, whichever is less, alleging that any pupil has been excluded from or segregated in any school on account of his or her color, race, nationality, sex, religion or religious affiliation, or that any employee of or applicant for employment or assignment with any such school district has been questioned concerning his or her color, race, nationality, sex, religion or religious affiliation or subjected to discrimination by reason thereof, by or on behalf of the school board of such district, the State Board of Education shall promptly mail a copy of such complaint to the secretary or clerk of such school board.
    The State Board of Education shall fix a date, not less than 20 nor more than 30 days from the date of the filing of such complaint, for a hearing upon the allegations therein. The State Board of Education may also fix a date for a hearing whenever it has reason to believe that such discrimination may exist in any school district. Reasonable notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be mailed to the secretary or clerk of the school board and to the first signatory to such complaint.
    The State Board of Education may designate an assistant to conduct such hearing and receive testimony concerning the situation complained of. The complainants may be represented at such hearing by one of their number or by counsel. Each party shall have the privilege of cross examining witnesses. The State Board of Education or the hearing officer appointed by it shall have the power to subpoena witnesses, compel their attendance, and require the production of evidence relating to any relevant matter under this Act. Any circuit court of this State, upon the application of the State Board of Education or the hearing officer appointed by it, may, in its or his or her discretion, compel the attendance of witnesses, the production of books, papers, records or memoranda and the giving of testimony before the State Board of Education or the hearing officer appointed by it conducting an investigation or holding a hearing authorized by this Act, by an attachment for contempt, or otherwise, in the same manner as production of evidence may be compelled before the court. The State Board of Education or the hearing officer appointed by it may cause the depositions of witnesses within the State to be taken in the manner prescribed by law for like depositions in civil actions in courts of this State, and to that end compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers, records or memoranda. All testimony shall be taken under oath administered by the hearing officer, but the formal rules pertaining to evidence in judicial proceedings shall not apply. The State Board of Education shall provide a competent reporter to record all testimony. Either party desiring a transcript of the hearing shall pay for the cost of such transcript. A continuance may be granted provided both parties agree. The hearing officer shall report a summary of the testimony within 60 days after the hearing commences, unless a continuance is granted, to the State Board of Education who shall determine whether the allegations of the complaint are substantially correct. If a continuance is granted, the summary of testimony shall be reported to the State Board of Education within 60 days after the hearing recommences. The State Board of Education shall notify both parties of its decision within 30 days after it receives a summary of the testimony from the hearing officer. If the State Board of Education determines that a violation exists, it shall request the Attorney General to apply to the appropriate circuit court for such injunctive or other relief as may be necessary to rectify the practice complained of.
    The provisions of the Administrative Review Law, and all amendments and modifications thereof and the rules adopted pursuant thereto shall apply to and govern all proceedings for the judicial review of any final decision rendered by the State Board of Education pursuant to this Section.
(Source: P.A. 84-126.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-20) (from Ch. 122, par. 22-20)
    Sec. 22-20. All courts and law enforcement agencies of the State of Illinois and its political subdivisions shall report to the principal of any public school in this State whenever a child enrolled therein is detained for proceedings under the Juvenile Court Act of 1987, as heretofore and hereafter amended, or for any criminal offense, including illegal gang activity, or any violation of a municipal or county ordinance. The report shall include the basis for detaining the child, circumstances surrounding the events which led to the child's detention, and status of proceedings. The report shall be updated as appropriate to notify the principal of developments and the disposition of the matter.
    The information derived thereby shall be kept separate from and shall not become a part of the official school record of such child and shall not be a public record. Such information shall be used solely by the appropriate school official or officials whom the school has determined to have a legitimate educational or safety interest to aid in the proper rehabilitation of the child and to protect the safety of students and employees in the school.
(Source: P.A. 97-1104, eff. 1-1-13; 98-59, eff. 1-1-14.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-21) (from Ch. 122, par. 22-21)
    Sec. 22-21. Elections-Use of school buildings.
    (a) Every school board shall offer to the appropriate officer or board having responsibility for providing polling places for elections the use of any and all buildings under its jurisdiction for any and all elections to be held, if so requested by such appropriate officer or board.
    (b) Election officers shall place 2 or more cones, small United States national flags, or some other marker a distance of 100 horizontal feet from each entrance to the room used by voters to engage in voting, which shall be known as the polling room. If the polling room is located within a building that is a public or private school and the distance of 100 horizontal feet ends within the interior of the building, then the markers shall be placed outside of the building at each entrance used by voters to enter that building on the grounds adjacent to the thoroughfare or walkway. If the polling room is located within a public or private school building with 2 or more floors and the polling room is located on the ground floor, then the markers shall be placed 100 horizontal feet from each entrance to the polling room used by voters to engage in voting. If the polling room is located in a public or private school building with 2 or more floors and the polling room is located on a floor above or below the ground floor, then the markers shall be placed a distance of 100 feet from the nearest elevator or staircase used by voters on the ground floor to access the floor where the polling room is located. The area within where the markers are placed shall be known as a campaign free zone, and electioneering is prohibited pursuant to this subsection.
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the area on polling place property beyond the campaign free zone, whether publicly or privately owned, is a public forum for the time that the polls are open on an election day. At the request of election officers any publicly owned building must be made available for use as a polling place. A person shall have the right to congregate and engage in electioneering on any polling place property while the polls are open beyond the campaign free zone, including but not limited to, the placement of temporary signs. This subsection shall be construed liberally in favor of persons engaging in electioneering on all polling place property beyond the campaign free zone for the time that the polls are open on an election day.
(Source: P.A. 93-574, eff. 8-21-03.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-22) (from Ch. 122, par. 22-22)
    Sec. 22-22. Secondary Education. The term "secondary education" means the curriculum offered by a school district or an attendance center or centers serving grades 9 through 12 or grades 10 through 12.
(Source: P.A. 84-814.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-23) (from Ch. 122, par. 22-23)
    Sec. 22-23. Sprinkler systems.
    (a) The provisions of this Section apply to the school board, board of education, board of school directors, board of school inspectors or other governing body of each school district in this State, including special charter districts and districts organized under Article 34.
    (b) As used in this Section, the term "school construction" means (1) the construction of a new school building, or addition to an existing building, within any period of 30 months, having 7,200 or more square feet, and (2) any alteration, as defined in 71 Illinois Administrative Code, Section 400.210, within any period of 30 months, affecting one or more areas of a school building which cumulatively are equal to 50% or more of the square footage of the school building.
    (c) New areas or uses of buildings not required to be sprinklered under this Section shall be protected with the installation of an automatic fire detection system.
    (d) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Act, no school construction shall be commenced in any school district on or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1991 unless sprinkler systems are required by, and are installed in accordance with approved plans and specifications in the school building, addition or project areas which constitute school construction as defined in subsection (b). Plans and specifications shall comply with rules and regulations established by the State Board of Education, and such rules and regulations shall be consistent so far as practicable with nationally recognized standards such as those established by the National Fire Protection Association.
(Source: P.A. 90-566, eff. 1-2-98.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-24) (from Ch. 122, par. 22-24)
    Sec. 22-24. IHSA Liaison. To facilitate communication and coordination between the General Assembly and the Illinois High School Association on matters relative to the continuing development of interscholastic athletic and activity participation among secondary school students in Illinois, the Governor shall appoint, from the membership of the General Assembly, liaison representatives to meet with the Board of Directors of the Illinois High School Association at regular meetings of that Board. The Governor shall appoint one member from each chamber of the General Assembly to serve as a liaison representative and one member from each chamber to serve as the liaison representative's alternate. The 2 liaison representatives shall not be members of the same political party, nor shall a liaison representative's alternate be a member of the same political party as the liaison representative for whom he or she is an alternate. The terms of the liaison representatives and alternate liaison representatives appointed by the Governor shall be 2 years, commencing on the second Wednesday of January in odd numbered years, except that the terms of the liaison representatives and alternate liaison representatives initially appointed by the Governor under this Section shall commence on the date of their appointment and expire on the second Wednesday of January, 1993. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the Governor for the unexpired term, and the person appointed to fill a vacancy shall be a member of the same chamber of the General Assembly and the same political party as his or her predecessor in office. The liaison representatives, or their alternates who meet with the Board of Directors of the Illinois High School Association at any meetings of that Board which the liaison representatives are unable to attend, shall communicate to the members of the General Assembly information of importance to the cooperative relationship between the Illinois High School Association and the General Assembly. It shall be the responsibility of the Illinois High School Association to timely supply to both liaison representatives and both alternates all agenda materials and information that are customarily supplied by that Association to the members of its Board of Directors for use in connection with the meetings of that Board.
(Source: P.A. 87-239; 87-895.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-25)
    Sec. 22-25. High School Quality Guarantees. The school board of any district that maintains grades 9-12, including special charter districts and any district organized under Article 34, may enter into agreements that guarantee the academic skills and performance of graduates of their high schools in the workforce or in higher education. Any quality guarantee agreements established shall be subject to such qualifications and restrictions as the school board may determine.
(Source: P.A. 89-610, eff. 8-6-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-26)
    Sec. 22-26. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 91-491, eff. 8-13-99. Repealed internally, eff. 1-2-00; repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-27)
    Sec. 22-27. World War II, Korean Conflict, and Vietnam Conflict veterans; service member killed in action; diplomas.
    (a) Upon request, the school board of any district that maintains grades 10 through 12 may award a diploma to any honorably discharged veteran who:
        (1) served in the armed forces of the United States
    	
during World War II, the Korean Conflict, or the Vietnam Conflict;
        (2) resided within an area currently within the
    	
district;
        (3) left high school before graduating in order to
    	
serve in the armed forces of the United States; and
        (4) has not received a high school diploma.
    (a-5) Upon request, the school board of a school district that maintains grades 10 through 12 may posthumously award a diploma to any service member who was killed in action while performing active military duty with the armed forces of the United States if all of the following criteria have been met:
        (1) He or she resided in an area currently within the
    	
district.
        (2) He or she left high school before graduating to
    	
serve in the armed forces of the United States.
        (3) He or she did not receive a high school diploma.
    (b) The State Board of Education and the Department of Veterans' Affairs may issue rules consistent with the provisions of this Section that are necessary to implement this Section.
(Source: P.A. 101-131, eff. 7-26-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-30)
    Sec. 22-30. Self-administration and self-carry of asthma medication and epinephrine injectors; administration of undesignated epinephrine injectors; administration of an opioid antagonist; administration of undesignated asthma medication; asthma episode emergency response protocol.
    (a) For the purpose of this Section only, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below:
    "Asthma action plan" means a written plan developed with a pupil's medical provider to help control the pupil's asthma. The goal of an asthma action plan is to reduce or prevent flare-ups and emergency department visits through day-to-day management and to serve as a student-specific document to be referenced in the event of an asthma episode.
    "Asthma episode emergency response protocol" means a procedure to provide assistance to a pupil experiencing symptoms of wheezing, coughing, shortness of breath, chest tightness, or breathing difficulty.
    "Epinephrine injector" includes an auto-injector approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for the administration of epinephrine and a pre-filled syringe approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration and used for the administration of epinephrine that contains a pre-measured dose of epinephrine that is equivalent to the dosages used in an auto-injector.
    "Asthma medication" means quick-relief asthma medication, including albuterol or other short-acting bronchodilators, that is approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of respiratory distress. "Asthma medication" includes medication delivered through a device, including a metered dose inhaler with a reusable or disposable spacer or a nebulizer with a mouthpiece or mask.
    "Opioid antagonist" means a drug that binds to opioid receptors and blocks or inhibits the effect of opioids acting on those receptors, including, but not limited to, naloxone hydrochloride or any other similarly acting drug approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
    "Respiratory distress" means the perceived or actual presence of wheezing, coughing, shortness of breath, chest tightness, breathing difficulty, or any other symptoms consistent with asthma. Respiratory distress may be categorized as "mild-to-moderate" or "severe".
    "School nurse" means a registered nurse working in a school with or without licensure endorsed in school nursing.
    "Self-administration" means a pupil's discretionary use of his or her prescribed asthma medication or epinephrine injector.
    "Self-carry" means a pupil's ability to carry his or her prescribed asthma medication or epinephrine injector.
    "Standing protocol" may be issued by (i) a physician licensed to practice medicine in all its branches, (ii) a licensed physician assistant with prescriptive authority, or (iii) a licensed advanced practice registered nurse with prescriptive authority.
    "Trained personnel" means any school employee or volunteer personnel authorized in Sections 10-22.34, 10-22.34a, and 10-22.34b of this Code who has completed training under subsection (g) of this Section to recognize and respond to anaphylaxis, an opioid overdose, or respiratory distress.
    "Undesignated asthma medication" means asthma medication prescribed in the name of a school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school.
    "Undesignated epinephrine injector" means an epinephrine injector prescribed in the name of a school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school.
    (b) A school, whether public, charter, or nonpublic, must permit the self-administration and self-carry of asthma medication by a pupil with asthma or the self-administration and self-carry of an epinephrine injector by a pupil, provided that:
        (1) the parents or guardians of the pupil provide to
    	
the school (i) written authorization from the parents or guardians for (A) the self-administration and self-carry of asthma medication or (B) the self-carry of asthma medication or (ii) for (A) the self-administration and self-carry of an epinephrine injector or (B) the self-carry of an epinephrine injector, written authorization from the pupil's physician, physician assistant, or advanced practice registered nurse; and
        (2) the parents or guardians of the pupil provide to
    	
the school (i) the prescription label, which must contain the name of the asthma medication, the prescribed dosage, and the time at which or circumstances under which the asthma medication is to be administered, or (ii) for the self-administration or self-carry of an epinephrine injector, a written statement from the pupil's physician, physician assistant, or advanced practice registered nurse containing the following information:
            (A) the name and purpose of the epinephrine
        	
injector;
            (B) the prescribed dosage; and
            (C) the time or times at which or the special
        	
circumstances under which the epinephrine injector is to be administered.
The information provided shall be kept on file in the office of the school nurse or, in the absence of a school nurse, the school's administrator.
    (b-5) A school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school may authorize the provision of a student-specific or undesignated epinephrine injector to a student or any personnel authorized under a student's Individual Health Care Action Plan, Illinois Food Allergy Emergency Action Plan and Treatment Authorization Form, or plan pursuant to Section 504 of the federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973 to administer an epinephrine injector to the student, that meets the student's prescription on file.
    (b-10) The school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school may authorize a school nurse or trained personnel to do the following: (i) provide an undesignated epinephrine injector to a student for self-administration only or any personnel authorized under a student's Individual Health Care Action Plan, Illinois Food Allergy Emergency Action Plan and Treatment Authorization Form, plan pursuant to Section 504 of the federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973, or individualized education program plan to administer to the student that meets the student's prescription on file; (ii) administer an undesignated epinephrine injector that meets the prescription on file to any student who has an Individual Health Care Action Plan, Illinois Food Allergy Emergency Action Plan and Treatment Authorization Form, plan pursuant to Section 504 of the federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973, or individualized education program plan that authorizes the use of an epinephrine injector; (iii) administer an undesignated epinephrine injector to any person that the school nurse or trained personnel in good faith believes is having an anaphylactic reaction; (iv) administer an opioid antagonist to any person that the school nurse or trained personnel in good faith believes is having an opioid overdose; (v) provide undesignated asthma medication to a student for self-administration only or to any personnel authorized under a student's Individual Health Care Action Plan or asthma action plan, plan pursuant to Section 504 of the federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973, or individualized education program plan to administer to the student that meets the student's prescription on file; (vi) administer undesignated asthma medication that meets the prescription on file to any student who has an Individual Health Care Action Plan or asthma action plan, plan pursuant to Section 504 of the federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973, or individualized education program plan that authorizes the use of asthma medication; and (vii) administer undesignated asthma medication to any person that the school nurse or trained personnel believes in good faith is having respiratory distress.
    (c) The school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school must inform the parents or guardians of the pupil, in writing, that the school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school and its employees and agents, including a physician, physician assistant, or advanced practice registered nurse providing standing protocol and a prescription for school epinephrine injectors, an opioid antagonist, or undesignated asthma medication, are to incur no liability or professional discipline, except for willful and wanton conduct, as a result of any injury arising from the administration of asthma medication, an epinephrine injector, or an opioid antagonist regardless of whether authorization was given by the pupil's parents or guardians or by the pupil's physician, physician assistant, or advanced practice registered nurse. The parents or guardians of the pupil must sign a statement acknowledging that the school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school and its employees and agents are to incur no liability, except for willful and wanton conduct, as a result of any injury arising from the administration of asthma medication, an epinephrine injector, or an opioid antagonist regardless of whether authorization was given by the pupil's parents or guardians or by the pupil's physician, physician assistant, or advanced practice registered nurse and that the parents or guardians must indemnify and hold harmless the school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school and its employees and agents against any claims, except a claim based on willful and wanton conduct, arising out of the administration of asthma medication, an epinephrine injector, or an opioid antagonist regardless of whether authorization was given by the pupil's parents or guardians or by the pupil's physician, physician assistant, or advanced practice registered nurse.
    (c-5) When a school nurse or trained personnel administers an undesignated epinephrine injector to a person whom the school nurse or trained personnel in good faith believes is having an anaphylactic reaction, administers an opioid antagonist to a person whom the school nurse or trained personnel in good faith believes is having an opioid overdose, or administers undesignated asthma medication to a person whom the school nurse or trained personnel in good faith believes is having respiratory distress, notwithstanding the lack of notice to the parents or guardians of the pupil or the absence of the parents or guardians signed statement acknowledging no liability, except for willful and wanton conduct, the school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school and its employees and agents, and a physician, a physician assistant, or an advanced practice registered nurse providing standing protocol and a prescription for undesignated epinephrine injectors, an opioid antagonist, or undesignated asthma medication, are to incur no liability or professional discipline, except for willful and wanton conduct, as a result of any injury arising from the use of an undesignated epinephrine injector, the use of an opioid antagonist, or the use of undesignated asthma medication, regardless of whether authorization was given by the pupil's parents or guardians or by the pupil's physician, physician assistant, or advanced practice registered nurse.
    (d) The permission for self-administration and self-carry of asthma medication or the self-administration and self-carry of an epinephrine injector is effective for the school year for which it is granted and shall be renewed each subsequent school year upon fulfillment of the requirements of this Section.
    (e) Provided that the requirements of this Section are fulfilled, a pupil with asthma may self-administer and self-carry his or her asthma medication or a pupil may self-administer and self-carry an epinephrine injector (i) while in school, (ii) while at a school-sponsored activity, (iii) while under the supervision of school personnel, or (iv) before or after normal school activities, such as while in before-school or after-school care on school-operated property or while being transported on a school bus.
    (e-5) Provided that the requirements of this Section are fulfilled, a school nurse or trained personnel may administer an undesignated epinephrine injector to any person whom the school nurse or trained personnel in good faith believes to be having an anaphylactic reaction (i) while in school, (ii) while at a school-sponsored activity, (iii) while under the supervision of school personnel, or (iv) before or after normal school activities, such as while in before-school or after-school care on school-operated property or while being transported on a school bus. A school nurse or trained personnel may carry undesignated epinephrine injectors on his or her person while in school or at a school-sponsored activity.
    (e-10) Provided that the requirements of this Section are fulfilled, a school nurse or trained personnel may administer an opioid antagonist to any person whom the school nurse or trained personnel in good faith believes to be having an opioid overdose (i) while in school, (ii) while at a school-sponsored activity, (iii) while under the supervision of school personnel, or (iv) before or after normal school activities, such as while in before-school or after-school care on school-operated property. A school nurse or trained personnel may carry an opioid antagonist on his or her person while in school or at a school-sponsored activity.
    (e-15) If the requirements of this Section are met, a school nurse or trained personnel may administer undesignated asthma medication to any person whom the school nurse or trained personnel in good faith believes to be experiencing respiratory distress (i) while in school, (ii) while at a school-sponsored activity, (iii) while under the supervision of school personnel, or (iv) before or after normal school activities, including before-school or after-school care on school-operated property. A school nurse or trained personnel may carry undesignated asthma medication on his or her person while in school or at a school-sponsored activity.
    (f) The school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school may maintain a supply of undesignated epinephrine injectors in any secure location that is accessible before, during, and after school where an allergic person is most at risk, including, but not limited to, classrooms and lunchrooms. A physician, a physician assistant who has prescriptive authority in accordance with Section 7.5 of the Physician Assistant Practice Act of 1987, or an advanced practice registered nurse who has prescriptive authority in accordance with Section 65-40 of the Nurse Practice Act may prescribe undesignated epinephrine injectors in the name of the school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school to be maintained for use when necessary. Any supply of epinephrine injectors shall be maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
    The school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school may maintain a supply of an opioid antagonist in any secure location where an individual may have an opioid overdose. A health care professional who has been delegated prescriptive authority for opioid antagonists in accordance with Section 5-23 of the Substance Use Disorder Act may prescribe opioid antagonists in the name of the school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school, to be maintained for use when necessary. Any supply of opioid antagonists shall be maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
    The school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school may maintain a supply of asthma medication in any secure location that is accessible before, during, or after school where a person is most at risk, including, but not limited to, a classroom or the nurse's office. A physician, a physician assistant who has prescriptive authority under Section 7.5 of the Physician Assistant Practice Act of 1987, or an advanced practice registered nurse who has prescriptive authority under Section 65-40 of the Nurse Practice Act may prescribe undesignated asthma medication in the name of the school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school to be maintained for use when necessary. Any supply of undesignated asthma medication must be maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
    (f-3) Whichever entity initiates the process of obtaining undesignated epinephrine injectors and providing training to personnel for carrying and administering undesignated epinephrine injectors shall pay for the costs of the undesignated epinephrine injectors.
    (f-5) Upon any administration of an epinephrine injector, a school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school must immediately activate the EMS system and notify the student's parent, guardian, or emergency contact, if known.
    Upon any administration of an opioid antagonist, a school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school must immediately activate the EMS system and notify the student's parent, guardian, or emergency contact, if known.
    (f-10) Within 24 hours of the administration of an undesignated epinephrine injector, a school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school must notify the physician, physician assistant, or advanced practice registered nurse who provided the standing protocol and a prescription for the undesignated epinephrine injector of its use.
    Within 24 hours after the administration of an opioid antagonist, a school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school must notify the health care professional who provided the prescription for the opioid antagonist of its use.
    Within 24 hours after the administration of undesignated asthma medication, a school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school must notify the student's parent or guardian or emergency contact, if known, and the physician, physician assistant, or advanced practice registered nurse who provided the standing protocol and a prescription for the undesignated asthma medication of its use. The district or school must follow up with the school nurse, if available, and may, with the consent of the child's parent or guardian, notify the child's health care provider of record, as determined under this Section, of its use.
    (g) Prior to the administration of an undesignated epinephrine injector, trained personnel must submit to the school's administration proof of completion of a training curriculum to recognize and respond to anaphylaxis that meets the requirements of subsection (h) of this Section. Training must be completed annually. The school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school must maintain records related to the training curriculum and trained personnel.
    Prior to the administration of an opioid antagonist, trained personnel must submit to the school's administration proof of completion of a training curriculum to recognize and respond to an opioid overdose, which curriculum must meet the requirements of subsection (h-5) of this Section. Training must be completed annually. Trained personnel must also submit to the school's administration proof of cardiopulmonary resuscitation and automated external defibrillator certification. The school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school must maintain records relating to the training curriculum and the trained personnel.
    Prior to the administration of undesignated asthma medication, trained personnel must submit to the school's administration proof of completion of a training curriculum to recognize and respond to respiratory distress, which must meet the requirements of subsection (h-10) of this Section. Training must be completed annually, and the school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school must maintain records relating to the training curriculum and the trained personnel.
    (h) A training curriculum to recognize and respond to anaphylaxis, including the administration of an undesignated epinephrine injector, may be conducted online or in person.
    Training shall include, but is not limited to:
        (1) how to recognize signs and symptoms of an
    	
allergic reaction, including anaphylaxis;
        (2) how to administer an epinephrine injector; and
        (3) a test demonstrating competency of the knowledge
    	
required to recognize anaphylaxis and administer an epinephrine injector.
    Training may also include, but is not limited to:
        (A) a review of high-risk areas within a school and
    	
its related facilities;
        (B) steps to take to prevent exposure to allergens;
        (C) emergency follow-up procedures, including the
    	
importance of calling 9-1-1 or, if 9-1-1 is not available, other local emergency medical services;
        (D) how to respond to a student with a known
    	
allergy, as well as a student with a previously unknown allergy; and
        (E) other criteria as determined in rules adopted
    	
pursuant to this Section.
    In consultation with statewide professional organizations representing physicians licensed to practice medicine in all of its branches, registered nurses, and school nurses, the State Board of Education shall make available resource materials consistent with criteria in this subsection (h) for educating trained personnel to recognize and respond to anaphylaxis. The State Board may take into consideration the curriculum on this subject developed by other states, as well as any other curricular materials suggested by medical experts and other groups that work on life-threatening allergy issues. The State Board is not required to create new resource materials. The State Board shall make these resource materials available on its Internet website.
    (h-5) A training curriculum to recognize and respond to an opioid overdose, including the administration of an opioid antagonist, may be conducted online or in person. The training must comply with any training requirements under Section 5-23 of the Substance Use Disorder Act and the corresponding rules. It must include, but is not limited to:
        (1) how to recognize symptoms of an opioid overdose;
        (2) information on drug overdose prevention and
    	
recognition;
        (3) how to perform rescue breathing and resuscitation;
        (4) how to respond to an emergency involving an
    	
opioid overdose;
        (5) opioid antagonist dosage and administration;
        (6) the importance of calling 9-1-1 or, if 9-1-1 is
    	
not available, other local emergency medical services;
        (7) care for the overdose victim after administration
    	
of the overdose antagonist;
        (8) a test demonstrating competency of the knowledge
    	
required to recognize an opioid overdose and administer a dose of an opioid antagonist; and
        (9) other criteria as determined in rules adopted
    	
pursuant to this Section.
    (h-10) A training curriculum to recognize and respond to respiratory distress, including the administration of undesignated asthma medication, may be conducted online or in person. The training must include, but is not limited to:
        (1) how to recognize symptoms of respiratory distress
    	
and how to distinguish respiratory distress from anaphylaxis;
        (2) how to respond to an emergency involving
    	
respiratory distress;
        (3) asthma medication dosage and administration;
        (4) the importance of calling 9-1-1 or, if 9-1-1 is
    	
not available, other local emergency medical services;
        (5) a test demonstrating competency of the knowledge
    	
required to recognize respiratory distress and administer asthma medication; and
        (6) other criteria as determined in rules adopted
    	
under this Section.
    (i) Within 3 days after the administration of an undesignated epinephrine injector by a school nurse, trained personnel, or a student at a school or school-sponsored activity, the school must report to the State Board of Education in a form and manner prescribed by the State Board the following information:
        (1) age and type of person receiving epinephrine
    	
(student, staff, visitor);
        (2) any previously known diagnosis of a severe
    	
allergy;
        (3) trigger that precipitated allergic episode;
        (4) location where symptoms developed;
        (5) number of doses administered;
        (6) type of person administering epinephrine (school
    	
nurse, trained personnel, student); and
        (7) any other information required by the State
    	
Board.
    If a school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school maintains or has an independent contractor providing transportation to students who maintains a supply of undesignated epinephrine injectors, then the school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school must report that information to the State Board of Education upon adoption or change of the policy of the school district, public school, charter school, nonpublic school, or independent contractor, in a manner as prescribed by the State Board. The report must include the number of undesignated epinephrine injectors in supply.
    (i-5) Within 3 days after the administration of an opioid antagonist by a school nurse or trained personnel, the school must report to the State Board of Education, in a form and manner prescribed by the State Board, the following information:
        (1) the age and type of person receiving the opioid
    	
antagonist (student, staff, or visitor);
        (2) the location where symptoms developed;
        (3) the type of person administering the opioid
    	
antagonist (school nurse or trained personnel); and
        (4) any other information required by the State
    	
Board.
    (i-10) Within 3 days after the administration of undesignated asthma medication by a school nurse, trained personnel, or a student at a school or school-sponsored activity, the school must report to the State Board of Education, on a form and in a manner prescribed by the State Board of Education, the following information:
        (1) the age and type of person receiving the asthma
    	
medication (student, staff, or visitor);
        (2) any previously known diagnosis of asthma for the
    	
person;
        (3) the trigger that precipitated respiratory
    	
distress, if identifiable;
        (4) the location of where the symptoms developed;
        (5) the number of doses administered;
        (6) the type of person administering the asthma
    	
medication (school nurse, trained personnel, or student);
        (7) the outcome of the asthma medication
    	
administration; and
        (8) any other information required by the State
    	
Board.
    (j) By October 1, 2015 and every year thereafter, the State Board of Education shall submit a report to the General Assembly identifying the frequency and circumstances of undesignated epinephrine and undesignated asthma medication administration during the preceding academic year. Beginning with the 2017 report, the report shall also contain information on which school districts, public schools, charter schools, and nonpublic schools maintain or have independent contractors providing transportation to students who maintain a supply of undesignated epinephrine injectors. This report shall be published on the State Board's Internet website on the date the report is delivered to the General Assembly.
    (j-5) Annually, each school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school shall request an asthma action plan from the parents or guardians of a pupil with asthma. If provided, the asthma action plan must be kept on file in the office of the school nurse or, in the absence of a school nurse, the school administrator. Copies of the asthma action plan may be distributed to appropriate school staff who interact with the pupil on a regular basis, and, if applicable, may be attached to the pupil's federal Section 504 plan or individualized education program plan.
    (j-10) To assist schools with emergency response procedures for asthma, the State Board of Education, in consultation with statewide professional organizations with expertise in asthma management and a statewide organization representing school administrators, shall develop a model asthma episode emergency response protocol before September 1, 2016. Each school district, charter school, and nonpublic school shall adopt an asthma episode emergency response protocol before January 1, 2017 that includes all of the components of the State Board's model protocol.
    (j-15) Every 2 years, school personnel who work with pupils shall complete an in-person or online training program on the management of asthma, the prevention of asthma symptoms, and emergency response in the school setting. In consultation with statewide professional organizations with expertise in asthma management, the State Board of Education shall make available resource materials for educating school personnel about asthma and emergency response in the school setting.
    (j-20) On or before October 1, 2016 and every year thereafter, the State Board of Education shall submit a report to the General Assembly and the Department of Public Health identifying the frequency and circumstances of opioid antagonist administration during the preceding academic year. This report shall be published on the State Board's Internet website on the date the report is delivered to the General Assembly.
    (k) The State Board of Education may adopt rules necessary to implement this Section.
    (l) Nothing in this Section shall limit the amount of epinephrine injectors that any type of school or student may carry or maintain a supply of.
(Source: P.A. 100-201, eff. 8-18-17; 100-513, eff. 1-1-18; 100-726, eff. 1-1-19; 100-759, eff. 1-1-19; 100-799, eff. 1-1-19; 101-81, eff. 7-12-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-33)
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-363)
    Sec. 22-33. Medical cannabis.
    (a) This Section may be referred to as Ashley's Law.
    (a-5) In this Section, "designated caregiver", "medical cannabis infused product", "qualifying patient", and "registered" have the meanings given to those terms under Section 10 of the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act.
    (b) Subject to the restrictions under subsections (c) through (g) of this Section, a school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school shall authorize a parent or guardian or any other individual registered with the Department of Public Health as a designated caregiver of a student who is a registered qualifying patient to administer a medical cannabis infused product to the student on the premises of the child's school or on the child's school bus if both the student (as a registered qualifying patient) and the parent or guardian or other individual (as a registered designated caregiver) have been issued registry identification cards under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act. After administering the product, the parent or guardian or other individual shall remove the product from the school premises or the school bus.
    (c) A parent or guardian or other individual may not administer a medical cannabis infused product under this Section in a manner that, in the opinion of the school district or school, would create a disruption to the school's educational environment or would cause exposure of the product to other students.
    (d) A school district or school may not discipline a student who is administered a medical cannabis infused product by a parent or guardian or other individual under this Section and may not deny the student's eligibility to attend school solely because the student requires the administration of the product.
    (e) Nothing in this Section requires a member of a school's staff to administer a medical cannabis infused product to a student.
    (f) A school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school may not authorize the use of a medical cannabis infused product under this Section if the school district or school would lose federal funding as a result of the authorization.
    (g) A school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school shall adopt a policy to implement this Section.
(Source: P.A. 100-660, eff. 8-1-18; 101-363, eff. 8-9-19.)
 
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-370)
    Sec. 22-33. Medical cannabis.
    (a) This Section may be referred to as Ashley's Law.
    (a-5) In this Section:
    "Designated caregiver", "medical cannabis infused product", "qualifying patient", and "registered" have the meanings given to those terms under Section 10 of the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act.
    "Self-administration" means a student's discretionary use of his or her medical cannabis infused product.
    (b) Subject to the restrictions under subsections (c) through (g) of this Section, a school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school shall authorize a parent or guardian or any other individual registered with the Department of Public Health as a designated caregiver of a student who is a registered qualifying patient to administer a medical cannabis infused product to the student on the premises of the child's school or on the child's school bus if both the student (as a registered qualifying patient) and the parent or guardian or other individual (as a registered designated caregiver) have been issued registry identification cards under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act. After administering the product, the parent or guardian or other individual shall remove the product from the school premises or the school bus.
    (b-5) Notwithstanding subsection (b) and subject to the restrictions under subsections (c) through (g), a school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school must allow a school nurse or school administrator to administer a medical cannabis infused product to a student who is a registered qualifying patient (i) while on school premises, (ii) while at a school-sponsored activity, or (iii) before or after normal school activities, including while the student is in before-school or after-school care on school-operated property or while the student is being transported on a school bus. A school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school may authorize the self-administration of a medical cannabis infused product by a student who is a registered qualifying patient if the self-administration takes place under the direct supervision of a school nurse or school administrator.
    Before allowing the administration of a medical cannabis infused product by a school nurse or school administrator or a student's self-administration of a medical cannabis infused product under the supervision of a school nurse or school administrator under this subsection, the parent or guardian of a student who is the registered qualifying patient must provide written authorization for its use, along with a copy of the registry identification card of the student (as a registered qualifying patient) and the parent or guardian (as a registered designated caregiver). The written authorization must specify the times where or the special circumstances under which the medical cannabis infused product must be administered. The written authorization and a copy of the registry identification cards must be kept on file in the office of the school nurse. The authorization for a student to self-administer medical cannabis infused products is effective for the school year in which it is granted and must be renewed each subsequent school year upon fulfillment of the requirements of this Section.
    (b-10) Medical cannabis infused products that are to be administered under subsection (b-5) must be stored with the school nurse at all times in a manner consistent with storage of other student medication at the school and may be accessible only by the school nurse or a school administrator.
    (c) A parent or guardian or other individual may not administer a medical cannabis infused product under this Section in a manner that, in the opinion of the school district or school, would create a disruption to the school's educational environment or would cause exposure of the product to other students.
    (d) A school district or school may not discipline a student who is administered a medical cannabis infused product by a parent or guardian or other individual under this Section or who self-administers a medical cannabis infused product under the supervision of a school nurse or school administrator under this Section and may not deny the student's eligibility to attend school solely because the student requires the administration of the product.
    (e) Nothing in this Section requires a member of a school's staff to administer a medical cannabis infused product to a student.
    (f) A school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school may not authorize the use of a medical cannabis infused product under this Section if the school district or school would lose federal funding as a result of the authorization.
    (f-5) The State Board of Education, in consultation with the Department of Public Health, must develop a training curriculum for school nurses and school administrators on the administration of medical cannabis infused products. Prior to the administration of a medical cannabis infused product under subsection (b-5), a school nurse or school administrator must annually complete the training curriculum developed under this subsection and must submit to the school's administration proof of its completion. A school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school must maintain records related to the training curriculum and of the school nurses or school administrators who have completed the training.
    (g) A school district, public school, charter school, or nonpublic school shall adopt a policy to implement this Section.
(Source: P.A. 100-660, eff. 8-1-18; 101-370, eff. 1-1-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-35)
    Sec. 22-35. Sharing information on school lunch applicants; consent. Before an entity shares with the Department of Healthcare and Family Services information on an applicant for free or reduced-price lunches under Section 2-3.131, 3-14.29, 10-28, or 34-18.26 of this Code or Section 10 of the School Breakfast and Lunch Program Act, that entity must obtain, in writing, the consent of the applicant's parent or legal guardian. The Department of Healthcare and Family Services may not seek any punitive action against or withhold any benefit or subsidy from an applicant for a free or reduced-price lunch due to the applicant's parent or legal guardian withholding consent.
(Source: P.A. 95-331, eff. 8-21-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-40)
    Sec. 22-40. Eminent domain. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, any power granted under this Code to acquire property by condemnation or eminent domain is subject to, and shall be exercised in accordance with, the Eminent Domain Act.
(Source: P.A. 94-1055, eff. 1-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-45)
    Sec. 22-45. Illinois P-20 Council.
    (a) The General Assembly finds that preparing Illinoisans for success in school and the workplace requires a continuum of quality education from preschool through graduate school. This State needs a framework to guide education policy and integrate education at every level. A statewide coordinating council to study and make recommendations concerning education at all levels can avoid fragmentation of policies, promote improved teaching and learning, and continue to cultivate and demonstrate strong accountability and efficiency. Establishing an Illinois P-20 Council will develop a statewide agenda that will move the State towards the common goals of improving academic achievement, increasing college access and success, improving use of existing data and measurements, developing improved accountability, fostering innovative approaches to education, promoting lifelong learning, easing the transition to college, and reducing remediation. A pre-kindergarten through grade 20 agenda will strengthen this State's economic competitiveness by producing a highly-skilled workforce. In addition, lifelong learning plans will enhance this State's ability to leverage funding.
    (b) There is created the Illinois P-20 Council. The Illinois P-20 Council shall include all of the following members:
        (1) The Governor or his or her designee, to serve as
    	
chairperson.
        (2) Four members of the General Assembly, one
    	
appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, one appointed by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives, one appointed by the President of the Senate, and one appointed by the Minority Leader of the Senate.
        (3) Six at-large members appointed by the Governor as
    	
follows, with 2 members being from the City of Chicago, 2 members being from Lake County, McHenry County, Kane County, DuPage County, Will County, or that part of Cook County outside of the City of Chicago, and 2 members being from the remainder of the State:
            (A) one representative of civic leaders;
            (B) one representative of local government;
            (C) one representative of trade unions;
            (D) one representative of nonprofit organizations
        	
or foundations;
            (E) one representative of parents' organizations;
        	
and
            (F) one education research expert.
        (4) Five members appointed by statewide business
    	
organizations and business trade associations.
        (5) Six members appointed by statewide professional
    	
organizations and associations representing pre-kindergarten through grade 20 teachers, community college faculty, and public university faculty.
        (6) Two members appointed by associations
    	
representing local school administrators and school board members. One of these members must be a special education administrator.
        (7) One member representing community colleges,
    	
appointed by the Illinois Council of Community College Presidents.
        (8) One member representing 4-year independent
    	
colleges and universities, appointed by a statewide organization representing private institutions of higher learning.
        (9) One member representing public 4-year
    	
universities, appointed jointly by the university presidents and chancellors.
        (10) Ex-officio members as follows:
            (A) The State Superintendent of Education or his
        	
or her designee.
            (B) The Executive Director of the Board of Higher
        	
Education or his or her designee.
            (C) The Executive Director of the Illinois
        	
Community College Board or his or her designee.
            (D) The Executive Director of the Illinois
        	
Student Assistance Commission or his or her designee.
            (E) The Co-chairpersons of the Illinois
        	
Workforce Investment Board or their designee.
            (F) The Director of Commerce and Economic
        	
Opportunity or his or her designee.
            (G) The Chairperson of the Illinois Early
        	
Learning Council or his or her designee.
            (H) The President of the Illinois Mathematics and
        	
Science Academy or his or her designee.
            (I) The president of an association representing
        	
educators of adult learners or his or her designee.
Ex-officio members shall have no vote on the Illinois P-20 Council.
    Appointed members shall serve for staggered terms expiring on July 1 of the first, second, or third calendar year following their appointments or until their successors are appointed and have qualified. Staggered terms shall be determined by lot at the organizing meeting of the Illinois P-20 Council.
    Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments, and any member so appointed shall serve during the remainder of the term for which the vacancy occurred.
    (c) The Illinois P-20 Council shall be funded through State appropriations to support staff activities, research, data-collection, and dissemination. The Illinois P-20 Council shall be staffed by the Office of the Governor, in coordination with relevant State agencies, boards, and commissions. The Illinois Education Research Council shall provide research and coordinate research collection activities for the Illinois P-20 Council.
    (d) The Illinois P-20 Council shall have all of the following duties:
        (1) To make recommendations to do all of the
    	
following:
            (A) Coordinate pre-kindergarten through grade 20
        	
(graduate school) education in this State through working at the intersections of educational systems to promote collaborative infrastructure.
            (B) Coordinate and leverage strategies, actions,
        	
legislation, policies, and resources of all stakeholders to support fundamental and lasting improvement in this State's public schools, community colleges, and universities.
            (C) Better align the high school curriculum with
        	
postsecondary expectations.
            (D) Better align assessments across all levels of
        	
education.
            (E) Reduce the need for students entering
        	
institutions of higher education to take remedial courses.
            (F) Smooth the transition from high school to
        	
college.
            (G) Improve high school and college graduation
        	
rates.
            (H) Improve the rigor and relevance of academic
        	
standards for college and workforce readiness.
            (I) Better align college and university teaching
        	
programs with the needs of Illinois schools.
        (2) To advise the Governor, the General Assembly,
    	
the State's education and higher education agencies, and the State's workforce and economic development boards and agencies on policies related to lifelong learning for Illinois students and families.
        (3) To articulate a framework for systemic
    	
educational improvement and innovation that will enable every student to meet or exceed Illinois learning standards and be well-prepared to succeed in the workforce and community.
        (4) To provide an estimated fiscal impact for
    	
implementation of all Council recommendations.
        (5) To make recommendations for short-term and
    	
long-term learning recovery actions for public school students in this State in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Illinois P-20 Council shall submit a report with its recommendations for a multi-year recovery plan by December 31, 2021 to the Governor, the State Board of Education, the Board of Higher Education, the Illinois Community College Board, and the General Assembly that addresses all of the following:
            (A) Closing the digital divide for all students,
        	
including access to devices, Internet connectivity, and ensuring that educators have the necessary support and training to provide high quality remote and blended learning to students.
            (B) Evaluating the academic growth and
        	
proficiency of students in order to understand the impact of school closures and remote and blended remote learning conditions on student academic outcomes, including disaggregating data by race, income, diverse learners, and English learners, in ways that balance the need to understand that impact with the need to support student well-being and also take into consideration the logistical constraints facing schools and districts.
            (C) Establishing a system for the collection and
        	
review of student data at the State level, including data about prekindergarten through higher education student attendance, engagement and participation, discipline, and social-emotional and mental health inputs and outcomes, in order to better understand the full impact of disrupted learning.
            (D) Providing students with resources and
        	
programs for academic support, such as enrichment opportunities, tutoring corps, summer bridge programs, youth leadership and development programs, youth and community-led restorative and transformative justice programs, and youth internship and apprenticeship programs.
            (E) Providing students with resources and support
        	
to ensure access to social-emotional learning, mental health services, and trauma responsive, restorative justice and anti-racist practices in order to support the growth of the whole child, such as investing in community schools and providing comprehensive year-round services and support for both students and their families.
            (F) Ensuring more time for students' academic,
        	
social-emotional, and mental health needs by considering such strategies as: (i) extending planning time for teachers, (ii) extending the school day and school year, and (iii) transitioning to year-round schooling.
            (G) Strengthening the transition from secondary
        	
education to postsecondary education in the wake of threats to alignment and affordability created by the pandemic and related conditions.
    (e) The chairperson of the Illinois P-20 Council may authorize the creation of working groups focusing on areas of interest to Illinois educational and workforce development, including without limitation the following areas:
        (1) Preparation, recruitment, and certification of
    	
highly qualified teachers.
        (2) Mentoring and induction of highly qualified
    	
teachers.
        (3) The diversity of highly qualified teachers.
        (4) Funding for highly qualified teachers, including
    	
developing a strategic and collaborative plan to seek federal and private grants to support initiatives targeting teacher preparation and its impact on student achievement.
        (5) Highly effective administrators.
        (6) Illinois birth through age 3 education,
    	
pre-kindergarten, and early childhood education.
        (7) The assessment, alignment, outreach, and network
    	
of college and workforce readiness efforts.
        (8) Alternative routes to college access.
        (9) Research data and accountability.
        (10) Community schools, community participation, and
    	
other innovative approaches to education that foster community partnerships.
        (11) Tuition, financial aid, and other issues related
    	
to keeping postsecondary education affordable for Illinois residents.
        (12) Learning recovery in the wake of the COVID-19
    	
pandemic.
    The chairperson of the Illinois P-20 Council may designate Council members to serve as working group chairpersons. Working groups may invite organizations and individuals representing pre-kindergarten through grade 20 interests to participate in discussions, data collection, and dissemination.
(Source: P.A. 101-654, eff. 3-8-21.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-50)
    Sec. 22-50. Twice-exceptional children; recommendations. The State Advisory Council on the Education of Children with Disabilities and the Advisory Council on the Education of Gifted and Talented Children shall research and discuss best practices for addressing the needs of "twice-exceptional" children, those who are gifted and talented and have a disability. The Councils shall then jointly make recommendations to the State Board of Education with respect to the State Board of Education providing guidance and technical assistance to school districts in furthering improved educational outcomes for gifted and twice-exceptional children. Recommendations shall include strategies to (i) educate teachers and other providers about the unique needs of this population, (ii) train teachers in target, research-based, identification and pedagogical methods, and (iii) establish guidelines for unique programming for twice-exceptional students.
(Source: P.A. 96-382, eff. 8-13-09; 96-1000, eff. 7-2-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-55)
    Sec. 22-55. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 96-1000, eff. 7-2-10. Repealed by P.A. 97-355, eff. 1-1-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-60)
    Sec. 22-60. Unfunded mandates prohibited.
    (a) No public school district or private school is obligated to comply with the following types of mandates unless a separate appropriation has been enacted into law providing full funding for the mandate for the school year during which the mandate is required:
        (1) Any mandate in this Code enacted after the
    	
effective date of this amendatory Act of the 96th General Assembly.
        (2) Any regulatory mandate promulgated by the State
    	
Board of Education and adopted by rule after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 96th General Assembly other than those promulgated with respect to this Section or statutes already enacted on or before the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 96th General Assembly.
    (b) If the amount appropriated to fund a mandate described in subsection (a) of this Section does not fully fund the mandated activity, then the school district or private school may choose to discontinue or modify the mandated activity to ensure that the costs of compliance do not exceed the funding received.
    Before discontinuing or modifying the mandate, the school district shall petition its regional superintendent of schools on or before February 15 of each year to request to be exempt from implementing the mandate in a school or schools in the next school year. The petition shall include all legitimate costs associated with implementing and operating the mandate, the estimated reimbursement from State and federal sources, and any unique circumstances the school district can verify that exist that would cause the implementation and operation of such a mandate to be cost prohibitive.
    The regional superintendent of schools shall review the petition. In accordance with the Open Meetings Act, he or she shall convene a public hearing to hear testimony from the school district and interested community members. The regional superintendent shall, on or before March 15 of each year, inform the school district of his or her decision, along with the reasons why the exemption was granted or denied, in writing. The regional superintendent must also send notification to the State Board of Education detailing which school districts requested an exemption and the results.
    If the regional superintendent grants an exemption to the school district, then the school district is relieved from the requirement to establish and implement the mandate in the school or schools granted an exemption for the next school year. If the regional superintendent of schools does not grant an exemption, then the school district shall implement the mandate in accordance with the applicable law or rule by the first student attendance day of the next school year. However, the school district or a resident of the school district may on or before April 15 appeal the decision of the regional superintendent to the State Superintendent of Education. The State Superintendent shall hear appeals on the decisions of regional superintendents of schools no later than May 15 of each year. The State Superintendent shall make a final decision at the conclusion of the hearing on the school district's request for an exemption from the mandate. If the State Superintendent grants an exemption, then the school district is relieved from the requirement to implement a mandate in the school or schools granted an exemption for the next school year. If the State Superintendent does not grant an exemption, then the school district shall implement the mandate in accordance with the applicable law or rule by the first student attendance day of the next school year.
    If a school district or private school discontinues or modifies a mandated activity due to lack of full funding from the State, then the school district or private school shall annually maintain and update a list of discontinued or modified mandated activities. The list shall be provided to the State Board of Education upon request.
    (c) This Section does not apply to (i) any new statutory or regulatory mandates related to revised learning standards developed through the Common Core State Standards Initiative and assessments developed to align with those standards or actions specified in this State's Phase 2 Race to the Top Grant application if the application is approved by the United States Department of Education or (ii) new statutory or regulatory mandates from the Race to the Top Grant through the federal American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 imposed on school districts designated as being in the lowest performing 5% of schools within the Race to the Top Grant application.
    (d) In any instances in which this Section conflicts with the State Mandates Act, the State Mandates Act shall prevail.
(Source: P.A. 96-1441, eff. 8-20-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-65)
    Sec. 22-65. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-813, eff. 7-13-12. Repealed by P.A. 99-30, eff. 7-10-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-70)
    Sec. 22-70. Enrollment information; children of military personnel. At the time of annual enrollment or at any time during the school year, a school district or a recognized non-public school, except for sectarian non-public schools, serving any of grades kindergarten through 12 shall provide, either on its standard enrollment form or on a separate form, the opportunity for the individual enrolling the student to voluntarily state whether the student has a parent or guardian who is a member of a branch of the armed forces of the United States and who is either deployed to active duty or expects to be deployed to active duty during the school year. Each school district and recognized non-public school shall report this enrollment information as aggregate data to the State Board of Education.
(Source: P.A. 97-505, eff. 8-23-11; 97-813, eff. 7-13-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-75)
    Sec. 22-75. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 98-463, eff. 8-16-13. Repealed by P.A. 99-30, eff. 7-10-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-76)
    Sec. 22-76. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 98-463, eff. 8-16-13. Repealed internally, eff. 9-1-2013.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-77)
    Sec. 22-77. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 98-861, eff. 8-5-14. Repealed internally, eff. 7-1-14.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-80)
    Sec. 22-80. Student athletes; concussions and head injuries.
    (a) The General Assembly recognizes all of the following:
        (1) Concussions are one of the most commonly reported
    	
injuries in children and adolescents who participate in sports and recreational activities. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates that as many as 3,900,000 sports-related and recreation-related concussions occur in the United States each year. A concussion is caused by a blow or motion to the head or body that causes the brain to move rapidly inside the skull. The risk of catastrophic injuries or death is significant when a concussion or head injury is not properly evaluated and managed.
        (2) Concussions are a type of brain injury that can
    	
range from mild to severe and can disrupt the way the brain normally works. Concussions can occur in any organized or unorganized sport or recreational activity and can result from a fall or from players colliding with each other, the ground, or with obstacles. Concussions occur with or without loss of consciousness, but the vast majority of concussions occur without loss of consciousness.
        (3) Continuing to play with a concussion or symptoms
    	
of a head injury leaves a young athlete especially vulnerable to greater injury and even death. The General Assembly recognizes that, despite having generally recognized return-to-play standards for concussions and head injuries, some affected youth athletes are prematurely returned to play, resulting in actual or potential physical injury or death to youth athletes in this State.
        (4) Student athletes who have sustained a concussion
    	
may need informal or formal accommodations, modifications of curriculum, and monitoring by medical or academic staff until the student is fully recovered. To that end, all schools are encouraged to establish a return-to-learn protocol that is based on peer-reviewed scientific evidence consistent with Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines and conduct baseline testing for student athletes.
    (b) In this Section:
    "Athletic trainer" means an athletic trainer licensed under the Illinois Athletic Trainers Practice Act who is working under the supervision of a physician.
    "Coach" means any volunteer or employee of a school who is responsible for organizing and supervising students to teach them or train them in the fundamental skills of an interscholastic athletic activity. "Coach" refers to both head coaches and assistant coaches.
    "Concussion" means a complex pathophysiological process affecting the brain caused by a traumatic physical force or impact to the head or body, which may include temporary or prolonged altered brain function resulting in physical, cognitive, or emotional symptoms or altered sleep patterns and which may or may not involve a loss of consciousness.
    "Department" means the Department of Financial and Professional Regulation.
    "Game official" means a person who officiates at an interscholastic athletic activity, such as a referee or umpire, including, but not limited to, persons enrolled as game officials by the Illinois High School Association or Illinois Elementary School Association.
    "Interscholastic athletic activity" means any organized school-sponsored or school-sanctioned activity for students, generally outside of school instructional hours, under the direction of a coach, athletic director, or band leader, including, but not limited to, baseball, basketball, cheerleading, cross country track, fencing, field hockey, football, golf, gymnastics, ice hockey, lacrosse, marching band, rugby, soccer, skating, softball, swimming and diving, tennis, track (indoor and outdoor), ultimate Frisbee, volleyball, water polo, and wrestling. All interscholastic athletics are deemed to be interscholastic activities.
    "Licensed healthcare professional" means a person who has experience with concussion management and who is a nurse, a psychologist who holds a license under the Clinical Psychologist Licensing Act and specializes in the practice of neuropsychology, a physical therapist licensed under the Illinois Physical Therapy Act, an occupational therapist licensed under the Illinois Occupational Therapy Practice Act, a physician assistant, or an athletic trainer.
    "Nurse" means a person who is employed by or volunteers at a school and is licensed under the Nurse Practice Act as a registered nurse, practical nurse, or advanced practice registered nurse.
    "Physician" means a physician licensed to practice medicine in all of its branches under the Medical Practice Act of 1987.
    "Physician assistant" means a physician assistant licensed under the Physician Assistant Practice Act of 1987.
    "School" means any public or private elementary or secondary school, including a charter school.
    "Student" means an adolescent or child enrolled in a school.
    (c) This Section applies to any interscholastic athletic activity, including practice and competition, sponsored or sanctioned by a school, the Illinois Elementary School Association, or the Illinois High School Association. This Section applies beginning with the 2016-2017 school year.
    (d) The governing body of each public or charter school and the appropriate administrative officer of a private school with students enrolled who participate in an interscholastic athletic activity shall appoint or approve a concussion oversight team. Each concussion oversight team shall establish a return-to-play protocol, based on peer-reviewed scientific evidence consistent with Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines, for a student's return to interscholastic athletics practice or competition following a force or impact believed to have caused a concussion. Each concussion oversight team shall also establish a return-to-learn protocol, based on peer-reviewed scientific evidence consistent with Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines, for a student's return to the classroom after that student is believed to have experienced a concussion, whether or not the concussion took place while the student was participating in an interscholastic athletic activity.
    Each concussion oversight team must include to the extent practicable at least one physician. If a school employs an athletic trainer, the athletic trainer must be a member of the school concussion oversight team to the extent practicable. If a school employs a nurse, the nurse must be a member of the school concussion oversight team to the extent practicable. At a minimum, a school shall appoint a person who is responsible for implementing and complying with the return-to-play and return-to-learn protocols adopted by the concussion oversight team. At a minimum, a concussion oversight team may be composed of only one person and this person need not be a licensed healthcare professional, but it may not be a coach. A school may appoint other licensed healthcare professionals to serve on the concussion oversight team.
    (e) A student may not participate in an interscholastic athletic activity for a school year until the student and the student's parent or guardian or another person with legal authority to make medical decisions for the student have signed a form for that school year that acknowledges receiving and reading written information that explains concussion prevention, symptoms, treatment, and oversight and that includes guidelines for safely resuming participation in an athletic activity following a concussion. The form must be approved by the Illinois High School Association.
    (f) A student must be removed from an interscholastic athletics practice or competition immediately if one of the following persons believes the student might have sustained a concussion during the practice or competition:
        (1) a coach;
        (2) a physician;
        (3) a game official;
        (4) an athletic trainer;
        (5) the student's parent or guardian or another
    	
person with legal authority to make medical decisions for the student;
        (6) the student; or
        (7) any other person deemed appropriate under the
    	
school's return-to-play protocol.
    (g) A student removed from an interscholastic athletics practice or competition under this Section may not be permitted to practice or compete again following the force or impact believed to have caused the concussion until:
        (1) the student has been evaluated, using established
    	
medical protocols based on peer-reviewed scientific evidence consistent with Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines, by a treating physician (chosen by the student or the student's parent or guardian or another person with legal authority to make medical decisions for the student), an athletic trainer, an advanced practice registered nurse, or a physician assistant;
        (2) the student has successfully completed each
    	
requirement of the return-to-play protocol established under this Section necessary for the student to return to play;
        (3) the student has successfully completed each
    	
requirement of the return-to-learn protocol established under this Section necessary for the student to return to learn;
        (4) the treating physician, the athletic trainer, or
    	
the physician assistant has provided a written statement indicating that, in the physician's professional judgment, it is safe for the student to return to play and return to learn or the treating advanced practice registered nurse has provided a written statement indicating that it is safe for the student to return to play and return to learn; and
        (5) the student and the student's parent or guardian
    	
or another person with legal authority to make medical decisions for the student:
            (A) have acknowledged that the student has
        	
completed the requirements of the return-to-play and return-to-learn protocols necessary for the student to return to play;
            (B) have provided the treating physician's,
        	
athletic trainer's, advanced practice registered nurse's, or physician assistant's written statement under subdivision (4) of this subsection (g) to the person responsible for compliance with the return-to-play and return-to-learn protocols under this subsection (g) and the person who has supervisory responsibilities under this subsection (g); and
            (C) have signed a consent form indicating that
        	
the person signing:
                (i) has been informed concerning and consents
            	
to the student participating in returning to play in accordance with the return-to-play and return-to-learn protocols;
                (ii) understands the risks associated with
            	
the student returning to play and returning to learn and will comply with any ongoing requirements in the return-to-play and return-to-learn protocols; and
                (iii) consents to the disclosure to
            	
appropriate persons, consistent with the federal Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (Public Law 104-191), of the treating physician's, athletic trainer's, physician assistant's, or advanced practice registered nurse's written statement under subdivision (4) of this subsection (g) and, if any, the return-to-play and return-to-learn recommendations of the treating physician, the athletic trainer, the physician assistant, or the advanced practice registered nurse, as the case may be.
    A coach of an interscholastic athletics team may not authorize a student's return to play or return to learn.
    The district superintendent or the superintendent's designee in the case of a public elementary or secondary school, the chief school administrator or that person's designee in the case of a charter school, or the appropriate administrative officer or that person's designee in the case of a private school shall supervise an athletic trainer or other person responsible for compliance with the return-to-play protocol and shall supervise the person responsible for compliance with the return-to-learn protocol. The person who has supervisory responsibilities under this paragraph may not be a coach of an interscholastic athletics team.
    (h)(1) The Illinois High School Association shall approve, for coaches, game officials, and non-licensed healthcare professionals, training courses that provide for not less than 2 hours of training in the subject matter of concussions, including evaluation, prevention, symptoms, risks, and long-term effects. The Association shall maintain an updated list of individuals and organizations authorized by the Association to provide the training.
    (2) The following persons must take a training course in accordance with paragraph (4) of this subsection (h) from an authorized training provider at least once every 2 years:
        (A) a coach of an interscholastic athletic activity;
        (B) a nurse, licensed healthcare professional, or
    	
non-licensed healthcare professional who serves as a member of a concussion oversight team either on a volunteer basis or in his or her capacity as an employee, representative, or agent of a school; and
        (C) a game official of an interscholastic athletic
    	
activity.
    (3) A physician who serves as a member of a concussion oversight team shall, to the greatest extent practicable, periodically take an appropriate continuing medical education course in the subject matter of concussions.
    (4) For purposes of paragraph (2) of this subsection (h):
        (A) a coach, game official, or non-licensed
    	
healthcare professional, as the case may be, must take a course described in paragraph (1) of this subsection (h);
        (B) an athletic trainer must take a
    	
concussion-related continuing education course from an athletic trainer continuing education sponsor approved by the Department;
        (C) a nurse must take a concussion-related continuing
    	
education course from a nurse continuing education sponsor approved by the Department;
        (D) a physical therapist must take a
    	
concussion-related continuing education course from a physical therapist continuing education sponsor approved by the Department;
        (E) a psychologist must take a concussion-related
    	
continuing education course from a psychologist continuing education sponsor approved by the Department;
        (F) an occupational therapist must take a
    	
concussion-related continuing education course from an occupational therapist continuing education sponsor approved by the Department; and
        (G) a physician assistant must take a
    	
concussion-related continuing education course from a physician assistant continuing education sponsor approved by the Department.
    (5) Each person described in paragraph (2) of this subsection (h) must submit proof of timely completion of an approved course in compliance with paragraph (4) of this subsection (h) to the district superintendent or the superintendent's designee in the case of a public elementary or secondary school, the chief school administrator or that person's designee in the case of a charter school, or the appropriate administrative officer or that person's designee in the case of a private school.
    (6) A physician, licensed healthcare professional, or non-licensed healthcare professional who is not in compliance with the training requirements under this subsection (h) may not serve on a concussion oversight team in any capacity.
    (7) A person required under this subsection (h) to take a training course in the subject of concussions must complete the training prior to serving on a concussion oversight team in any capacity.
    (i) The governing body of each public or charter school and the appropriate administrative officer of a private school with students enrolled who participate in an interscholastic athletic activity shall develop a school-specific emergency action plan for interscholastic athletic activities to address the serious injuries and acute medical conditions in which the condition of the student may deteriorate rapidly. The plan shall include a delineation of roles, methods of communication, available emergency equipment, and access to and a plan for emergency transport. This emergency action plan must be:
        (1) in writing;
        (2) reviewed by the concussion oversight team;
        (3) approved by the district superintendent or the
    	
superintendent's designee in the case of a public elementary or secondary school, the chief school administrator or that person's designee in the case of a charter school, or the appropriate administrative officer or that person's designee in the case of a private school;
        (4) distributed to all appropriate personnel;
        (5) posted conspicuously at all venues utilized by
    	
the school; and
        (6) reviewed annually by all athletic trainers, first
    	
responders, coaches, school nurses, athletic directors, and volunteers for interscholastic athletic activities.
    (j) The State Board of Education shall adopt rules as necessary to administer this Section, including, but not limited to, rules governing the informal or formal accommodation of a student who may have sustained a concussion during an interscholastic athletic activity.
(Source: P.A. 100-309, eff. 9-1-17; 100-513, eff. 1-1-18; 100-747, eff. 1-1-19; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18; 101-81, eff. 7-12-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-81)
    Sec. 22-81. Heroin and opioid prevention pilot program. By January 1, 2017, the State Board of Education and the Department of Human Services shall develop and establish a 3-year heroin and opioid drug prevention pilot program that offers educational materials and instruction on heroin and opioid abuse to all school districts in the State for use at their respective public elementary and secondary schools. A school district's participation in the pilot program shall be voluntary. Subject to appropriation, the Department of Human Services shall reimburse a school district that decides to participate in the pilot program for any costs it incurs in connection with its participation in the pilot program. Each school district that participates in the pilot program shall have the discretion to determine which grade levels the school district will instruct under the program.
    The pilot program must use effective, research-proven, interactive teaching methods and technologies, and must provide students, parents, and school staff with scientific, social, and emotional learning content to help them understand the risk of drug use. Such learning content must specifically target the dangers of prescription pain medication and heroin abuse. The Department may contract with a health education organization to fulfill the requirements of the pilot program.
    The State Board of Education, the Department of Human Services, and any contracted organization shall submit an annual report to the General Assembly that includes: (i) a list of school districts participating in the pilot program; (ii) the grade levels each school district instructs under the pilot program; and (iii) any findings regarding the effectiveness of the pilot program.
(Source: P.A. 99-480, eff. 9-9-15; 99-642, eff. 7-28-16.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-82)
    Sec. 22-82. Assessment reporting.
    (a) Before the 30th day of each school year, beginning with the 2016-2017 school year, every school district shall report, for each of its schools, all of the following to the State Board of Education, using a form developed by the State Board of Education:
        (1) Every reliable assessment that measures a certain
    	
group or subset of students in the same manner with the same potential assessment items; is scored by a non-district entity; is administered either statewide or beyond Illinois, such as assessments available from the Northwest Evaluation Association, Scantron Performance Series assessments, Renaissance Learning's STAR Reading Enterprise assessments, the College Board's SAT, Advanced Placement or International Baccalaureate examinations, or ACT's Educational Planning and Assessment System tests; and will be administered by each school that school year.
        (2) The administration window for each of these
    	
assessments.
        (3) Which entity is requiring the assessment (State,
    	
school district, network, or principal).
        (4) Which grade levels will be taking the assessment.
        (5) Which subsets of students, such as English
    	
Learners and special education students, will be taking the assessment.
        (6) An estimate of the average time it will take a
    	
student to complete the assessment.
        (7) If the results of the assessment are to be used
    	
for purposes other than for guiding instruction, what the results of the assessment will be used for, such as for promotion, course placement, graduation, teacher evaluation, or school performance ratings.
    (b) The State Board of Education shall compile the information reported under subsection (a) of this Section for each school year and make that information available to the public. Each school shall also make that information publicly available to the parents and guardians of its students through the school district's Internet website or distribution in paper form.
    (c) The State Board of Education may adopt any rules necessary to carry out its responsibilities under this Section.
(Source: P.A. 99-590, eff. 7-22-16.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-83)
    Sec. 22-83. Police training academy job training program.
    (a) In a county of 175,000 or more inhabitants, any school district with a high school may establish one or more partnerships with a local police department, county sheriff, or police training academy to establish a jobs training program for high school students. The school district shall establish its partnership or partnerships on behalf of all of the high schools in the district; no high school shall establish a partnership for this purpose separate from the school district's partnership under this Section. The jobs training program shall be open to all students, regardless of prior academic history. However, to encourage and maintain successful program participation and partnerships, the school districts and their partner agencies may impose specific program requirements.
    (b) The State Board of Education shall track participation and the success of students participating in the jobs training program established under this Section and annually publish a report on its website examining the program and its success.
(Source: P.A. 100-331, eff. 1-1-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-85)
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-180)
    Sec. 22-85. Graduation requirements; Free Application for Federal Student Aid.
    (a) Beginning with the 2020-2021 school year, in addition to any other requirements under this Code, as a prerequisite to receiving a high school diploma from a public high school, the parent or guardian of each student or, if a student is at least 18 years of age or legally emancipated, the student must comply with either of the following:
        (1) File a Free Application for Federal Student Aid
    	
with the United States Department of Education or, if applicable, an application for State financial aid.
        (2) On a form created by the State Board of
    	
Education, file a waiver with the student's school district indicating that the parent or guardian or, if applicable, the student understands what the Free Application for Federal Student Aid and application for State financial aid are and has chosen not to file an application under paragraph (1).
    (b) Each school district with a high school must require each high school student to comply with this Section and must provide to each high school student and, if applicable, his or her parent or guardian any support or assistance necessary to comply with this Section. A school district must award a high school diploma to a student who is unable to meet the requirements of subsection (a) due to extenuating circumstances, as determined by the school district, if (i) the student has met all other graduation requirements under this Code and (ii) the principal attests that the school district has made a good faith effort to assist the student or, if applicable, his or her parent or guardian in filing an application or a waiver under subsection (a).
    (c) The State Board of Education may adopt rules to implement this Section.
(Source: P.A. 101-180, eff. 6-1-20.)
 
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-478)
    Sec. 22-85. Parental notification of law enforcement detainment and questioning on school grounds.
    (a) In this Section, "school grounds" means the real property comprising an active and operational elementary or secondary school during the regular hours in which school is in session and when students are present.
    (b) Before detaining and questioning a student on school grounds who is under 18 years of age and who is suspected of committing a criminal act, a law enforcement officer, school resource officer, or other school security personnel must do all of the following:
        (1) Ensure that notification or attempted
    	
notification of the student's parent or guardian is made.
        (2) Document the time and manner in which the
    	
notification or attempted notification under paragraph (1) occurred.
        (3) Make reasonable efforts to ensure that the
    	
student's parent or guardian is present during the questioning or, if the parent or guardian is not present, ensure that school personnel, including, but not limited to, a school social worker, a school psychologist, a school nurse, a school guidance counselor, or any other mental health professional, are present during the questioning.
        (4) If practicable, make reasonable efforts to ensure
    	
that a law enforcement officer trained in promoting safe interactions and communications with youth is present during the questioning. An officer who received training in youth investigations approved or certified by his or her law enforcement agency or under Section 10.22 of the Police Training Act or a juvenile police officer, as defined under Section 1-3 of the Juvenile Court Act of 1987, satisfies the requirement under this paragraph.
    (c) This Section does not limit the authority of a law enforcement officer to make an arrest on school grounds. This Section does not apply to circumstances that would cause a reasonable person to believe that urgent and immediate action is necessary to do any of the following:
        (1) Prevent bodily harm or injury to the student or
    	
any other person.
        (2) Apprehend an armed or fleeing suspect.
        (3) Prevent the destruction of evidence.
        (4) Address an emergency or other dangerous
    	
situation.
(Source: P.A. 101-478, eff. 8-23-19.)
 
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-531)
    Sec. 22-85. Sexual abuse at schools.
    (a) The General Assembly finds that:
        (1) investigation of a child regarding an incident of
    	
sexual abuse can induce significant trauma for the child;
        (2) it is desirable to prevent multiple interviews of
    	
a child at a school; and
        (3) it is important to recognize the role of
    	
Children's Advocacy Centers in conducting developmentally appropriate investigations.
    (b) In this Section:
    "Alleged incident of sexual abuse" is limited to an incident of sexual abuse of a child that is alleged to have been perpetrated by school personnel, including a school vendor or volunteer, that occurred (i) on school grounds or during a school activity or (ii) outside of school grounds or not during a school activity.
    "Appropriate law enforcement agency" means a law enforcement agency whose employees have been involved, in some capacity, with an investigation of a particular alleged incident of sexual abuse.
    (c) If a mandated reporter within a school has knowledge of an alleged incident of sexual abuse, the reporter must call the Department of Children and Family Services' hotline established under Section 7.6 of the Abused and Neglected Child Reporting Act immediately after obtaining the minimal information necessary to make a report, including the names of the affected parties and the allegations. The State Board of Education must make available materials detailing the information that is necessary to enable notification to the Department of Children and Family Services of an alleged incident of sexual abuse. Each school must ensure that mandated reporters review the State Board of Education's materials and materials developed by the Department of Children and Family Services and distributed in the school building under Section 7 of the Abused and Neglected Child Reporting Act at least once annually.
    (d) For schools in a county with an accredited Children's Advocacy Center, every alleged incident of sexual abuse that is reported to the Department of Children and Family Services' hotline or a law enforcement agency and is subsequently accepted for investigation must be referred by the entity that received the report to the local Children's Advocacy Center pursuant to that county's multidisciplinary team's protocol under the Children's Advocacy Center Act for investigating child sexual abuse allegations.
    (e) A county's local Children's Advocacy Center must, at a minimum, do both of the following regarding a referred case of an alleged incident of sexual abuse:
        (1) Coordinate the investigation of the alleged
    	
incident, as governed by the local Children's Advocacy Center's existing multidisciplinary team protocol and according to National Children's Alliance accreditation standards.
        (2) Facilitate communication between the
    	
multidisciplinary team investigating the alleged incident of sexual abuse and, if applicable, the referring school's (i) Title IX officer, or his or her designee, (ii) school resource officer, or (iii) personnel leading the school's investigation into the alleged incident of sexual abuse. If a school uses a designated entity to investigate a sexual abuse allegation, the multidisciplinary team may correspond only with that entity and any reference in this Section to "school" refers to that designated entity. This facilitation of communication must, at a minimum, ensure that all applicable parties have each other's contact information and must share the county's local Children's Advocacy Center's protocol regarding the process of approving the viewing of a forensic interview, as defined under Section 2.5 of the Children's Advocacy Center Act, by school personnel and a contact person for questions relating to the protocol.
    (f) After an alleged incident of sexual abuse is accepted for investigation by the Department of Children and Family Services or a law enforcement agency and while the criminal and child abuse investigations related to that alleged incident are being conducted by the local multidisciplinary team, the school relevant to the alleged incident of sexual abuse must comply with both of the following:
        (1) It may not interview the alleged victim regarding
    	
details of the alleged incident of sexual abuse until after the completion of the forensic interview of that victim is conducted at a Children's Advocacy Center. This paragraph does not prohibit a school from requesting information from the alleged victim or his or her parent or guardian to ensure the safety and well-being of the alleged victim at school during an investigation.
        (2) If asked by a law enforcement agency or an
    	
investigator of the Department of Children and Family Services who is conducting the investigation, it must inform those individuals of any evidence the school has gathered pertaining to an alleged incident of sexual abuse, as permissible by federal or State law.
    (g) After completion of a forensic interview, the multidisciplinary team must notify the school relevant to the alleged incident of sexual abuse of its completion. If, for any reason, a multidisciplinary team determines it will not conduct a forensic interview in a specific investigation, the multidisciplinary team must notify the school as soon as the determination is made. If a forensic interview has not been conducted within 15 calendar days after opening an investigation, the school may notify the multidisciplinary team that it intends to interview the alleged victim. No later than 10 calendar days after this notification, the multidisciplinary team may conduct the forensic interview and, if the multidisciplinary team does not conduct the interview, the school may proceed with its interview.
    (h) To the greatest extent possible considering student safety and Title IX compliance, school personnel may view the electronic recordings of a forensic interview of an alleged victim of an incident of sexual abuse. As a means to avoid additional interviews of an alleged victim, school personnel must be granted viewing access to the electronic recording of a forensic interview conducted at an accredited Children's Advocacy Center for an alleged incident of sexual abuse only if the school receives (i) approval from the multidisciplinary team investigating the case and (ii) informed consent by a child over the age of 13 or the child's parent or guardian. Each county's local Children's Advocacy Center and multidisciplinary team must establish an internal protocol regarding the process of approving the viewing of the forensic interview, and this process and the contact person must be shared with the school contact at the time of the initial facilitation. Whenever possible, the school's viewing of the electronic recording of a forensic interview should be conducted in lieu of the need for additional interviews.
    (i) For an alleged incident of sexual abuse that has been accepted for investigation by a multidisciplinary team, if, during the course of its internal investigation and at any point during or after the multidisciplinary team's investigation, the school determines that it needs to interview the alleged victim to successfully complete its investigation and the victim is under 18 years of age, a child advocate must be made available to the student and may be present during the school's interview. A child advocate may be a school social worker, a school or equally qualified psychologist, or a person in a position the State Board of Education has identified as an appropriate advocate for the student during a school's investigation into an alleged incident of sexual abuse.
    (j) The Department of Children and Family Services must notify the relevant school when an agency investigation of an alleged incident of sexual abuse is complete. The notification must include information on the outcome of that investigation.
    (k) The appropriate law enforcement agency must notify the relevant school when an agency investigation of an alleged incident of sexual abuse is complete or has been suspended. The notification must include information on the outcome of that investigation.
    (l) This Section applies to all schools operating under this Code, including, but not limited to, public schools located in cities having a population of more than 500,000, a school operated pursuant to an agreement with a public school district, alternative schools operated by third parties, an alternative learning opportunities program, a public school administered by a local public agency or the Department of Human Services, charter schools operating under the authority of Article 27A, and non-public schools recognized by the State Board of Education.
(Source: P.A. 101-531, eff. 8-23-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-86)
    (Section scheduled to be repealed on March 15, 2021)
    Sec. 22-86. Make Sexual and Severe Physical Abuse Fully Extinct (Make S.A.F.E.) Task Force.
    (a) The General Assembly finds that the most precious resource in this State is our children. The General Assembly also finds that the protection of children from sexual abuse and exploitation is at the core of the duties and fundamental responsibilities of the General Assembly and is of the utmost importance.
    (b) The Make Sexual and Severe Physical Abuse Fully Extinct (Make S.A.F.E.) Task Force is created to address issues concerning the sexual abuse of students in school-related settings. The Task Force shall consist of all of the following members, who must be appointed no later than 60 days after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 101st General Assembly:
        (1) One representative appointed by the Speaker of
    	
the House of Representatives.
        (2) One representative appointed by the Minority
    	
Leader of the House of Representatives.
        (3) One senator appointed by the President of the
    	
Senate.
        (4) One senator appointed by the Minority Leader of
    	
the Senate.
        (5) One member who represents the Children's
    	
Advocacy Centers of Illinois appointed by the State Superintendent of Education.
        (6) The Executive Director of an urban, accredited
    	
Children's Advocacy Center appointed by the State Superintendent of Education.
        (7) The Executive Director of a suburban,
    	
accredited Children's Advocacy Center appointed by the State Superintendent of Education.
        (8) The Executive Director of a rural, accredited
    	
Children's Advocacy Center appointed by the State Superintendent of Education.
        (9) One representative of the State Board of
    	
Education appointed by the State Superintendent of Education.
        (10) One member representing a State's Attorney's
    	
office appointed by the State Superintendent of Education.
        (11) One member representing a statewide
    	
organization that unites the services and resources of rape crisis centers, alleviates the suffering of sexual assault survivors, and helps build communities appointed by the State Superintendent of Education.
        (12) One member representing the Department of
    	
State Police appointed by the State Superintendent of Education.
        (13) One member representing the Department of
    	
Children and Family Services appointed by the State Superintendent of Education.
        (14) One member representing the Office of the
    	
Attorney General appointed by the State Superintendent of Education.
        (15) One member representing a statewide
    	
organization representing suburban school districts appointed by the State Superintendent of Education.
        (16) One member representing a statewide
    	
professional teachers' organization appointed by the State Superintendent of Education.
        (17) One member representing a different statewide
    	
professional teachers' organization appointed by the State Superintendent of Education.
        (18) One member representing a professional
    	
teachers' organization in a city having a population of over 500,000 appointed by the State Superintendent of Education.
        (19) One member representing a school district
    	
organized under Article 34 appointed by the State Superintendent of Education.
        (20) One member representing the investigating body
    	
of a school district organized under Article 34 appointed by the State Superintendent of Education.
        (21) One member representing a statewide organization
    	
that represents social workers appointed by the State Superintendent of Education.
        (22) One member representing a charter schools'
    	
organization in this State appointed by the State Superintendent of Education.
        (23) One member representing a statewide organization
    	
that represents principals appointed by the State Superintendent of Education.
        (24) One member representing a statewide organization
    	
that represents superintendents appointed by the State Superintendent of Education.
        (25) One member representing a statewide organization
    	
that represents school boards appointed by the State Superintendent of Education.
    (c) The Task Force shall first meet at the call of the State Superintendent of Education, and each subsequent meeting shall be at the call of the Chairperson, who shall be designated by the State Superintendent of Education. The State Board of Education shall provide administrative and other support to the Task Force. Members of the Task Force shall serve without compensation.
    (d) The Task Force shall review the best practices for preventing the sexual abuse of students in a school-related setting or by school-related perpetrators, including school district employees or other students, how to best address that abuse, and the proper support for students who have suffered from that abuse. The review shall examine the best practices at all schools maintaining prekindergarten through grade 12, regardless of whether the school is a public school, nonpublic school, or charter school. On or before September 15, 2020, the Task Force must report the findings of its review to the Governor and the General Assembly, which must, at a minimum, include all of the following topics:
        (1) The best practices for preventing sexual and
    	
severe physical abuse in school-related settings or by school-related perpetrators, including, but not limited to, criminal history records checks for school district employees, the employment status of a school employee accused of sexual abuse of a student, and procedural safeguards for personnel who regularly interact with children as part of school or school activities, even if the personnel are not officially employed by a school district.
        (2) The best practices for addressing sexual and
    	
severe physical abuse in a school-related setting or by school-related perpetrators, including, but not limited to, the nature and amount of forensic interviews and forensic interview information sharing, school cooperation with multidisciplinary teams under the Children's Advocacy Center Act, and model school policies.
        (3) The best practices for support for students who
    	
have suffered sexual or severe physical abuse in a school-related setting or by a school-related perpetrator, including, but not limited to, emotional, psychological, and academic support.
        (4) Any other topic the Task Force deems necessary
    	
to advance the safety or well-being of students in relation to sexual and severe physical abuse stemming from a school-related setting or school-related perpetrator.
    The Task Force is dissolved upon submission of the report under this subsection.
    (e) This Section is repealed on March 15, 2021.
(Source: P.A. 101-531, eff. 8-23-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-89)
    Sec. 22-89. Graduates during the 2019-2020 school year. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, any diploma conferred during the 2019-2020 school year, including during the summer of 2020, under graduation requirements that were modified by an executive order, emergency rulemaking, or school board policy prompted by a gubernatorial disaster proclamation as a result of COVID-19 is deemed valid and is not subject to challenge or review due to a failure to meet minimum requirements otherwise required by this Code, administrative rule, or school board policy.
(Source: P.A. 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/22-90)
    (Section scheduled to be repealed on February 1, 2023)
    Sec. 22-90. Whole Child Task Force.
    (a) The General Assembly makes all of the following findings:
        (1) The COVID-19 pandemic has exposed systemic
    	
inequities in American society. Students, educators, and families throughout this State have been deeply affected by the pandemic, and the impact of the pandemic will be felt for years to come. The negative consequences of the pandemic have impacted students and communities differently along the lines of race, income, language, and special needs. However, students in this State faced significant unmet physical health, mental health, and social and emotional needs even prior to the pandemic.
        (2) The path to recovery requires a commitment from
    	
adults in this State to address our students cultural, physical, emotional, and mental health needs and to provide them with stronger and increased systemic support and intervention.
        (3) It is well documented that trauma and toxic
    	
stress diminish a child's ability to thrive. Forms of childhood trauma and toxic stress include adverse childhood experiences, systemic racism, poverty, food and housing insecurity, and gender-based violence. The COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated these issues and brought them into focus.
        (4) It is estimated that, overall, approximately 40%
    	
of children in this State have experienced at least one adverse childhood experience and approximately 10% have experienced 3 or more adverse childhood experiences. However, the number of adverse childhood experiences is higher for Black and Hispanic children who are growing up in poverty. The COVID-19 pandemic has amplified the number of students who have experienced childhood trauma. Also, the COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted preexisting inequities in school disciplinary practices that disproportionately impact Black and Brown students. Research shows, for example, that girls of color are disproportionately impacted by trauma, adversity, and abuse, and instead of receiving the care and trauma-informed support they may need, many Black girls in particular face disproportionately harsh disciplinary measures.
        (5) The cumulative effects of trauma and toxic stress
    	
adversely impact the physical health of students, as well as their ability to learn, form relationships, and self-regulate. If left unaddressed, these effects increase a student's risk for depression, alcoholism, anxiety, asthma, smoking, and suicide, all of which are risks that disproportionately affect Black youth and may lead to a host of medical diseases as an adult. Access to infant and early childhood mental health services is critical to ensure the social and emotional well-being of this State's youngest children, particularly those children who have experienced trauma.
        (6) Although this State enacted measures through
    	
Public Act 100-105 to address the high rate of early care and preschool expulsions of infants, toddlers, and preschoolers and the disproportionately higher rate of expulsion for Black and Hispanic children, a recent study found a wide variation in the awareness, understanding, and compliance with the law by providers of early childhood care. Further work is needed to implement the law, which includes providing training to early childhood care providers to increase their understanding of the law, increasing the availability and access to infant and early childhood mental health services, and building aligned data collection systems to better understand expulsion rates and to allow for accurate reporting as required by the law.
        (7) Many educators and schools in this State have
    	
embraced and implemented evidenced-based restorative justice and trauma-responsive and culturally relevant practices and interventions. However, the use of these interventions on students is often isolated or is implemented occasionally and only if the school has the appropriate leadership, resources, and partners available to engage seriously in this work. It would be malpractice to deny our students access to these practices and interventions, especially in the aftermath of a once-in-a-century pandemic.
    (b) The Whole Child Task Force is created for the purpose of establishing an equitable, inclusive, safe, and supportive environment in all schools for every student in this State. The task force shall have all of the following goals, which means key steps have to be taken to ensure that every child in every school in this State has access to teachers, social workers, school leaders, support personnel, and others who have been trained in evidenced-based interventions and restorative practices:
        (1) To create a common definition of a
    	
trauma-responsive school, a trauma-responsive district, and a trauma-responsive community.
        (2) To outline the training and resources required to
    	
create and sustain a system of support for trauma-responsive schools, districts, and communities and to identify this State's role in that work, including recommendations concerning options for redirecting resources from school resource officers to classroom-based support.
        (3) To identify or develop a process to conduct an
    	
analysis of the organizations that provide training in restorative practices, implicit bias, anti-racism, and trauma-responsive systems, mental health services, and social and emotional services to schools.
        (4) To provide recommendations concerning the key
    	
data to be collected and reported to ensure that this State has a full and accurate understanding of the progress toward ensuring that all schools, including programs and providers of care to pre-kindergarten children, employ restorative, anti-racist, and trauma-responsive strategies and practices. The data collected must include information relating to the availability of trauma responsive support structures in schools as well as disciplinary practices employed on students in person or through other means, including during remote or blended learning. It should also include information on the use of, and funding for, school resource officers and other similar police personnel in school programs.
        (5) To recommend an implementation timeline,
    	
including the key roles, responsibilities, and resources to advance this State toward a system in which every school, district, and community is progressing toward becoming trauma-responsive.
        (6) To seek input and feedback from stakeholders,
    	
including parents, students, and educators, who reflect the diversity of this State.
    (c) Members of the Whole Child Task Force shall be appointed by the State Superintendent of Education. Members of this task force must represent the diversity of this State and possess the expertise needed to perform the work required to meet the goals of the task force set forth under subsection (a). Members of the task force shall include all of the following:
        (1) One member of a statewide professional teachers'
    	
organization.
        (2) One member of another statewide professional
    	
teachers' organization.
        (3) One member who represents a school district
    	
serving a community with a population of 500,000 or more.
        (4) One member of a statewide organization
    	
representing social workers.
        (5) One member of an organization that has specific
    	
expertise in trauma-responsive school practices and experience in supporting schools in developing trauma-responsive and restorative practices.
        (6) One member of another organization that has
    	
specific expertise in trauma-responsive school practices and experience in supporting schools in developing trauma-responsive and restorative practices.
        (7) One member of a statewide organization that
    	
represents school administrators.
        (8) One member of a statewide policy organization
    	
that works to build a healthy public education system that prepares all students for a successful college, career, and civic life.
        (9) One member of a statewide organization that
    	
brings teachers together to identify and address issues critical to student success.
        (10) One member of the General Assembly recommended
    	
by the President of the Senate.
        (11) One member of the General Assembly recommended
    	
by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
        (12) One member of the General Assembly recommended
    	
by the Minority Leader of the Senate.
        (13) One member of the General Assembly recommended
    	
by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
        (14) One member of a civil rights organization that
    	
works actively on issues regarding student support.
        (15) One administrator from a school district that
    	
has actively worked to develop a system of student support that uses a trauma-informed lens.
        (16) One educator from a school district that has
    	
actively worked to develop a system of student support that uses a trauma-informed lens.
        (17) One member of a youth-led organization.
        (18) One member of an organization that has
    	
demonstrated expertise in restorative practices.
        (19) One member of a coalition of mental health and
    	
school practitioners who assist schools in developing and implementing trauma-informed and restorative strategies and systems.
        (20) One member of an organization whose mission is
    	
to promote the safety, health, and economic success of children, youth, and families in this State.
        (21) One member who works or has worked as a
    	
restorative justice coach or disciplinarian.
        (22) One member who works or has worked as a social
    	
worker.
        (23) One member of the State Board of Education.
        (24) One member who represents a statewide
    	
principals' organization.
        (25) One member who represents a statewide
    	
organization of school boards.
        (26) One member who has expertise in
    	
pre-kindergarten education.
        (27) One member who represents a school social
    	
worker association.
        (28) One member who represents an organization that
    	
represents school districts in both the south suburbs and collar counties.
        (29) One member who is a licensed clinical
    	
psychologist who (A) has a doctor of philosophy in the field of clinical psychology and has an appointment at an independent free-standing children's hospital located in Chicago, (B) serves as associate professor at a medical school located in Chicago, and (C) serves as the clinical director of a coalition of voluntary collaboration of organizations that are committed to applying a trauma lens to their efforts on behalf of families and children in the State.
        (30) One member who represents a west suburban school
    	
district.
    (d) The Whole Child Task Force shall meet at the call of the State Superintendent of Education or his or her designee, who shall serve as as the chairperson. The State Board of Education shall provide administrative and other support to the task force. Members of the task force shall serve without compensation.
    (e) The Whole Child Task Force shall submit a report of its findings and recommendations to the General Assembly, the Illinois Legislative Black Caucus, the State Board of Education, and the Governor on or before February 1, 2022. Upon submitting its report, the task force is dissolved.
    (f) This Section is repealed on February 1, 2023.
(Source: P.A. 101-654, eff. 3-8-21.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 23 heading)
ARTICLE 23. SCHOOL BOARD ASSOCIATIONS

    (105 ILCS 5/23-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 23-1)
    Sec. 23-1. Purpose of article.
    This Article has for its purpose the education of school board members as to their duties and responsibilities so as to improve the management of the public schools, through associations of school boards. The activities of any association which complies with this Article are hereby declared to constitute a public purpose.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/23-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 23-2)
    Sec. 23-2. Boards may form or join associations.
    School boards are authorized to form, join and provide for the expenses of associations of Illinois school boards formed for the purpose of conducting county or regional school board institutes and otherwise disseminating and interchanging information regarding school board problems, duties and responsibilities, provided such associations comply with the requirements of this Article.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/23-3) (from Ch. 122, par. 23-3)
    Sec. 23-3. Filing copy of constitution, by-laws and amendments.
    Within 30 days after the adoption by any such association of its constitution or by-laws or any amendment thereto, it shall file a copy thereof, certified by its president and executive director, with the Governor, the Superintendent of Public Instruction and the county superintendent of schools of each county in which it has any membership.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/23-4) (from Ch. 122, par. 23-4)
    Sec. 23-4. Election of officers and governing body.
    The constitution or by-laws of any such association shall provide for the election of its officers and governing body at an annual meeting of the association, or in some other manner which will insure that all member boards have an equal opportunity to participate in the election.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/23-5) (from Ch. 122, par. 23-5)
    Sec. 23-5. Membership.
    Any such association shall admit to its membership any school board whose district lies wholly or in part within the area covered by the association.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/23-6) (from Ch. 122, par. 23-6)
    Sec. 23-6. Annual report. Each association shall make an annual report within 60 days after the close of its fiscal year to the Governor, the State Board of Education and the regional superintendent of schools of each region in which it has members, setting forth the activities of the association for the preceding fiscal year, the institutes held, the subjects discussed, and the attendance, and shall furnish the Governor, the State Board of Education and such regional superintendents with copies of all publications sent to its members.
(Source: P.A. 81-1508.)

    (105 ILCS 5/23-7) (from Ch. 122, par. 23-7)
    Sec. 23-7. Compensation and expenses.
    No school board member shall receive any compensation for service rendered to any such association, whether as an officer or otherwise, but shall be entitled to reimbursement for expenses actually incurred in the work of such association.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/23-8) (from Ch. 122, par. 23-8)
    Sec. 23-8. Powers and duties.
    Each association shall perform such duties and exercise such powers as if it were a state institution for the purposes of Article 16 of the "Illinois Pension Code", approved March 18, 1963, as amended.
(Source: Laws 1965, p. 3746.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 24 heading)
ARTICLE 24. EMPLOYMENT OF TEACHERS--TENURE--DUTIES OF TEACHERS

    (105 ILCS 5/24-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 24-1)
    Sec. 24-1. Appointment-Salaries-Payment-School month-School term.) School boards shall appoint all teachers, determine qualifications of employment and fix the amount of their salaries subject to limitation set forth in this Act. They shall pay the wages of teachers monthly, subject, however, to the provisions of Section 24-21. The school month shall be the same as the calendar month but by resolution the school board may adopt for its use a month of 20 days, including holidays. The school term shall consist of at least the minimum number of pupil attendance days required by Section 10-19, any additional legal school holidays, days of teachers' institutes, or equivalent professional educational experiences, and one or two days at the beginning of the school term when used as a teachers' workshop.
(Source: P.A. 80-249.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-1.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 24-1.1)
    Sec. 24-1.1. Employment of public school employees by nonpublic schools. Employees of public schools may be employed on a part-time or temporary basis by private or parochial schools, providing that such employment is in no way connected with or subsidized by their public school employment, and provided further that such private or parochial employment does not conflict or interfere with an employee's public school duties.
(Source: P.A. 80-287.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-1.5)
    Sec. 24-1.5. New or vacant teaching positions. A school district's selection of a candidate for a new or vacant teaching position not otherwise required to be filled pursuant to Section 24-12 of this Code must be based upon the consideration of factors that include without limitation certifications, qualifications, merit and ability (including performance evaluations, if available), and relevant experience, provided that the length of continuing service with the school district must not be considered as a factor, unless all other factors are determined by the school district to be equal. A school district's decision to select a particular candidate to fill a new or vacant position is not subject to review under grievance resolution procedures adopted pursuant to subsection (c) of Section 10 of the Illinois Educational Labor Relations Act, provided that, in making such a decision, the district does not fail to adhere to procedural requirements in a collective bargaining agreement relating to the filling of new or vacant teaching positions. Provisions regarding the filling of new and vacant positions in a collective bargaining agreement between a school district and the exclusive bargaining representative of its teachers in existence on the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 97th General Assembly shall remain in full force and effect for the term of the agreement, unless terminated by mutual agreement.
    Nothing in this amendatory Act of the 97th General Assembly (i) limits or otherwise impacts school districts' management right to hire new employees, (ii) affects what currently is or may be a mandatory subject of bargaining under the Illinois Educational Labor Relations Act, or (iii) creates a statutory cause of action for a candidate or a candidate's representative to challenge a school district's selection decision based on the school district's failure to adhere to the requirements of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 97-8, eff. 6-13-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 24-2)
    Sec. 24-2. Holidays.
    (a) Teachers shall not be required to teach on Saturdays, nor, except as provided in subsection (b) of this Section, shall teachers or other school employees, other than noncertificated school employees whose presence is necessary because of an emergency or for the continued operation and maintenance of school facilities or property, be required to work on legal school holidays, which are January 1, New Year's Day; the third Monday in January, the Birthday of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.; February 12, the Birthday of President Abraham Lincoln; the first Monday in March (to be known as Casimir Pulaski's birthday); Good Friday; the day designated as Memorial Day by federal law; July 4, Independence Day; the first Monday in September, Labor Day; the second Monday in October, Columbus Day; November 11, Veterans' Day; the Thursday in November commonly called Thanksgiving Day; and December 25, Christmas Day. School boards may grant special holidays whenever in their judgment such action is advisable. No deduction shall be made from the time or compensation of a school employee on account of any legal or special holiday.
    (b) A school board or other entity eligible to apply for waivers and modifications under Section 2-3.25g of this Code is authorized to hold school or schedule teachers' institutes, parent-teacher conferences, or staff development on the third Monday in January (the Birthday of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.); February 12 (the Birthday of President Abraham Lincoln); the first Monday in March (known as Casimir Pulaski's birthday); the second Monday in October (Columbus Day); and November 11 (Veterans' Day), provided that:
        (1) the person or persons honored by the holiday are
    	
recognized through instructional activities conducted on that day or, if the day is not used for student attendance, on the first school day preceding or following that day; and
        (2) the entity that chooses to exercise this
    	
authority first holds a public hearing about the proposal. The entity shall provide notice preceding the public hearing to both educators and parents. The notice shall set forth the time, date, and place of the hearing, describe the proposal, and indicate that the entity will take testimony from educators and parents about the proposal.
    (c) Commemorative holidays, which recognize specified patriotic, civic, cultural or historical persons, activities, or events, are regular school days. Commemorative holidays are: January 28 (to be known as Christa McAuliffe Day and observed as a commemoration of space exploration), February 15 (the birthday of Susan B. Anthony), March 29 (Viet Nam War Veterans' Day), September 11 (September 11th Day of Remembrance), the school day immediately preceding Veterans' Day (Korean War Veterans' Day), October 1 (Recycling Day), October 7 (Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans Remembrance Day), December 7 (Pearl Harbor Veterans' Day), and any day so appointed by the President or Governor. School boards may establish commemorative holidays whenever in their judgment such action is advisable. School boards shall include instruction relative to commemorated persons, activities, or events on the commemorative holiday or at any other time during the school year and at any point in the curriculum when such instruction may be deemed appropriate. The State Board of Education shall prepare and make available to school boards instructional materials relative to commemorated persons, activities, or events which may be used by school boards in conjunction with any instruction provided pursuant to this paragraph.
    (d) City of Chicago School District 299 shall observe March 4 of each year as a commemorative holiday. This holiday shall be known as Mayors' Day which shall be a day to commemorate and be reminded of the past Chief Executive Officers of the City of Chicago, and in particular the late Mayor Richard J. Daley and the late Mayor Harold Washington. If March 4 falls on a Saturday or Sunday, Mayors' Day shall be observed on the following Monday.
    (e) Notwithstanding any other provision of State law to the contrary, November 3, 2020 shall be a State holiday known as 2020 General Election Day and shall be observed throughout the State pursuant to this amendatory Act of the 101st General Assembly. All government offices, with the exception of election authorities, shall be closed unless authorized to be used as a location for election day services or as a polling place.
(Source: P.A. 101-642, eff. 6-16-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-3) (from Ch. 122, par. 24-3)
    Sec. 24-3. Attendance at teachers' institute. The days in any school year spent by a teacher or educational support personnel during the term time spent in attendance upon a teachers' institute or equivalent professional educational experiences held under the direction of the county superintendent of schools shall be considered time expended in the service of the district and no deduction of wages shall be made for such attendance. The board may make a pro-rata deduction from the salary of any teacher or educational support personnel who fail or refuse to attend such institute, unless, in the case of educational support personnel, they are exempt from attending. The boards shall close the schools for county institute.
(Source: P.A. 97-525, eff. 1-1-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-4) (from Ch. 122, par. 24-4)
    Sec. 24-4. The color, race, sex, nationality, religion or religious affiliation of any applicant seeking employment either as a superintendent, principal, teacher or otherwise in the public elementary or high schools, shall not be considered either a qualification or disqualification for any such employment. Nor shall color, race, sex, nationality, religion or religious affiliation be considered in assigning any person to an office or position or to any school in the school system. If any member of a school board, superintendent, principal or other school officer violates the foregoing provision or directly or indirectly requires, asks or seeks information concerning the color, race, sex, nationality, religion or religious affiliation of any person in connection with his employment or assignment, or if any person, agency, bureau, corporation or association employed or maintained to obtain or aid in obtaining employment of the kind described, directly or indirectly requires, asks, seeks, indicates or transmits orally or in writing information concerning the color, race, sex, nationality, religion or religious affiliation of an applicant for such employment, with the intent to influence such appointment, he shall be liable to a penalty of not less than $100 nor more than $500, to be recovered by the person aggrieved thereby in any court of competent jurisdiction, and he shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
(Source: P.A. 81-1509.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-4.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 24-4.1)
    Sec. 24-4.1. Residence requirements.) Residency within any school district shall not be considered in determining the employment or the compensation of a teacher or whether to retain, promote, assign or transfer that teacher.
(Source: P.A. 82-381.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-5) (from Ch. 122, par. 24-5)
    Sec. 24-5. Physical fitness and professional growth.
    (a) In this Section, "employee" means any employee of a school district, a student teacher, an employee of a contractor that provides services to students or in schools, or any other individual subject to the requirements of Section 10-21.9 or 34-18.5 of this Code.
    (b) This subsection (b) does not apply to substitute teacher employees. School boards shall require of new employees evidence of physical fitness to perform duties assigned and freedom from communicable disease. Such evidence shall consist of a physical examination by a physician licensed in Illinois or any other state to practice medicine and surgery in all its branches, a licensed advanced practice registered nurse, or a licensed physician assistant not more than 90 days preceding time of presentation to the board, and the cost of such examination shall rest with the employee. A new or existing employee may be subject to additional health examinations, including screening for tuberculosis, as required by rules adopted by the Department of Public Health or by order of a local public health official. The board may from time to time require an examination of any employee by a physician licensed in Illinois to practice medicine and surgery in all its branches, a licensed advanced practice registered nurse, or a licensed physician assistant and shall pay the expenses thereof from school funds.
    (b-5) School boards may require of new substitute teacher employees evidence of physical fitness to perform duties assigned and shall require of new substitute teacher employees evidence of freedom from communicable disease. Evidence may consist of a physical examination by a physician licensed in Illinois or any other state to practice medicine and surgery in all its branches, a licensed advanced practice registered nurse, or a licensed physician assistant not more than 90 days preceding time of presentation to the board, and the cost of such examination shall rest with the substitute teacher employee. A new or existing substitute teacher employee may be subject to additional health examinations, including screening for tuberculosis, as required by rules adopted by the Department of Public Health or by order of a local public health official. The board may from time to time require an examination of any substitute teacher employee by a physician licensed in Illinois to practice medicine and surgery in all its branches, a licensed advanced practice registered nurse, or a licensed physician assistant and shall pay the expenses thereof from school funds.
    (c) School boards may require teachers in their employ to furnish from time to time evidence of continued professional growth.
(Source: P.A. 100-513, eff. 1-1-18; 100-855, eff. 8-14-18; 101-81, eff. 7-12-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-6)
    Sec. 24-6. Sick leave. The school boards of all school districts, including special charter districts, but not including school districts in municipalities of 500,000 or more, shall grant their full-time teachers, and also shall grant such of their other employees as are eligible to participate in the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund under the "600-Hour Standard" established, or under such other eligibility participation standard as may from time to time be established, by rules and regulations now or hereafter promulgated by the Board of that Fund under Section 7-198 of the Illinois Pension Code, as now or hereafter amended, sick leave provisions not less in amount than 10 days at full pay in each school year. If any such teacher or employee does not use the full amount of annual leave thus allowed, the unused amount shall be allowed to accumulate to a minimum available leave of 180 days at full pay, including the leave of the current year. Sick leave shall be interpreted to mean personal illness, quarantine at home, serious illness or death in the immediate family or household, or birth, adoption, or placement for adoption. The school board may require a certificate from a physician licensed in Illinois to practice medicine and surgery in all its branches, a chiropractic physician licensed under the Medical Practice Act of 1987, a licensed advanced practice registered nurse, a licensed physician assistant, or, if the treatment is by prayer or spiritual means, a spiritual adviser or practitioner of the teacher's or employee's faith as a basis for pay during leave after an absence of 3 days for personal illness or 30 days for birth or as the school board may deem necessary in other cases. If the school board does require a certificate as a basis for pay during leave of less than 3 days for personal illness, the school board shall pay, from school funds, the expenses incurred by the teachers or other employees in obtaining the certificate. For paid leave for adoption or placement for adoption, the school board may require that the teacher or other employee provide evidence that the formal adoption process is underway, and such leave is limited to 30 days unless a longer leave has been negotiated with the exclusive bargaining representative.
    If, by reason of any change in the boundaries of school districts, or by reason of the creation of a new school district, the employment of a teacher is transferred to a new or different board, the accumulated sick leave of such teacher is not thereby lost, but is transferred to such new or different district.
    For purposes of this Section, "immediate family" shall include parents, spouse, brothers, sisters, children, grandparents, grandchildren, parents-in-law, brothers-in-law, sisters-in-law, and legal guardians.
(Source: P.A. 99-173, eff. 7-29-15; 100-513, eff. 1-1-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-6.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 24-6.1)
    Sec. 24-6.1. Sabbatical leave. Every school board may grant a sabbatical leave of absence to a teacher, principal or superintendent performing contractual continued service, for a period of at least 4 school months but not in excess of one school term, for resident study, research, travel or other purposes designed to improve the school system. The grant of a sabbatical leave by a school board shall constitute a finding that the leave is deemed to benefit the school system by improving the quality and level of experience of the teaching force.
    This leave may be granted after completion of at least 6 years of satisfactory service as a full time teacher, principal or superintendent and may again be granted after completion of a subsequent period of 6 years of such service. However, 2 sabbatical leaves, each consisting of at least 4 months but totaling no more than the equivalent of one school year, may be granted within a 6 year period. A leave granted for a period of one school year or less shall bar a further sabbatical leave until completion of 6 years additional satisfactory service, except that 2 leaves which total no more than the equivalent of one school year shall bar a further sabbatical leave only until the completion of 6 years additional satisfactory service following the completion of the first such leave. The leave shall be conditional upon a plan for resident study, research, travel or other activities proposed by the applicant and deemed by the board to benefit the school system, which plan shall be approved by the board and not thereafter modified without the approval of the board.
    Before a leave is granted pursuant to this Section, the applicant shall agree in writing that if at the expiration of such leave he does not return to and perform contractual continued service in the district for at least one school year after his return, all sums of money received from the board during his sabbatical leave will be refunded to the board unless such return and performance is prevented by illness or incapacity.
    During absence pursuant to such leave, such teacher, principal or superintendent shall receive the same basic salary as if in actual service, except that there may be deducted therefrom an amount equivalent to the amount payable for substitute service. However, such salary after deduction for substitute service shall in no case be less than the minimum provided by Section 24-8 of this Act or 1/2 of the basic salary, whichever is greater. The person on leave shall not engage in any activity for which salary or compensation is paid unless the activity is directly related to the purpose for which the leave is granted and is approved by the board. A sabbatical leave may be granted to enable the applicant, if otherwise eligible, to accept scholarships for study or research. Unless justified by illness or incapacity, failure of any person granted a leave under this Section to devote the entire period to the purposes for which the leave was granted shall constitute a cause for removal from teaching service.
    Upon expiration of a leave granted pursuant to this Section, and upon presentation of evidence satisfactory to the board showing compliance with the conditions of the leave, the teacher, principal or superintendent shall be returned to a position equivalent to that formerly occupied. The contractual continued service status of the person on sabbatical leave shall not be affected.
    Absence during a leave granted pursuant to this Section shall not be construed as a discontinuance of service for any purpose, including progression on the salary schedule if one is in effect in the district. The board shall pay the contribution to the Teachers' Retirement System required of the person on leave computed on the annual full-time salary rate under which the member last received earnings immediately prior to the leave or a proportionate part of such rate for a partial year of sabbatical leave credit.
    This Section in no way limits the power of the board to grant leaves for other purposes.
(Source: P.A. 83-186.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-6.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 24-6.2)
    Sec. 24-6.2. Association president leave. Each school board shall grant paid leaves of absence to the local association president of a state teacher association that is an exclusive bargaining agent in the district, or his or her teacher designee, for the purpose of attending meetings, workshops or seminars designated by the State Board of Education, the regional superintendent of schools, the general superintendent of schools in a school district subject to the provisions of Article 34, or the superintendent of schools in any school district having a population of less than 500,000 inhabitants to deal with issues arising from the education reform legislation of the 84th General Assembly.
(Source: P.A. 84-1401.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-6.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 24-6.3)
    Sec. 24-6.3. Retirement trustee leave.
    (a) Each school board employing a teacher who is an elected trustee of the Teachers' Retirement System of the State of Illinois shall make available to the elected trustee at least 20 days of paid leave of absence per year for the purpose of attending meetings of the System's Board of Trustees, committee meetings of such Board, and seminars regarding issues for which such Board is responsible. The Teachers' Retirement System of the State of Illinois shall reimburse affected school districts for the actual cost of hiring a substitute teacher during such leaves of absence.
    (b) Each school board employing an employee who is an elected trustee of the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund shall make available to the elected trustee at least 20 days of paid leave of absence per year for the purpose of attending meetings of the Fund's Board of Trustees, committee meetings of the Board of Trustees, and seminars regarding issues for which the Board of Trustees is responsible. The Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund may reimburse affected school districts for the actual cost of hiring a substitute employee during such leaves of absence.
(Source: P.A. 96-357, eff. 8-13-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-7) (from Ch. 122, par. 24-7)
    Sec. 24-7. Discrimination on account of sex.
    In fixing salaries of certificated employees school boards shall make no discrimination on account of sex.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-8) (from Ch. 122, par. 24-8)
    Sec. 24-8. Minimum salary. In fixing the salaries of teachers, school boards shall pay those who serve on a full-time basis not less than a rate for the school year that is based upon training completed in a recognized institution of higher learning, as follows: for the school year beginning July 1, 1980 and until the 2020-2021 school year, less than a bachelor's degree, $9,000; 120 semester hours or more and a bachelor's degree, $10,000; 150 semester hours or more and a master's degree, $11,000. In fixing the salaries of teachers, a school board shall pay those who serve on a full-time basis a rate not less than (i) $32,076 for the 2020-2021 school year, (ii) $34,576 for the 2021-2022 school year, (iii) $37,076 for the 2022-2023 school year, and (iv) $40,000 for the 2023-2024 school year. The minimum salary rate for each school year thereafter, subject to review by the General Assembly, shall equal the minimum salary rate for the previous school year increased by a percentage equal to the percentage increase, if any, in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers for all items published by the United States Department of Labor for the previous school year.
    On or before January 31, 2020, the Professional Review Panel created under Section 18-8.15 must submit a report to the General Assembly on how State funds and funds distributed under the evidence-based funding formula under Section 18-8.15 may aid the financial effects of the changes made by this amendatory Act of the 101st General Assembly.
    Based upon previous public school experience in this State or any other state, territory, dependency or possession of the United States, or in schools operated by or under the auspices of the United States, teachers who serve on a full-time basis shall have their salaries increased to at least the following amounts above the starting salary for a teacher in such district in the same classification: with less than a bachelor's degree, $750 after 5 years; with 120 semester hours or more and a bachelor's degree, $1,000 after 5 years and $1,600 after 8 years; with 150 semester hours or more and a master's degree, $1,250 after 5 years, $2,000 after 8 years and $2,750 after 13 years.
    For the purpose of this Section a teacher's salary shall include any amount paid by the school district on behalf of the teacher, as teacher contributions, to the Teachers' Retirement System of the State of Illinois.
    If a school board establishes a schedule for teachers' salaries based on education and experience, not inconsistent with this Section, all certificated nurses employed by that board shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of such schedule.
    For purposes of this Section, a teacher who submits a certificate of completion to the school office prior to the first day of the school term shall be considered to have the degree stated in such certificate.
(Source: P.A. 101-443, eff. 6-1-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-8.5)
    Sec. 24-8.5. Student teacher; salary. Each school district may provide a salary to a student teacher employed by the district. A school district may fix the amount of salary to pay a student teacher under this Section.
(Source: P.A. 101-220, eff. 8-7-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-9) (from Ch. 122, par. 24-9)
    Sec. 24-9. Teachers duty free lunch period.
    Every teacher in any school house where 2 or more teachers are employed whose duties require attendance at the school for 4 or more clock hours in any school day shall be entitled to and be allowed a duty free lunch period equal to the regular local school lunch period but not less than 30 minutes in each school day.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-11) (from Ch. 122, par. 24-11)
    Sec. 24-11. Boards of Education - Boards of School Inspectors - Contractual continued service.
    (a) As used in this and the succeeding Sections of this Article:
    "Teacher" means any or all school district employees regularly required to be certified under laws relating to the certification of teachers.
    "Board" means board of directors, board of education, or board of school inspectors, as the case may be.
    "School term" means that portion of the school year, July 1 to the following June 30, when school is in actual session.
    "Program" means a program of a special education joint agreement.
    "Program of a special education joint agreement" means instructional, consultative, supervisory, administrative, diagnostic, and related services that are managed by a special educational joint agreement designed to service 2 or more school districts that are members of the joint agreement.
    "PERA implementation date" means the implementation date of an evaluation system for teachers as specified by Section 24A-2.5 of this Code for all schools within a school district or all programs of a special education joint agreement.
    (b) This Section and Sections 24-12 through 24-16 of this Article apply only to school districts having less than 500,000 inhabitants.
    (c) Any teacher who is first employed as a full-time teacher in a school district or program prior to the PERA implementation date and who is employed in that district or program for a probationary period of 4 consecutive school terms shall enter upon contractual continued service in the district or in all of the programs that the teacher is legally qualified to hold, unless the teacher is given written notice of dismissal by certified mail, return receipt requested, by the employing board at least 45 days before the end of any school term within such period.
    (d) For any teacher who is first employed as a full-time teacher in a school district or program on or after the PERA implementation date, the probationary period shall be one of the following periods, based upon the teacher's school terms of service and performance, before the teacher shall enter upon contractual continued service in the district or in all of the programs that the teacher is legally qualified to hold, unless the teacher is given written notice of dismissal by certified mail, return receipt requested, by the employing board at least 45 days before the end of any school term within such period:
        (1) 4 consecutive school terms of service in which
    	
the teacher receives overall annual evaluation ratings of at least "Proficient" in the last school term and at least "Proficient" in either the second or third school term;
        (2) 3 consecutive school terms of service in which
    	
the teacher receives 3 overall annual evaluations of "Excellent"; or
        (3) 2 consecutive school terms of service in which
    	
the teacher receives 2 overall annual evaluations of "Excellent" service, but only if the teacher (i) previously attained contractual continued service in a different school district or program in this State, (ii) voluntarily departed or was honorably dismissed from that school district or program in the school term immediately prior to the teacher's first school term of service applicable to the attainment of contractual continued service under this subdivision (3), and (iii) received, in his or her 2 most recent overall annual or biennial evaluations from the prior school district or program, ratings of at least "Proficient", with both such ratings occurring after the school district's or program's PERA implementation date. For a teacher to attain contractual continued service under this subdivision (3), the teacher shall provide official copies of his or her 2 most recent overall annual or biennial evaluations from the prior school district or program to the new school district or program within 60 days from the teacher's first day of service with the new school district or program. The prior school district or program must provide the teacher with official copies of his or her 2 most recent overall annual or biennial evaluations within 14 days after the teacher's request. If a teacher has requested such official copies prior to 45 days after the teacher's first day of service with the new school district or program and the teacher's prior school district or program fails to provide the teacher with the official copies required under this subdivision (3), then the time period for the teacher to submit the official copies to his or her new school district or program must be extended until 14 days after receipt of such copies from the prior school district or program. If the prior school district or program fails to provide the teacher with the official copies required under this subdivision (3) within 90 days from the teacher's first day of service with the new school district or program, then the new school district or program shall rely upon the teacher's own copies of his or her evaluations for purposes of this subdivision (3).
    If the teacher does not receive overall annual evaluations of "Excellent" in the school terms necessary for eligibility to achieve accelerated contractual continued service in subdivisions (2) and (3) of this subsection (d), the teacher shall be eligible for contractual continued service pursuant to subdivision (1) of this subsection (d). If, at the conclusion of 4 consecutive school terms of service that count toward attainment of contractual continued service, the teacher's performance does not qualify the teacher for contractual continued service under subdivision (1) of this subsection (d), then the teacher shall not enter upon contractual continued service and shall be dismissed. If a performance evaluation is not conducted for any school term when such evaluation is required to be conducted under Section 24A-5 of this Code, then the teacher's performance evaluation rating for such school term for purposes of determining the attainment of contractual continued service shall be deemed "Proficient", except that, during any time in which the Governor has declared a disaster due to a public health emergency pursuant to Section 7 of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, this default to "Proficient" does not apply to any teacher who has entered into contractual continued service and who was deemed "Excellent" on his or her most recent evaluation. During any time in which the Governor has declared a disaster due to a public health emergency pursuant to Section 7 of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act and unless the school board and any exclusive bargaining representative have completed the performance rating for teachers or mutually agreed to an alternate performance rating, any teacher who has entered into contractual continued service, whose most recent evaluation was deemed "Excellent", and whose performance evaluation is not conducted when the evaluation is required to be conducted shall receive a teacher's performance rating deemed "Excellent". A school board and any exclusive bargaining representative may mutually agree to an alternate performance rating for teachers not in contractual continued service during any time in which the Governor has declared a disaster due to a public health emergency pursuant to Section 7 of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, as long as the agreement is in writing.
    (e) For the purposes of determining contractual continued service, a school term shall be counted only toward attainment of contractual continued service if the teacher actually teaches or is otherwise present and participating in the district's or program's educational program for 120 days or more, provided that the days of leave under the federal Family Medical Leave Act that the teacher is required to take until the end of the school term shall be considered days of teaching or participation in the district's or program's educational program. A school term that is not counted toward attainment of contractual continued service shall not be considered a break in service for purposes of determining whether a teacher has been employed for 4 consecutive school terms, provided that the teacher actually teaches or is otherwise present and participating in the district's or program's educational program in the following school term.
    (f) If the employing board determines to dismiss the teacher in the last year of the probationary period as provided in subsection (c) of this Section or subdivision (1) or (2) of subsection (d) of this Section, but not subdivision (3) of subsection (d) of this Section, the written notice of dismissal provided by the employing board must contain specific reasons for dismissal. Any full-time teacher who does not receive written notice from the employing board at least 45 days before the end of any school term as provided in this Section and whose performance does not require dismissal after the fourth probationary year pursuant to subsection (d) of this Section shall be re-employed for the following school term.
    (g) Contractual continued service shall continue in effect the terms and provisions of the contract with the teacher during the last school term of the probationary period, subject to this Act and the lawful regulations of the employing board. This Section and succeeding Sections do not modify any existing power of the board except with respect to the procedure of the discharge of a teacher and reductions in salary as hereinafter provided. Contractual continued service status shall not restrict the power of the board to transfer a teacher to a position which the teacher is qualified to fill or to make such salary adjustments as it deems desirable, but unless reductions in salary are uniform or based upon some reasonable classification, any teacher whose salary is reduced shall be entitled to a notice and a hearing as hereinafter provided in the case of certain dismissals or removals.
    (h) If, by reason of any change in the boundaries of school districts or by reason of the creation of a new school district, the position held by any teacher having a contractual continued service status is transferred from one board to the control of a new or different board, then the contractual continued service status of the teacher is not thereby lost, and such new or different board is subject to this Code with respect to the teacher in the same manner as if the teacher were its employee and had been its employee during the time the teacher was actually employed by the board from whose control the position was transferred.
    (i) The employment of any teacher in a program of a special education joint agreement established under Section 3-15.14, 10-22.31 or 10-22.31a shall be governed by this and succeeding Sections of this Article. For purposes of attaining and maintaining contractual continued service and computing length of continuing service as referred to in this Section and Section 24-12, employment in a special educational joint program shall be deemed a continuation of all previous certificated employment of such teacher for such joint agreement whether the employer of the teacher was the joint agreement, the regional superintendent, or one of the participating districts in the joint agreement.
    (j) For any teacher employed after July 1, 1987 as a full-time teacher in a program of a special education joint agreement, whether the program is operated by the joint agreement or a member district on behalf of the joint agreement, in the event of a reduction in the number of programs or positions in the joint agreement in which the notice of dismissal is provided on or before the end of the 2010-2011 school term, the teacher in contractual continued service is eligible for employment in the joint agreement programs for which the teacher is legally qualified in order of greater length of continuing service in the joint agreement, unless an alternative method of determining the sequence of dismissal is established in a collective bargaining agreement. For any teacher employed after July 1, 1987 as a full-time teacher in a program of a special education joint agreement, whether the program is operated by the joint agreement or a member district on behalf of the joint agreement, in the event of a reduction in the number of programs or positions in the joint agreement in which the notice of dismissal is provided during the 2011-2012 school term or a subsequent school term, the teacher shall be included on the honorable dismissal lists of all joint agreement programs for positions for which the teacher is qualified and is eligible for employment in such programs in accordance with subsections (b) and (c) of Section 24-12 of this Code and the applicable honorable dismissal policies of the joint agreement.
    (k) For any teacher employed after July 1, 1987 as a full-time teacher in a program of a special education joint agreement, whether the program is operated by the joint agreement or a member district on behalf of the joint agreement, in the event of the dissolution of a joint agreement, in which the notice to teachers of the dissolution is provided during the 2010-2011 school term, the teacher in contractual continued service who is legally qualified shall be assigned to any comparable position in a member district currently held by a teacher who has not entered upon contractual continued service or held by a teacher who has entered upon contractual continued service with a shorter length of contractual continued service. Any teacher employed after July 1, 1987 as a full-time teacher in a program of a special education joint agreement, whether the program is operated by the joint agreement or a member district on behalf of the joint agreement, in the event of the dissolution of a joint agreement in which the notice to teachers of the dissolution is provided during the 2011-2012 school term or a subsequent school term, the teacher who is qualified shall be included on the order of honorable dismissal lists of each member district and shall be assigned to any comparable position in any such district in accordance with subsections (b) and (c) of Section 24-12 of this Code and the applicable honorable dismissal policies of each member district.
    (l) The governing board of the joint agreement, or the administrative district, if so authorized by the articles of agreement of the joint agreement, rather than the board of education of a school district, may carry out employment and termination actions including dismissals under this Section and Section 24-12.
    (m) The employment of any teacher in a special education program authorized by Section 14-1.01 through 14-14.01, or a joint educational program established under Section 10-22.31a, shall be under this and the succeeding Sections of this Article, and such employment shall be deemed a continuation of the previous employment of such teacher in any of the participating districts, regardless of the participation of other districts in the program.
    (n) Any teacher employed as a full-time teacher in a special education program prior to September 23, 1987 in which 2 or more school districts participate for a probationary period of 2 consecutive years shall enter upon contractual continued service in each of the participating districts, subject to this and the succeeding Sections of this Article, and, notwithstanding Section 24-1.5 of this Code, in the event of the termination of the program shall be eligible for any vacant position in any of such districts for which such teacher is qualified.
(Source: P.A. 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-12) (from Ch. 122, par. 24-12)
    Sec. 24-12. Removal or dismissal of teachers in contractual continued service.
    (a) This subsection (a) applies only to honorable dismissals and recalls in which the notice of dismissal is provided on or before the end of the 2010-2011 school term. If a teacher in contractual continued service is removed or dismissed as a result of a decision of the board to decrease the number of teachers employed by the board or to discontinue some particular type of teaching service, written notice shall be mailed to the teacher and also given the teacher either by certified mail, return receipt requested or personal delivery with receipt at least 60 days before the end of the school term, together with a statement of honorable dismissal and the reason therefor, and in all such cases the board shall first remove or dismiss all teachers who have not entered upon contractual continued service before removing or dismissing any teacher who has entered upon contractual continued service and who is legally qualified to hold a position currently held by a teacher who has not entered upon contractual continued service.
    As between teachers who have entered upon contractual continued service, the teacher or teachers with the shorter length of continuing service with the district shall be dismissed first unless an alternative method of determining the sequence of dismissal is established in a collective bargaining agreement or contract between the board and a professional faculty members' organization and except that this provision shall not impair the operation of any affirmative action program in the district, regardless of whether it exists by operation of law or is conducted on a voluntary basis by the board. Any teacher dismissed as a result of such decrease or discontinuance shall be paid all earned compensation on or before the third business day following the last day of pupil attendance in the regular school term.
    If the board has any vacancies for the following school term or within one calendar year from the beginning of the following school term, the positions thereby becoming available shall be tendered to the teachers so removed or dismissed so far as they are legally qualified to hold such positions; provided, however, that if the number of honorable dismissal notices based on economic necessity exceeds 15% of the number of full-time equivalent positions filled by certified employees (excluding principals and administrative personnel) during the preceding school year, then if the board has any vacancies for the following school term or within 2 calendar years from the beginning of the following school term, the positions so becoming available shall be tendered to the teachers who were so notified and removed or dismissed whenever they are legally qualified to hold such positions. Each board shall, in consultation with any exclusive employee representatives, each year establish a list, categorized by positions, showing the length of continuing service of each teacher who is qualified to hold any such positions, unless an alternative method of determining a sequence of dismissal is established as provided for in this Section, in which case a list shall be made in accordance with the alternative method. Copies of the list shall be distributed to the exclusive employee representative on or before February 1 of each year. Whenever the number of honorable dismissal notices based upon economic necessity exceeds 5, or 150% of the average number of teachers honorably dismissed in the preceding 3 years, whichever is more, then the board also shall hold a public hearing on the question of the dismissals. Following the hearing and board review, the action to approve any such reduction shall require a majority vote of the board members.
    (b) This subsection (b) applies only to honorable dismissals and recalls in which the notice of dismissal is provided during the 2011-2012 school term or a subsequent school term. If any teacher, whether or not in contractual continued service, is removed or dismissed as a result of a decision of a school board to decrease the number of teachers employed by the board, a decision of a school board to discontinue some particular type of teaching service, or a reduction in the number of programs or positions in a special education joint agreement, then written notice must be mailed to the teacher and also given to the teacher either by electronic mail, certified mail, return receipt requested, or personal delivery with receipt at least 45 days before the end of the school term, together with a statement of honorable dismissal and the reason therefor, and in all such cases the sequence of dismissal shall occur in accordance with this subsection (b); except that this subsection (b) shall not impair the operation of any affirmative action program in the school district, regardless of whether it exists by operation of law or is conducted on a voluntary basis by the board.
    Each teacher must be categorized into one or more positions for which the teacher is qualified to hold, based upon legal qualifications and any other qualifications established in a district or joint agreement job description, on or before the May 10 prior to the school year during which the sequence of dismissal is determined. Within each position and subject to agreements made by the joint committee on honorable dismissals that are authorized by subsection (c) of this Section, the school district or joint agreement must establish 4 groupings of teachers qualified to hold the position as follows:
        (1) Grouping one shall consist of each teacher who is
    	
not in contractual continued service and who (i) has not received a performance evaluation rating, (ii) is employed for one school term or less to replace a teacher on leave, or (iii) is employed on a part-time basis. "Part-time basis" for the purposes of this subsection (b) means a teacher who is employed to teach less than a full-day, teacher workload or less than 5 days of the normal student attendance week, unless otherwise provided for in a collective bargaining agreement between the district and the exclusive representative of the district's teachers. For the purposes of this Section, a teacher (A) who is employed as a full-time teacher but who actually teaches or is otherwise present and participating in the district's educational program for less than a school term or (B) who, in the immediately previous school term, was employed on a full-time basis and actually taught or was otherwise present and participated in the district's educational program for 120 days or more is not considered employed on a part-time basis.
        (2) Grouping 2 shall consist of each teacher with a
    	
Needs Improvement or Unsatisfactory performance evaluation rating on either of the teacher's last 2 performance evaluation ratings.
        (3) Grouping 3 shall consist of each teacher with a
    	
performance evaluation rating of at least Satisfactory or Proficient on both of the teacher's last 2 performance evaluation ratings, if 2 ratings are available, or on the teacher's last performance evaluation rating, if only one rating is available, unless the teacher qualifies for placement into grouping 4.
        (4) Grouping 4 shall consist of each teacher whose
    	
last 2 performance evaluation ratings are Excellent and each teacher with 2 Excellent performance evaluation ratings out of the teacher's last 3 performance evaluation ratings with a third rating of Satisfactory or Proficient.
    Among teachers qualified to hold a position, teachers must be dismissed in the order of their groupings, with teachers in grouping one dismissed first and teachers in grouping 4 dismissed last.
    Within grouping one, the sequence of dismissal must be at the discretion of the school district or joint agreement. Within grouping 2, the sequence of dismissal must be based upon average performance evaluation ratings, with the teacher or teachers with the lowest average performance evaluation rating dismissed first. A teacher's average performance evaluation rating must be calculated using the average of the teacher's last 2 performance evaluation ratings, if 2 ratings are available, or the teacher's last performance evaluation rating, if only one rating is available, using the following numerical values: 4 for Excellent; 3 for Proficient or Satisfactory; 2 for Needs Improvement; and 1 for Unsatisfactory. As between or among teachers in grouping 2 with the same average performance evaluation rating and within each of groupings 3 and 4, the teacher or teachers with the shorter length of continuing service with the school district or joint agreement must be dismissed first unless an alternative method of determining the sequence of dismissal is established in a collective bargaining agreement or contract between the board and a professional faculty members' organization.
    Each board, including the governing board of a joint agreement, shall, in consultation with any exclusive employee representatives, each year establish a sequence of honorable dismissal list categorized by positions and the groupings defined in this subsection (b). Copies of the list showing each teacher by name and categorized by positions and the groupings defined in this subsection (b) must be distributed to the exclusive bargaining representative at least 75 days before the end of the school term, provided that the school district or joint agreement may, with notice to any exclusive employee representatives, move teachers from grouping one into another grouping during the period of time from 75 days until 45 days before the end of the school term. Each year, each board shall also establish, in consultation with any exclusive employee representatives, a list showing the length of continuing service of each teacher who is qualified to hold any such positions, unless an alternative method of determining a sequence of dismissal is established as provided for in this Section, in which case a list must be made in accordance with the alternative method. Copies of the list must be distributed to the exclusive employee representative at least 75 days before the end of the school term.
    Any teacher dismissed as a result of such decrease or discontinuance must be paid all earned compensation on or before the third business day following the last day of pupil attendance in the regular school term.
    If the board or joint agreement has any vacancies for the following school term or within one calendar year from the beginning of the following school term, the positions thereby becoming available must be tendered to the teachers so removed or dismissed who were in grouping 3 or 4 of the sequence of dismissal and are qualified to hold the positions, based upon legal qualifications and any other qualifications established in a district or joint agreement job description, on or before the May 10 prior to the date of the positions becoming available, provided that if the number of honorable dismissal notices based on economic necessity exceeds 15% of the number of full-time equivalent positions filled by certified employees (excluding principals and administrative personnel) during the preceding school year, then the recall period is for the following school term or within 2 calendar years from the beginning of the following school term. If the board or joint agreement has any vacancies within the period from the beginning of the following school term through February 1 of the following school term (unless a date later than February 1, but no later than 6 months from the beginning of the following school term, is established in a collective bargaining agreement), the positions thereby becoming available must be tendered to the teachers so removed or dismissed who were in grouping 2 of the sequence of dismissal due to one "needs improvement" rating on either of the teacher's last 2 performance evaluation ratings, provided that, if 2 ratings are available, the other performance evaluation rating used for grouping purposes is "satisfactory", "proficient", or "excellent", and are qualified to hold the positions, based upon legal qualifications and any other qualifications established in a district or joint agreement job description, on or before the May 10 prior to the date of the positions becoming available. On and after July 1, 2014 (the effective date of Public Act 98-648), the preceding sentence shall apply to teachers removed or dismissed by honorable dismissal, even if notice of honorable dismissal occurred during the 2013-2014 school year. Among teachers eligible for recall pursuant to the preceding sentence, the order of recall must be in inverse order of dismissal, unless an alternative order of recall is established in a collective bargaining agreement or contract between the board and a professional faculty members' organization. Whenever the number of honorable dismissal notices based upon economic necessity exceeds 5 notices or 150% of the average number of teachers honorably dismissed in the preceding 3 years, whichever is more, then the school board or governing board of a joint agreement, as applicable, shall also hold a public hearing on the question of the dismissals. Following the hearing and board review, the action to approve any such reduction shall require a majority vote of the board members.
    For purposes of this subsection (b), subject to agreement on an alternative definition reached by the joint committee described in subsection (c) of this Section, a teacher's performance evaluation rating means the overall performance evaluation rating resulting from an annual or biennial performance evaluation conducted pursuant to Article 24A of this Code by the school district or joint agreement determining the sequence of dismissal, not including any performance evaluation conducted during or at the end of a remediation period. No more than one evaluation rating each school term shall be one of the evaluation ratings used for the purpose of determining the sequence of dismissal. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection for any performance evaluations conducted during or at the end of a remediation period, if multiple performance evaluations are conducted in a school term, only the rating from the last evaluation conducted prior to establishing the sequence of honorable dismissal list in such school term shall be the one evaluation rating from that school term used for the purpose of determining the sequence of dismissal. Averaging ratings from multiple evaluations is not permitted unless otherwise agreed to in a collective bargaining agreement or contract between the board and a professional faculty members' organization. The preceding 3 sentences are not a legislative declaration that existing law does or does not already require that only one performance evaluation each school term shall be used for the purpose of determining the sequence of dismissal. For performance evaluation ratings determined prior to September 1, 2012, any school district or joint agreement with a performance evaluation rating system that does not use either of the rating category systems specified in subsection (d) of Section 24A-5 of this Code for all teachers must establish a basis for assigning each teacher a rating that complies with subsection (d) of Section 24A-5 of this Code for all of the performance evaluation ratings that are to be used to determine the sequence of dismissal. A teacher's grouping and ranking on a sequence of honorable dismissal shall be deemed a part of the teacher's performance evaluation, and that information shall be disclosed to the exclusive bargaining representative as part of a sequence of honorable dismissal list, notwithstanding any laws prohibiting disclosure of such information. A performance evaluation rating may be used to determine the sequence of dismissal, notwithstanding the pendency of any grievance resolution or arbitration procedures relating to the performance evaluation. If a teacher has received at least one performance evaluation rating conducted by the school district or joint agreement determining the sequence of dismissal and a subsequent performance evaluation is not conducted in any school year in which such evaluation is required to be conducted under Section 24A-5 of this Code, the teacher's performance evaluation rating for that school year for purposes of determining the sequence of dismissal is deemed Proficient, except that, during any time in which the Governor has declared a disaster due to a public health emergency pursuant to Section 7 of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, this default to Proficient does not apply to any teacher who has entered into contractual continued service and who was deemed Excellent on his or her most recent evaluation. During any time in which the Governor has declared a disaster due to a public health emergency pursuant to Section 7 of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act and unless the school board and any exclusive bargaining representative have completed the performance rating for teachers or have mutually agreed to an alternate performance rating, any teacher who has entered into contractual continued service, whose most recent evaluation was deemed Excellent, and whose performance evaluation is not conducted when the evaluation is required to be conducted shall receive a teacher's performance rating deemed Excellent. A school board and any exclusive bargaining representative may mutually agree to an alternate performance rating for teachers not in contractual continued service during any time in which the Governor has declared a disaster due to a public health emergency pursuant to Section 7 of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, as long as the agreement is in writing. If a performance evaluation rating is nullified as the result of an arbitration, administrative agency, or court determination, then the school district or joint agreement is deemed to have conducted a performance evaluation for that school year, but the performance evaluation rating may not be used in determining the sequence of dismissal.
    Nothing in this subsection (b) shall be construed as limiting the right of a school board or governing board of a joint agreement to dismiss a teacher not in contractual continued service in accordance with Section 24-11 of this Code.
    Any provisions regarding the sequence of honorable dismissals and recall of honorably dismissed teachers in a collective bargaining agreement entered into on or before January 1, 2011 and in effect on June 13, 2011 (the effective date of Public Act 97-8) that may conflict with Public Act 97-8 shall remain in effect through the expiration of such agreement or June 30, 2013, whichever is earlier.
    (c) Each school district and special education joint agreement must use a joint committee composed of equal representation selected by the school board and its teachers or, if applicable, the exclusive bargaining representative of its teachers, to address the matters described in paragraphs (1) through (5) of this subsection (c) pertaining to honorable dismissals under subsection (b) of this Section.
        (1) The joint committee must consider and may agree
    	
to criteria for excluding from grouping 2 and placing into grouping 3 a teacher whose last 2 performance evaluations include a Needs Improvement and either a Proficient or Excellent.
        (2) The joint committee must consider and may agree
    	
to an alternative definition for grouping 4, which definition must take into account prior performance evaluation ratings and may take into account other factors that relate to the school district's or program's educational objectives. An alternative definition for grouping 4 may not permit the inclusion of a teacher in the grouping with a Needs Improvement or Unsatisfactory performance evaluation rating on either of the teacher's last 2 performance evaluation ratings.
        (3) The joint committee may agree to including within
    	
the definition of a performance evaluation rating a performance evaluation rating administered by a school district or joint agreement other than the school district or joint agreement determining the sequence of dismissal.
        (4) For each school district or joint agreement that
    	
administers performance evaluation ratings that are inconsistent with either of the rating category systems specified in subsection (d) of Section 24A-5 of this Code, the school district or joint agreement must consult with the joint committee on the basis for assigning a rating that complies with subsection (d) of Section 24A-5 of this Code to each performance evaluation rating that will be used in a sequence of dismissal.
        (5) Upon request by a joint committee member
    	
submitted to the employing board by no later than 10 days after the distribution of the sequence of honorable dismissal list, a representative of the employing board shall, within 5 days after the request, provide to members of the joint committee a list showing the most recent and prior performance evaluation ratings of each teacher identified only by length of continuing service in the district or joint agreement and not by name. If, after review of this list, a member of the joint committee has a good faith belief that a disproportionate number of teachers with greater length of continuing service with the district or joint agreement have received a recent performance evaluation rating lower than the prior rating, the member may request that the joint committee review the list to assess whether such a trend may exist. Following the joint committee's review, but by no later than the end of the applicable school term, the joint committee or any member or members of the joint committee may submit a report of the review to the employing board and exclusive bargaining representative, if any. Nothing in this paragraph (5) shall impact the order of honorable dismissal or a school district's or joint agreement's authority to carry out a dismissal in accordance with subsection (b) of this Section.
    Agreement by the joint committee as to a matter requires the majority vote of all committee members, and if the joint committee does not reach agreement on a matter, then the otherwise applicable requirements of subsection (b) of this Section shall apply. Except as explicitly set forth in this subsection (c), a joint committee has no authority to agree to any further modifications to the requirements for honorable dismissals set forth in subsection (b) of this Section. The joint committee must be established, and the first meeting of the joint committee each school year must occur on or before December 1.
    The joint committee must reach agreement on a matter on or before February 1 of a school year in order for the agreement of the joint committee to apply to the sequence of dismissal determined during that school year. Subject to the February 1 deadline for agreements, the agreement of a joint committee on a matter shall apply to the sequence of dismissal until the agreement is amended or terminated by the joint committee.
    The provisions of the Open Meetings Act shall not apply to meetings of a joint committee created under this subsection (c).
    (d) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this subsection (d), the requirements and dismissal procedures of Section 24-16.5 of this Code shall apply to any dismissal sought under Section 24-16.5 of this Code.
        (1) If a dismissal of a teacher in contractual
    	
continued service is sought for any reason or cause other than an honorable dismissal under subsections (a) or (b) of this Section or a dismissal sought under Section 24-16.5 of this Code, including those under Section 10-22.4, the board must first approve a motion containing specific charges by a majority vote of all its members. Written notice of such charges, including a bill of particulars and the teacher's right to request a hearing, must be mailed to the teacher and also given to the teacher either by electronic mail, certified mail, return receipt requested, or personal delivery with receipt within 5 days of the adoption of the motion. Any written notice sent on or after July 1, 2012 shall inform the teacher of the right to request a hearing before a mutually selected hearing officer, with the cost of the hearing officer split equally between the teacher and the board, or a hearing before a board-selected hearing officer, with the cost of the hearing officer paid by the board.
        Before setting a hearing on charges stemming from
    	
causes that are considered remediable, a board must give the teacher reasonable warning in writing, stating specifically the causes that, if not removed, may result in charges; however, no such written warning is required if the causes have been the subject of a remediation plan pursuant to Article 24A of this Code.
        If, in the opinion of the board, the interests of the
    	
school require it, the board may suspend the teacher without pay, pending the hearing, but if the board's dismissal or removal is not sustained, the teacher shall not suffer the loss of any salary or benefits by reason of the suspension.
        (2) No hearing upon the charges is required unless
    	
the teacher within 17 days after receiving notice requests in writing of the board that a hearing be scheduled before a mutually selected hearing officer or a hearing officer selected by the board. The secretary of the school board shall forward a copy of the notice to the State Board of Education.
        (3) Within 5 business days after receiving a notice
    	
of hearing in which either notice to the teacher was sent before July 1, 2012 or, if the notice was sent on or after July 1, 2012, the teacher has requested a hearing before a mutually selected hearing officer, the State Board of Education shall provide a list of 5 prospective, impartial hearing officers from the master list of qualified, impartial hearing officers maintained by the State Board of Education. Each person on the master list must (i) be accredited by a national arbitration organization and have had a minimum of 5 years of experience directly related to labor and employment relations matters between employers and employees or their exclusive bargaining representatives and (ii) beginning September 1, 2012, have participated in training provided or approved by the State Board of Education for teacher dismissal hearing officers so that he or she is familiar with issues generally involved in evaluative and non-evaluative dismissals.
        If notice to the teacher was sent before July 1, 2012
    	
or, if the notice was sent on or after July 1, 2012, the teacher has requested a hearing before a mutually selected hearing officer, the board and the teacher or their legal representatives within 3 business days shall alternately strike one name from the list provided by the State Board of Education until only one name remains. Unless waived by the teacher, the teacher shall have the right to proceed first with the striking. Within 3 business days of receipt of the list provided by the State Board of Education, the board and the teacher or their legal representatives shall each have the right to reject all prospective hearing officers named on the list and notify the State Board of Education of such rejection. Within 3 business days after receiving this notification, the State Board of Education shall appoint a qualified person from the master list who did not appear on the list sent to the parties to serve as the hearing officer, unless the parties notify it that they have chosen to alternatively select a hearing officer under paragraph (4) of this subsection (d).
        If the teacher has requested a hearing before a
    	
hearing officer selected by the board, the board shall select one name from the master list of qualified impartial hearing officers maintained by the State Board of Education within 3 business days after receipt and shall notify the State Board of Education of its selection.
        A hearing officer mutually selected by the parties,
    	
selected by the board, or selected through an alternative selection process under paragraph (4) of this subsection (d) (A) must not be a resident of the school district, (B) must be available to commence the hearing within 75 days and conclude the hearing within 120 days after being selected as the hearing officer, and (C) must issue a decision as to whether the teacher must be dismissed and give a copy of that decision to both the teacher and the board within 30 days from the conclusion of the hearing or closure of the record, whichever is later.
        If the Governor has declared a disaster due to a
    	
public health emergency pursuant to Section 7 of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act and except if the parties mutually agree otherwise and the agreement is in writing, the requirements of this Section pertaining to prehearings and hearings are paused and do not begin to toll until the proclamation is no longer in effect. If mutually agreed to and reduced to writing, the parties may proceed with the prehearing and hearing requirements of this Section and may also agree to extend the timelines of this Section connected to the appointment and selection of a hearing officer and those connected to commencing and concluding a hearing. Any hearing convened during a public health emergency pursuant to Section 7 of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act may be convened remotely. Any hearing officer for a hearing convened during a public health emergency pursuant to Section 7 of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act may voluntarily withdraw from the hearing and another hearing officer shall be selected or appointed pursuant to this Section.
        (4) In the alternative to selecting a hearing
    	
officer from the list received from the State Board of Education or accepting the appointment of a hearing officer by the State Board of Education or if the State Board of Education cannot provide a list or appoint a hearing officer that meets the foregoing requirements, the board and the teacher or their legal representatives may mutually agree to select an impartial hearing officer who is not on the master list either by direct appointment by the parties or by using procedures for the appointment of an arbitrator established by the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service or the American Arbitration Association. The parties shall notify the State Board of Education of their intent to select a hearing officer using an alternative procedure within 3 business days of receipt of a list of prospective hearing officers provided by the State Board of Education, notice of appointment of a hearing officer by the State Board of Education, or receipt of notice from the State Board of Education that it cannot provide a list that meets the foregoing requirements, whichever is later.
        (5) If the notice of dismissal was sent to the
    	
teacher before July 1, 2012, the fees and costs for the hearing officer must be paid by the State Board of Education. If the notice of dismissal was sent to the teacher on or after July 1, 2012, the hearing officer's fees and costs must be paid as follows in this paragraph (5). The fees and permissible costs for the hearing officer must be determined by the State Board of Education. If the board and the teacher or their legal representatives mutually agree to select an impartial hearing officer who is not on a list received from the State Board of Education, they may agree to supplement the fees determined by the State Board to the hearing officer, at a rate consistent with the hearing officer's published professional fees. If the hearing officer is mutually selected by the parties, then the board and the teacher or their legal representatives shall each pay 50% of the fees and costs and any supplemental allowance to which they agree. If the hearing officer is selected by the board, then the board shall pay 100% of the hearing officer's fees and costs. The fees and costs must be paid to the hearing officer within 14 days after the board and the teacher or their legal representatives receive the hearing officer's decision set forth in paragraph (7) of this subsection (d).
        (6) The teacher is required to answer the bill of
    	
particulars and aver affirmative matters in his or her defense, and the time for initially doing so and the time for updating such answer and defenses after pre-hearing discovery must be set by the hearing officer. The State Board of Education shall promulgate rules so that each party has a fair opportunity to present its case and to ensure that the dismissal process proceeds in a fair and expeditious manner. These rules shall address, without limitation, discovery and hearing scheduling conferences; the teacher's initial answer and affirmative defenses to the bill of particulars and the updating of that information after pre-hearing discovery; provision for written interrogatories and requests for production of documents; the requirement that each party initially disclose to the other party and then update the disclosure no later than 10 calendar days prior to the commencement of the hearing, the names and addresses of persons who may be called as witnesses at the hearing, a summary of the facts or opinions each witness will testify to, and all other documents and materials, including information maintained electronically, relevant to its own as well as the other party's case (the hearing officer may exclude witnesses and exhibits not identified and shared, except those offered in rebuttal for which the party could not reasonably have anticipated prior to the hearing); pre-hearing discovery and preparation, including provision for written interrogatories and requests for production of documents, provided that discovery depositions are prohibited; the conduct of the hearing; the right of each party to be represented by counsel, the offer of evidence and witnesses and the cross-examination of witnesses; the authority of the hearing officer to issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum, provided that the hearing officer may limit the number of witnesses to be subpoenaed on behalf of each party to no more than 7; the length of post-hearing briefs; and the form, length, and content of hearing officers' decisions. The hearing officer shall hold a hearing and render a final decision for dismissal pursuant to Article 24A of this Code or shall report to the school board findings of fact and a recommendation as to whether or not the teacher must be dismissed for conduct. The hearing officer shall commence the hearing within 75 days and conclude the hearing within 120 days after being selected as the hearing officer, provided that the hearing officer may modify these timelines upon the showing of good cause or mutual agreement of the parties. Good cause for the purpose of this subsection (d) shall mean the illness or otherwise unavoidable emergency of the teacher, district representative, their legal representatives, the hearing officer, or an essential witness as indicated in each party's pre-hearing submission. In a dismissal hearing pursuant to Article 24A of this Code in which a witness is a student or is under the age of 18, the hearing officer must make accommodations for the witness, as provided under paragraph (6.5) of this subsection. The hearing officer shall consider and give weight to all of the teacher's evaluations written pursuant to Article 24A that are relevant to the issues in the hearing.
        Each party shall have no more than 3 days to present
    	
its case, unless extended by the hearing officer to enable a party to present adequate evidence and testimony, including due to the other party's cross-examination of the party's witnesses, for good cause or by mutual agreement of the parties. The State Board of Education shall define in rules the meaning of "day" for such purposes. All testimony at the hearing shall be taken under oath administered by the hearing officer. The hearing officer shall cause a record of the proceedings to be kept and shall employ a competent reporter to take stenographic or stenotype notes of all the testimony. The costs of the reporter's attendance and services at the hearing shall be paid by the party or parties who are responsible for paying the fees and costs of the hearing officer. Either party desiring a transcript of the hearing shall pay for the cost thereof. Any post-hearing briefs must be submitted by the parties by no later than 21 days after a party's receipt of the transcript of the hearing, unless extended by the hearing officer for good cause or by mutual agreement of the parties.
        (6.5) In the case of charges involving sexual abuse
    	
or severe physical abuse of a student or a person under the age of 18, the hearing officer shall make alternative hearing procedures to protect a witness who is a student or who is under the age of 18 from being intimidated or traumatized. Alternative hearing procedures may include, but are not limited to: (i) testimony made via a telecommunication device in a location other than the hearing room and outside the physical presence of the teacher and other hearing participants, (ii) testimony outside the physical presence of the teacher, or (iii) non-public testimony. During a testimony described under this subsection, each party must be permitted to ask a witness who is a student or who is under 18 years of age all relevant questions and follow-up questions. All questions must exclude evidence of the witness' sexual behavior or predisposition, unless the evidence is offered to prove that someone other than the teacher subject to the dismissal hearing engaged in the charge at issue.
        (7) The hearing officer shall, within 30 days from
    	
the conclusion of the hearing or closure of the record, whichever is later, make a decision as to whether or not the teacher shall be dismissed pursuant to Article 24A of this Code or report to the school board findings of fact and a recommendation as to whether or not the teacher shall be dismissed for cause and shall give a copy of the decision or findings of fact and recommendation to both the teacher and the school board. If a hearing officer fails without good cause, specifically provided in writing to both parties and the State Board of Education, to render a decision or findings of fact and recommendation within 30 days after the hearing is concluded or the record is closed, whichever is later, the parties may mutually agree to select a hearing officer pursuant to the alternative procedure, as provided in this Section, to rehear the charges heard by the hearing officer who failed to render a decision or findings of fact and recommendation or to review the record and render a decision. If any hearing officer fails without good cause, specifically provided in writing to both parties and the State Board of Education, to render a decision or findings of fact and recommendation within 30 days after the hearing is concluded or the record is closed, whichever is later, the hearing officer shall be removed from the master list of hearing officers maintained by the State Board of Education for not more than 24 months. The parties and the State Board of Education may also take such other actions as it deems appropriate, including recovering, reducing, or withholding any fees paid or to be paid to the hearing officer. If any hearing officer repeats such failure, he or she must be permanently removed from the master list maintained by the State Board of Education and may not be selected by parties through the alternative selection process under this paragraph (7) or paragraph (4) of this subsection (d). The board shall not lose jurisdiction to discharge a teacher if the hearing officer fails to render a decision or findings of fact and recommendation within the time specified in this Section. If the decision of the hearing officer for dismissal pursuant to Article 24A of this Code or of the school board for dismissal for cause is in favor of the teacher, then the hearing officer or school board shall order reinstatement to the same or substantially equivalent position and shall determine the amount for which the school board is liable, including, but not limited to, loss of income and benefits.
        (8) The school board, within 45 days after receipt
    	
of the hearing officer's findings of fact and recommendation as to whether (i) the conduct at issue occurred, (ii) the conduct that did occur was remediable, and (iii) the proposed dismissal should be sustained, shall issue a written order as to whether the teacher must be retained or dismissed for cause from its employ. The school board's written order shall incorporate the hearing officer's findings of fact, except that the school board may modify or supplement the findings of fact if, in its opinion, the findings of fact are against the manifest weight of the evidence.
        If the school board dismisses the teacher
    	
notwithstanding the hearing officer's findings of fact and recommendation, the school board shall make a conclusion in its written order, giving its reasons therefor, and such conclusion and reasons must be included in its written order. The failure of the school board to strictly adhere to the timelines contained in this Section shall not render it without jurisdiction to dismiss the teacher. The school board shall not lose jurisdiction to discharge the teacher for cause if the hearing officer fails to render a recommendation within the time specified in this Section. The decision of the school board is final, unless reviewed as provided in paragraph (9) of this subsection (d).
        If the school board retains the teacher, the school
    	
board shall enter a written order stating the amount of back pay and lost benefits, less mitigation, to be paid to the teacher, within 45 days after its retention order. Should the teacher object to the amount of the back pay and lost benefits or amount mitigated, the teacher shall give written objections to the amount within 21 days. If the parties fail to reach resolution within 7 days, the dispute shall be referred to the hearing officer, who shall consider the school board's written order and teacher's written objection and determine the amount to which the school board is liable. The costs of the hearing officer's review and determination must be paid by the board.
        (9) The decision of the hearing officer pursuant to
    	
Article 24A of this Code or of the school board's decision to dismiss for cause is final unless reviewed as provided in Section 24-16 of this Code. If the school board's decision to dismiss for cause is contrary to the hearing officer's recommendation, the court on review shall give consideration to the school board's decision and its supplemental findings of fact, if applicable, and the hearing officer's findings of fact and recommendation in making its decision. In the event such review is instituted, the school board shall be responsible for preparing and filing the record of proceedings, and such costs associated therewith must be divided equally between the parties.
        (10) If a decision of the hearing officer for
    	
dismissal pursuant to Article 24A of this Code or of the school board for dismissal for cause is adjudicated upon review or appeal in favor of the teacher, then the trial court shall order reinstatement and shall remand the matter to the school board with direction for entry of an order setting the amount of back pay, lost benefits, and costs, less mitigation. The teacher may challenge the school board's order setting the amount of back pay, lost benefits, and costs, less mitigation, through an expedited arbitration procedure, with the costs of the arbitrator borne by the school board.
        Any teacher who is reinstated by any hearing or
    	
adjudication brought under this Section shall be assigned by the board to a position substantially similar to the one which that teacher held prior to that teacher's suspension or dismissal.
        (11) Subject to any later effective date referenced
    	
in this Section for a specific aspect of the dismissal process, the changes made by Public Act 97-8 shall apply to dismissals instituted on or after September 1, 2011. Any dismissal instituted prior to September 1, 2011 must be carried out in accordance with the requirements of this Section prior to amendment by Public Act 97-8.
    (e) Nothing contained in Public Act 98-648 repeals, supersedes, invalidates, or nullifies final decisions in lawsuits pending on July 1, 2014 (the effective date of Public Act 98-648) in Illinois courts involving the interpretation of Public Act 97-8.
(Source: P.A. 100-768, eff. 1-1-19; 101-81, eff. 7-12-19; 101-531, eff. 8-23-19; 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-12.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 24-12.1)
    Sec. 24-12.1. Rights of recalled teachers. Any teacher on contractual continued service who is removed or dismissed as a result of a decision of the board to decrease the number of teachers employed by the board or to discontinue some particular type of teaching service and who accepts the tender of a vacancy within one calendar year from the beginning of the following school term pursuant to Section 24-12 shall lose no rights which accrued while in contractual continued service.
(Source: P.A. 82-997.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-13) (from Ch. 122, par. 24-13)
    Sec. 24-13. Age or absences not affecting contractual continued service - Teachers replacing teachers in military service or in the General Assembly. The contractual continued service status of a teacher is not affected by his attained age, promotion, absence caused by temporary illness or temporary incapacity as defined by regulations of the employing board, leave of absence mutually agreed upon between the teacher and the board, or because of absence while in the military service of the United States. If a teacher is elected to serve in the General Assembly, the board shall grant him a leave of absence if he so requests. A teacher employed to replace one in the military service of the United States or one serving in the General Assembly does not acquire contractual continued service under this Article. If a teacher is elected to serve as an officer of a state or national teacher organization that represents teachers in collective bargaining negotiations, the board shall grant the teacher, upon written request, a leave (or leaves) of absence of up to 6 years or the period of time the teacher serves as an officer, whichever is longer.
(Source: P.A. 93-377, eff. 1-1-04.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-13.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 24-13.1)
    Sec. 24-13.1. Contractual continued service of teachers employed in Department of Defense overseas dependents' schools.
    By mutual agreement of a teacher and the employing board, the board may, but is not required to, grant the teacher a leave of absence to accept employment in a Department of Defense overseas dependents' school. If such a leave of absence is granted, the teacher may elect, for a period not exceeding the lesser of the period for which he is so employed or 5 years, (a) to preserve his contractual continued service status under this Act, and (b) to continue receipt, on the same basis as if he were teaching in the school system subject to the employing board, of service credit earned for requirements of promotion, incremental increases in salary, leaves of absence and other privileges based on an established period of service or employment. In addition, a teacher whose armed forces reserve unit is activated during the school year and who as a result is required to enter into active military service duty shall continue to have his or her full salary as a teacher paid by the school board for the first 2 weeks of the period during which he or she is required to remain on active military service duty; provided, however, that if the teacher is required to remain on active military service duty for any additional period, his or her contractual continued service under this Act shall be preserved, and he or she shall continue to receive throughout the entire period that he or she is required to remain on active military service duty, on the same basis as if he or she were teaching in the school system governed by the employing board, service credit earned for requirements of promotion, incremental increases in salary, leaves of absence and other privileges based on an established period of service or employment; provided further that a teacher who receives payment of his or her full salary as a teacher for the first 2 weeks of the period his or her armed forces reserve unit is required to remain on active military service duty shall return to the school board such portion of his or her teaching salary so paid as is equal to the payment he or she received for such 2 week period from his or her armed forces reserve unit, excluding, however, all payments received by the teacher from the armed forces reserve unit which are allocable to nonschool days or which constitute a travel, meal or housing allowance.
    A person employed to replace a teacher making the election provided for in this Section does not acquire contractual continued service status as a teacher under this Article.
(Source: P.A. 84-1401.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-14) (from Ch. 122, par. 24-14)
    Sec. 24-14. Termination of contractual continued service by teacher. A teacher who has entered into contractual continued service may resign at any time by obtaining concurrence of the board or by serving at least 30 days' written notice upon the secretary of the board. However, no teacher may resign during the school term, without the concurrence of the board, in order to accept another teaching assignment. Any teacher terminating said service not in accordance with this Section may be referred by the board to the State Superintendent of Education. The State Superintendent or his or her designee shall convene an informal evidentiary hearing no later than 90 days after receipt of a resolution by the board. If the State Superintendent or his or her designee finds that the teacher resigned during the school term without the concurrence of the board to accept another teaching assignment, the State Superintendent must suspend the teacher's license for one calendar year. In lieu of a hearing and finding, the teacher may agree to a lesser licensure sanction at the discretion of the State Superintendent.
(Source: P.A. 101-531, eff. 8-23-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-15) (from Ch. 122, par. 24-15)
    Sec. 24-15. Right to amend or repeal-Partial invalidity. Nothing herein limits the right of the General Assembly to amend or repeal any part of Sections 24-11 to 24-15, inclusive, or any contract resulting therefrom.
    If any section, paragraph, sentence or clause of this Article is held invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the remaining portion of this Article or this Act, or any section or part thereof.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-16) (from Ch. 122, par. 24-16)
    Sec. 24-16. Judicial review of administrative decision. The provisions of the Administrative Review Law, and all amendments and modifications thereof and the rules adopted pursuant thereto, shall apply to and govern all proceedings instituted for the judicial review of final administrative decisions of the hearing officer for dismissals pursuant to Article 24A of this Code or of a school board for dismissal for cause under Section 24-12 of this Article. The term "administrative decision" is defined as in Section 3-101 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
(Source: P.A. 97-8, eff. 6-13-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-16.5)
    Sec. 24-16.5. Optional alternative evaluative dismissal process for PERA evaluations.
    (a) As used in this Section:
    "Applicable hearing requirements" means (i) for any school district having less than 500,000 inhabitants or a program of a special education joint agreement, those procedures and requirements relating to a teacher's request for a hearing, selection of a hearing officer, pre-hearing and hearing procedures, and post-hearing briefs set forth in paragraphs (1) through (6) of subsection (d) of Section 24-12 of this Code or (ii) for a school district having 500,000 inhabitants or more, those procedures and requirements relating to a teacher's request for a hearing, selection of a hearing officer, pre-hearing and hearing procedures, and post-hearing briefs set forth in paragraphs (1) through (5) of subsection (a) of Section 34-85 of this Code.
    "Board" means, for a school district having less than 500,000 inhabitants or a program of a special education joint agreement, the board of directors, board of education, or board of school inspectors, as the case may be. For a school district having 500,000 inhabitants or more, "board" means the Chicago Board of Education.
    "Evaluator" means an evaluator, as defined in Section 24A-2.5 of this Code, who has successfully completed the pre-qualification program described in subsection (b) of Section 24A-3 of this Code.
    "PERA-trained board member" means a member of a board that has completed a training program on PERA evaluations either administered or approved by the State Board of Education.
    "PERA evaluation" means a performance evaluation of a teacher after the implementation date of an evaluation system for teachers, as specified by Section 24A-2.5 of this Code, using a performance evaluation instrument and process that meets the minimum requirements for teacher evaluation instruments and processes set forth in rules adopted by the State Board of Education to implement Public Act 96-861.
    "Remediation" means the remediation plan, mid-point and final evaluations, and related processes and requirements set forth in subdivisions (i), (j), and (k) of Section 24A-5 of this Code.
    "School district" means a school district or a program of a special education joint agreement.
    "Second evaluator" means an evaluator who either conducts the mid-point and final remediation evaluation or conducts an independent assessment of whether the teacher completed the remediation plan with a rating equal to or better than a "Proficient" rating, all in accordance with subdivision (c) of this Section.
    "Student growth components" means the components of a performance evaluation plan described in subdivision (c) of Section 24A-5 of this Code, as may be supplemented by administrative rules adopted by the State Board of Education.
    "Teacher practice components" means the components of a performance evaluation plan described in subdivisions (a) and (b) of Section 24A-5 of this Code, as may be supplemented by administrative rules adopted by the State Board of Education.
    "Teacher representatives" means the exclusive bargaining representative of a school district's teachers or, if no exclusive bargaining representatives exists, a representative committee selected by teachers.
    (b) This Section applies to all school districts, including those having 500,000 or more inhabitants. The optional dismissal process set forth in this Section is an alternative to those set forth in Sections 24-12 and 34-85 of this Code. Nothing in this Section is intended to change the existing practices or precedents under Section 24-12 or 34-85 of this Code, nor shall this Section be interpreted as implying standards and procedures that should or must be used as part of a remediation that precedes a dismissal sought under Section 24-12 or 34-85 of this Code.
    A board may dismiss a teacher who has entered upon contractual continued service under this Section if the following are met:
        (1) the cause of dismissal is that the teacher has
    	
failed to complete a remediation plan with a rating equal to or better than a "Proficient" rating;
        (2) the "Unsatisfactory" performance evaluation
    	
rating that preceded remediation resulted from a PERA evaluation; and
        (3) the school district has complied with subsection
    	
(c) of this Section.
    A school district may not, through agreement with a teacher or its teacher representatives, waive its right to dismiss a teacher under this Section.
    (c) Each school district electing to use the dismissal process set forth in this Section must comply with the pre-remediation and remediation activities and requirements set forth in this subsection (c).
        (1) Before a school district's first remediation
    	
relating to a dismissal under this Section, the school district must create and establish a list of at least 2 evaluators who will be available to serve as second evaluators under this Section. The school district shall provide its teacher representatives with an opportunity to submit additional names of teacher evaluators who will be available to serve as second evaluators and who will be added to the list created and established by the school district, provided that, unless otherwise agreed to by the school district, the teacher representatives may not submit more teacher evaluators for inclusion on the list than the number of evaluators submitted by the school district. Each teacher evaluator must either have (i) National Board of Professional Teaching Standards certification, with no "Unsatisfactory" or "Needs Improvement" performance evaluating ratings in his or her 2 most recent performance evaluation ratings; or (ii) "Excellent" performance evaluation ratings in 2 of his or her 3 most recent performance evaluations, with no "Needs Improvement" or "Unsatisfactory" performance evaluation ratings in his or her last 3 ratings. If the teacher representatives do not submit a list of teacher evaluators within 21 days after the school district's request, the school district may proceed with a remediation using a list that includes only the school district's selections. Either the school district or the teacher representatives may revise or add to their selections for the list at any time with notice to the other party, subject to the limitations set forth in this paragraph (1).
        (2) Before a school district's first remediation
    	
relating to a dismissal under this Section, the school district shall, in good faith cooperation with its teacher representatives, establish a process for the selection of a second evaluator from the list created pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection (c). Such process may be amended at any time in good faith cooperation with the teacher representatives. If the teacher representatives are given an opportunity to cooperate with the school district and elect not to do so, the school district may, at its discretion, establish or amend the process for selection. Before the hearing officer and as part of any judicial review of a dismissal under this Section, a teacher may not challenge a remediation or dismissal on the grounds that the process used by the school district to select a second evaluator was not established in good faith cooperation with its teacher representatives.
        (3) For each remediation preceding a dismissal under
    	
this Section, the school district shall select a second evaluator from the list of second evaluators created pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection (c), using the selection process established pursuant to paragraph (2) of this subsection (c). The selected second evaluator may not be the same individual who determined the teacher's "Unsatisfactory" performance evaluation rating preceding remediation, and, if the second evaluator is an administrator, may not be a direct report to the individual who determined the teacher's "Unsatisfactory" performance evaluation rating preceding remediation. The school district's authority to select a second evaluator from the list of second evaluators must not be delegated or limited through any agreement with the teacher representatives, provided that nothing shall prohibit a school district and its teacher representatives from agreeing to a formal peer evaluation process as permitted under Article 24A of this Code that could be used to meet the requirements for the selection of second evaluators under this subsection (c).
        (4) The second evaluator selected pursuant to
    	
paragraph (3) of this subsection (c) must either (i) conduct the mid-point and final evaluation during remediation or (ii) conduct an independent assessment of whether the teacher completed the remediation plan with a rating equal to or better than a "Proficient" rating, which independent assessment shall include, but is not limited to, personal or video-recorded observations of the teacher that relate to the teacher practice components of the remediation plan. Nothing in this subsection (c) shall be construed to limit or preclude the participation of the evaluator who rated a teacher as "Unsatisfactory" in remediation.
    (d) To institute a dismissal proceeding under this Section, the board must first provide written notice to the teacher within 30 days after the completion of the final remediation evaluation. The notice shall comply with the applicable hearing requirements and, in addition, must specify that dismissal is sought under this Section and include a copy of each performance evaluation relating to the scope of the hearing as described in this subsection (d).
    The applicable hearing requirements shall apply to the teacher's request for a hearing, the selection and qualifications of the hearing officer, and pre-hearing and hearing procedures, except that all of the following must be met:
        (1) The hearing officer must, in addition to meeting
    	
the qualifications set forth in the applicable hearing requirements, have successfully completed the pre-qualification program described in subsection (b) of Section 24A-3 of this Code, unless the State Board of Education waives this requirement to provide an adequate pool of hearing officers for consideration.
        (2) The scope of the hearing must be limited as
    	
follows:
            (A) The school district must demonstrate the
        	
following:
                (i) that the "Unsatisfactory" performance
            	
evaluation rating that preceded remediation applied the teacher practice components and student growth components and determined an overall evaluation rating of "Unsatisfactory" in accordance with the standards and requirements of the school district's evaluation plan;
                (ii) that the remediation plan complied with
            	
the requirements of Section 24A-5 of this Code;
                (iii) that the teacher failed to complete the
            	
remediation plan with a performance evaluation rating equal to or better than a "Proficient" rating, based upon a final remediation evaluation meeting the applicable standards and requirements of the school district's evaluation plan; and
                (iv) that if the second evaluator selected
            	
pursuant to paragraph (3) of subsection (c) of this Section does not conduct the mid-point and final evaluation and makes an independent assessment that the teacher completed the remediation plan with a rating equal to or better than a "Proficient" rating, the school district must demonstrate that the final remediation evaluation is a more valid assessment of the teacher's performance than the assessment made by the second evaluator.
            (B) The teacher may only challenge the
        	
substantive and procedural aspects of (i) the "Unsatisfactory" performance evaluation rating that led to the remediation, (ii) the remediation plan, and (iii) the final remediation evaluation. To the extent the teacher challenges procedural aspects, including any in applicable collective bargaining agreement provisions, of a relevant performance evaluation rating or the remediation plan, the teacher must demonstrate how an alleged procedural defect materially affected the teacher's ability to demonstrate a level of performance necessary to avoid remediation or dismissal or successfully complete the remediation plan. Without any such material effect, a procedural defect shall not impact the assessment by the hearing officer, board, or reviewing court of the validity of a performance evaluation or a remediation plan.
            (C) The hearing officer shall only consider and
        	
give weight to performance evaluations relevant to the scope of the hearing as described in clauses (A) and (B) of this subdivision (2).
        (3) Each party shall be given only 2 days to present
    	
evidence and testimony relating to the scope of the hearing, unless a longer period is mutually agreed to by the parties or deemed necessary by the hearing officer to enable a party to present adequate evidence and testimony to address the scope of the hearing, including due to the other party's cross-examination of the party's witnesses.
    (e) The provisions of Sections 24-12 and 34-85 pertaining to the decision or recommendation of the hearing officer do not apply to dismissal proceedings under this Section. For any dismissal proceedings under this Section, the hearing officer shall not issue a decision, and shall issue only findings of fact and a recommendation, including the reasons therefor, to the board to either retain or dismiss the teacher and shall give a copy of the report to both the teacher and the superintendent of the school district. The hearing officer's findings of fact and recommendation must be issued within 30 days from the close of the record of the hearing.
    The State Board of Education shall adopt rules regarding the length of the hearing officer's findings of fact and recommendation. If a hearing officer fails without good cause, specifically provided in writing to both parties and the State Board of Education, to render a recommendation within 30 days after the hearing is concluded or the record is closed, whichever is later, the parties may mutually agree to select a hearing officer pursuant to the alternative procedure, as provided in Section 24-12 or 34-85, to rehear the charges heard by the hearing officer who failed to render a recommendation or to review the record and render a recommendation. If any hearing officer fails without good cause, specifically provided in writing to both parties and the State Board of Education, to render a recommendation within 30 days after the hearing is concluded or the record is closed, whichever is later, the hearing officer shall be removed from the master list of hearing officers maintained by the State Board of Education for not more than 24 months. The parties and the State Board of Education may also take such other actions as it deems appropriate, including recovering, reducing, or withholding any fees paid or to be paid to the hearing officer. If any hearing officer repeats such failure, he or she shall be permanently removed from the master list of hearing officers maintained by the State Board of Education.
    (f) The board, within 45 days after receipt of the hearing officer's findings of fact and recommendation, shall decide, through adoption of a written order, whether the teacher must be dismissed from its employ or retained, provided that only PERA-trained board members may participate in the vote with respect to the decision.
    If the board dismisses the teacher notwithstanding the hearing officer's recommendation of retention, the board shall make a conclusion, giving its reasons therefor, and such conclusion and reasons must be included in its written order. The failure of the board to strictly adhere to the timelines contained in this Section does not render it without jurisdiction to dismiss the teacher. The board shall not lose jurisdiction to discharge the teacher if the hearing officer fails to render a recommendation within the time specified in this Section. The decision of the board is final, unless reviewed as provided in subsection (g) of this Section.
    If the board retains the teacher, the board shall enter a written order stating the amount of back pay and lost benefits, less mitigation, to be paid to the teacher, within 45 days of its retention order.
    (g) A teacher dismissed under this Section may apply for and obtain judicial review of a decision of the board in accordance with the provisions of the Administrative Review Law, except as follows:
        (1) for a teacher dismissed by a school district
    	
having 500,000 inhabitants or more, such judicial review must be taken directly to the appellate court of the judicial district in which the board maintains its primary administrative office, and any direct appeal to the appellate court must be filed within 35 days from the date that a copy of the decision sought to be reviewed was served upon the teacher;
        (2) for a teacher dismissed by a school district
    	
having less than 500,000 inhabitants after the hearing officer recommended dismissal, such judicial review must be taken directly to the appellate court of the judicial district in which the board maintains its primary administrative office, and any direct appeal to the appellate court must be filed within 35 days from the date that a copy of the decision sought to be reviewed was served upon the teacher; and
        (3) for all school districts, if the hearing officer
    	
recommended dismissal, the decision of the board may be reversed only if it is found to be arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or not in accordance with law.
    In the event judicial review is instituted by a teacher, any costs of preparing and filing the record of proceedings must be paid by the teacher. If a decision of the board is adjudicated upon judicial review in favor of the teacher, then the court shall remand the matter to the board with direction for entry of an order setting the amount of back pay, lost benefits, and costs, less mitigation. The teacher may challenge the board's order setting the amount of back pay, lost benefits, and costs, less mitigation, through an expedited arbitration procedure with the costs of the arbitrator borne by the board.
(Source: P.A. 97-8, eff. 6-13-11; 98-513, eff. 1-1-14.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-17) (from Ch. 122, par. 24-17)
    Sec. 24-17. Care of property.
    Every teacher shall see that the property of the district under his care and control is not unnecessarily damaged or destroyed. No teacher shall be paid any part of the school funds unless he has furnished schedules, when required by law, and has satisfactorily accounted for all books, apparatus and other property belonging to the district.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-18) (from Ch. 122, par. 24-18)
    Sec. 24-18. Daily registers. Teachers shall keep daily registers showing the name, age and attendance of each pupil, the day of the week, month and year. Registers shall be in the form prescribed by the State Board of Education.
    Such registers shall be furnished by the school directors, and each teacher shall, at the end of his term of school, return his register to the clerk or secretary of the school board. No teacher shall be paid any part of the school funds unless he has accurately kept and returned such a register.
(Source: P.A. 81-1508.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-19)
    Sec. 24-19. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-20)
    Sec. 24-20. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-21) (from Ch. 122, par. 24-21)
    Sec. 24-21. Payment of teachers' wages. The directors shall pay the wages of teachers in a manner agreed upon by the board, but at least 1 payment shall be made during each school month. The directors shall issue and deliver to the teacher an order on the school treasurer for the amount of salary due. The order shall state the rate and time for which the teacher is paid. It is unlawful for the directors: (1) to issue an order before they have certified to any schedule then required to be made; (2) after the date for filing schedules as fixed by law, to certify any schedule not delivered to them before that date when such schedule is for time taught before the first of July preceding; (3) to give an order in payment of a teacher's wages for the time covered by such delinquent schedule. Teachers not covered by a negotiated collective bargaining agreement may elect to receive payment of wages over either a 10 or 12 month period annually.
(Source: P.A. 82-396.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-21.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 24-21.1)
    Sec. 24-21.1. Organization dues, payments and contributions. The board shall, upon the written request of an employee, withhold from the compensation of that employee any dues, payments or contributions payable by such employee to any employee labor organization as defined in the Illinois Educational Labor Relations Act. Under such arrangement, an amount shall be withheld from each regular payroll period which is equal to the pro rata share of the annual dues plus any payments or contributions and the board shall transmit such withholdings to the specified labor organization within 10 working days from the time of the withholding.
(Source: P.A. 83-1014.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-22)
    Sec. 24-22. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 81-1508. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-23) (from Ch. 122, par. 24-23)
    Sec. 24-23. Teacher transcript of credits. Each teacher shall file with the superintendent of the school in which he is teaching or, if there is no such superintendent, with the Regional Superintendent of Schools a complete transcript of credits earned in recognized institutions of higher learning attended by him. On or before September 1 of each year thereafter, unless otherwise provided in a collective bargaining agreement, every teacher shall file a transcript of any credits that have been earned since the date the last transcript was filed.
    Such record of credits shall be used as the base for determining the minimum salary for such teachers as provided by Section 24-8 of this Act.
(Source: P.A. 96-998, eff. 7-2-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-24) (from Ch. 122, par. 24-24)
    Sec. 24-24. Maintenance of discipline. Subject to the limitations of all policies established or adopted under Section 14-8.05, teachers, other certificated educational employees, and any other person, whether or not a certificated employee, providing a related service for or with respect to a student shall maintain discipline in the schools, including school grounds which are owned or leased by the board and used for school purposes and activities. In all matters relating to the discipline in and conduct of the schools and the school children, they stand in the relation of parents and guardians to the pupils. This relationship shall extend to all activities connected with the school program, including all athletic and extracurricular programs, and may be exercised at any time for the safety and supervision of the pupils in the absence of their parents or guardians.
    Nothing in this Section affects the power of the board to establish rules with respect to discipline; except that each board shall establish a policy on discipline, and the policy so established shall provide, subject to the limitations of all policies established or adopted under Section 14-8.05, that a teacher, other certificated employee, and any other person, whether or not a certificated employee, providing a related service for or with respect to a student may use reasonable force as needed to maintain safety for the other students, school personnel or persons or for the purpose of self defense or the defense of property, shall provide that a teacher may remove a student from the classroom for disruptive behavior, and shall include provisions which provide due process to students. The policy shall not include slapping, paddling or prolonged maintenance of students in physically painful positions nor shall it include the intentional infliction of bodily harm.
    The board may make and enforce reasonable rules of conduct and sportsmanship for athletic and extracurricular school events. Any person who violates such rules may be denied admission to school events for not more than one year, provided that written 10 days notice of the violation is given such person and a hearing had thereon by the board pursuant to its rules and regulations. The administration of any school may sign complaints as agents of the school against persons committing any offense at school events.
(Source: P.A. 88-346; 88-670, eff. 12-2-94; 89-184, eff. 7-19-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-25) (from Ch. 122, par. 24-25)
    Sec. 24-25. Teachers and other employees may request any person entering a public school building or the grounds which are owned or leased by the board and used for school purposes and activities to identify himself and the purpose of his entry. A person who refuses to provide such information is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
    Authorized agents of an exclusive bargaining representative, upon notifying the school office, may meet with school employees in the school building during duty free times of such employees.
(Source: P.A. 86-202.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24-26) (from Ch. 122, par. 24-26)
    Sec. 24-26. Intervening to help students or their family members who may have alcohol or other drug problems. Teachers and other employees of school districts may intervene to help students or their family members who appear to have problems with alcohol and other drugs by encouraging them to seek an assessment and treatment. School personnel who intervene shall have immunity from civil liability in accordance with the Alcoholism and Drug Addiction Intervenor and Reporter Immunity Law. School personnel shall not be subject to disciplinary action by the school because of an intervention and may not be prohibited by school policy from intervening.
(Source: P.A. 87-213.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 24A heading)
ARTICLE 24A. EVALUATION OF
CERTIFIED EMPLOYEES

    (105 ILCS 5/24A-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 24A-1)
    Sec. 24A-1. Purpose. The purpose of this Article is to improve the educational services of the elementary and secondary public schools of Illinois by requiring that all certified school district employees be evaluated on a periodic basis and that the evaluations result in remedial action being taken when deemed necessary.
(Source: P.A. 84-972.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24A-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 24A-2)
    Sec. 24A-2. Application. The provisions of this Article shall apply to all public school districts organized and operating pursuant to the provisions of this Code, including special charter districts and those school districts operating in accordance with Article 34, except that this Section does not apply to teachers assigned to schools identified in an agreement entered into between the board of a school district operating under Article 34 and the exclusive representative of the district's teachers in accordance with Section 34-85c of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 95-510, eff. 8-28-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24A-2.5)
    Sec. 24A-2.5. Definitions. In this Article:
    "Evaluator" means:
        (1) an administrator qualified under Section 24A-3;
    	
or
        (2) other individuals qualified under Section 24A-3,
    	
provided that, if such other individuals are in the bargaining unit of a district's teachers, the district and the exclusive bargaining representative of that unit must agree to those individuals evaluating other bargaining unit members.
    Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in item (2) of this definition, a school district operating under Article 34 of this Code may require department chairs qualified under Section 24A-3 to evaluate teachers in their department or departments, provided that the school district shall bargain with the bargaining representative of its teachers over the impact and effects on department chairs of such a requirement.
    "Implementation date" means, unless otherwise specified and provided that the requirements set forth in subsection (d) of Section 24A-20 have been met:
        (1) For school districts having 500,000 or more
    	
inhabitants, in at least 300 schools by September 1, 2012 and in the remaining schools by September 1, 2013.
        (2) For school districts having less than 500,000
    	
inhabitants and receiving a Race to the Top Grant or School Improvement Grant after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 96th General Assembly, the date specified in those grants for implementing an evaluation system for teachers and principals incorporating student growth as a significant factor.
        (3) For the lowest performing 20% percent of
    	
remaining school districts having less than 500,000 inhabitants (with the measure of and school year or years used for school district performance to be determined by the State Superintendent of Education at a time determined by the State Superintendent), September 1, 2015.
        (4) For all other school districts having less than
    	
500,000 inhabitants, September 1, 2016.
    Notwithstanding items (3) and (4) of this definition, a school district and the exclusive bargaining representative of its teachers may jointly agree in writing to an earlier implementation date, provided that such date must not be earlier than September 1, 2013. The written agreement of the district and the exclusive bargaining representative must be transmitted to the State Board of Education.
    "Race to the Top Grant" means a grant made by the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Education for the program first funded pursuant to paragraph (2) of Section 14006(a) of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009.
    "School Improvement Grant" means a grant made by the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Education pursuant to Section 1003(g) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act.
(Source: P.A. 96-861, eff. 1-15-10; 97-8, eff. 6-13-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24A-3) (from Ch. 122, par. 24A-3)
    Sec. 24A-3. Evaluation training and pre-qualification.
    (a) School boards shall require evaluators to participate in an inservice training on the evaluation of certified personnel provided or approved by the State Board of Education prior to undertaking any evaluation and at least once during each certificate renewal cycle. Training provided or approved by the State Board of Education shall include the evaluator training program developed pursuant to Section 24A-20 of this Code.
    (b) Any evaluator undertaking an evaluation after September 1, 2012 must first successfully complete a pre-qualification program provided or approved by the State Board of Education. The program must involve rigorous training and an independent observer's determination that the evaluator's ratings properly align to the requirements established by the State Board pursuant to this Article.
(Source: P.A. 96-861, eff. 1-15-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24A-4) (from Ch. 122, par. 24A-4)
    Sec. 24A-4. Development of evaluation plan.
    (a) As used in this and the succeeding Sections, "teacher" means any and all school district employees regularly required to be certified under laws relating to the certification of teachers. Each school district shall develop, in cooperation with its teachers or, where applicable, the exclusive bargaining representatives of its teachers, an evaluation plan for all teachers.
    (b) By no later than the applicable implementation date, each school district shall, in good faith cooperation with its teachers or, where applicable, the exclusive bargaining representatives of its teachers, incorporate the use of data and indicators on student growth as a significant factor in rating teaching performance, into its evaluation plan for all teachers, both those teachers in contractual continued service and those teachers not in contractual continued service. The plan shall at least meet the standards and requirements for student growth and teacher evaluation established under Section 24A-7, and specifically describe how student growth data and indicators will be used as part of the evaluation process, how this information will relate to evaluation standards, the assessments or other indicators of student performance that will be used in measuring student growth and the weight that each will have, the methodology that will be used to measure student growth, and the criteria other than student growth that will be used in evaluating the teacher and the weight that each will have.
    To incorporate the use of data and indicators of student growth as a significant factor in rating teacher performance into the evaluation plan, the district shall use a joint committee composed of equal representation selected by the district and its teachers or, where applicable, the exclusive bargaining representative of its teachers. If, within 180 calendar days of the committee's first meeting, the committee does not reach agreement on the plan, then the district shall implement the model evaluation plan established under Section 24A-7 with respect to the use of data and indicators on student growth as a significant factor in rating teacher performance.
    Nothing in this subsection (b) shall make decisions on the use of data and indicators on student growth as a significant factor in rating teaching performance mandatory subjects of bargaining under the Illinois Educational Labor Relations Act that are not currently mandatory subjects of bargaining under the Act.
    The provisions of the Open Meetings Act shall not apply to meetings of a joint committee formed under this subsection (b).
    (c) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in subsection (b) of this Section, if the joint committee referred to in that subsection does not reach agreement on the plan within 90 calendar days after the committee's first meeting, a school district having 500,000 or more inhabitants shall not be required to implement any aspect of the model evaluation plan and may implement its last best proposal.
    (d) Beginning the first school year following the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 100th General Assembly, the joint committee referred to in subsection (b) of this Section shall meet no less than one time annually to assess and review the effectiveness of the district's evaluation plan for the purposes of continuous improvement of instruction and evaluation practices.
(Source: P.A. 100-768, eff. 1-1-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24A-5) (from Ch. 122, par. 24A-5)
    Sec. 24A-5. Content of evaluation plans. This Section does not apply to teachers assigned to schools identified in an agreement entered into between the board of a school district operating under Article 34 of this Code and the exclusive representative of the district's teachers in accordance with Section 34-85c of this Code.
    Each school district to which this Article applies shall establish a teacher evaluation plan which ensures that each teacher in contractual continued service is evaluated at least once in the course of every 2 school years.
    By no later than September 1, 2012, each school district shall establish a teacher evaluation plan that ensures that:
        (1) each teacher not in contractual continued service
    	
is evaluated at least once every school year; and
        (2) each teacher in contractual continued service is
    	
evaluated at least once in the course of every 2 school years. However, any teacher in contractual continued service whose performance is rated as either "needs improvement" or "unsatisfactory" must be evaluated at least once in the school year following the receipt of such rating.
    Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Section or any other Section of the School Code, a principal shall not be prohibited from evaluating any teachers within a school during his or her first year as principal of such school. If a first-year principal exercises this option in a school district where the evaluation plan provides for a teacher in contractual continued service to be evaluated once in the course of every 2 school years, then a new 2-year evaluation plan must be established.
    The evaluation plan shall comply with the requirements of this Section and of any rules adopted by the State Board of Education pursuant to this Section.
    The plan shall include a description of each teacher's duties and responsibilities and of the standards to which that teacher is expected to conform, and shall include at least the following components:
        (a) personal observation of the teacher in the
    	
classroom by the evaluator, unless the teacher has no classroom duties.
        (b) consideration of the teacher's attendance,
    	
planning, instructional methods, classroom management, where relevant, and competency in the subject matter taught.
        (c) by no later than the applicable implementation
    	
date, consideration of student growth as a significant factor in the rating of the teacher's performance.
        (d) prior to September 1, 2012, rating of the
    	
performance of teachers in contractual continued service as either:
            (i) "excellent", "satisfactory" or
        	
"unsatisfactory"; or
            (ii) "excellent", "proficient", "needs
        	
improvement" or "unsatisfactory".
        (e) on and after September 1, 2012, rating of the
    	
performance of all teachers as "excellent", "proficient", "needs improvement" or "unsatisfactory".
        (f) specification as to the teacher's strengths and
    	
weaknesses, with supporting reasons for the comments made.
        (g) inclusion of a copy of the evaluation in the
    	
teacher's personnel file and provision of a copy to the teacher.
        (h) within 30 school days after the completion of an
    	
evaluation rating a teacher in contractual continued service as "needs improvement", development by the evaluator, in consultation with the teacher, and taking into account the teacher's on-going professional responsibilities including his or her regular teaching assignments, of a professional development plan directed to the areas that need improvement and any supports that the district will provide to address the areas identified as needing improvement.
        (i) within 30 school days after completion of an
    	
evaluation rating a teacher in contractual continued service as "unsatisfactory", development and commencement by the district of a remediation plan designed to correct deficiencies cited, provided the deficiencies are deemed remediable. In all school districts the remediation plan for unsatisfactory, tenured teachers shall provide for 90 school days of remediation within the classroom, unless an applicable collective bargaining agreement provides for a shorter duration. In all school districts evaluations issued pursuant to this Section shall be issued within 10 days after the conclusion of the respective remediation plan. However, the school board or other governing authority of the district shall not lose jurisdiction to discharge a teacher in the event the evaluation is not issued within 10 days after the conclusion of the respective remediation plan.
        (j) participation in the remediation plan by the
    	
teacher in contractual continued service rated "unsatisfactory", an evaluator and a consulting teacher selected by the evaluator of the teacher who was rated "unsatisfactory", which consulting teacher is an educational employee as defined in the Educational Labor Relations Act, has at least 5 years' teaching experience, and a reasonable familiarity with the assignment of the teacher being evaluated, and who received an "excellent" rating on his or her most recent evaluation. Where no teachers who meet these criteria are available within the district, the district shall request and the applicable regional office of education shall supply, to participate in the remediation process, an individual who meets these criteria.
        In a district having a population of less than
    	
500,000 with an exclusive bargaining agent, the bargaining agent may, if it so chooses, supply a roster of qualified teachers from whom the consulting teacher is to be selected. That roster shall, however, contain the names of at least 5 teachers, each of whom meets the criteria for consulting teacher with regard to the teacher being evaluated, or the names of all teachers so qualified if that number is less than 5. In the event of a dispute as to qualification, the State Board shall determine qualification.
        (k) a mid-point and final evaluation by an evaluator
    	
during and at the end of the remediation period, immediately following receipt of a remediation plan provided for under subsections (i) and (j) of this Section. Each evaluation shall assess the teacher's performance during the time period since the prior evaluation; provided that the last evaluation shall also include an overall evaluation of the teacher's performance during the remediation period. A written copy of the evaluations and ratings, in which any deficiencies in performance and recommendations for correction are identified, shall be provided to and discussed with the teacher within 10 school days after the date of the evaluation, unless an applicable collective bargaining agreement provides to the contrary. These subsequent evaluations shall be conducted by an evaluator. The consulting teacher shall provide advice to the teacher rated "unsatisfactory" on how to improve teaching skills and to successfully complete the remediation plan. The consulting teacher shall participate in developing the remediation plan, but the final decision as to the evaluation shall be done solely by the evaluator, unless an applicable collective bargaining agreement provides to the contrary. Evaluations at the conclusion of the remediation process shall be separate and distinct from the required annual evaluations of teachers and shall not be subject to the guidelines and procedures relating to those annual evaluations. The evaluator may but is not required to use the forms provided for the annual evaluation of teachers in the district's evaluation plan.
        (l) reinstatement to the evaluation schedule set
    	
forth in the district's evaluation plan for any teacher in contractual continued service who achieves a rating equal to or better than "satisfactory" or "proficient" in the school year following a rating of "needs improvement" or "unsatisfactory".
        (m) dismissal in accordance with subsection (d) of
    	
Section 24-12 or Section 24-16.5 or 34-85 of this Code of any teacher who fails to complete any applicable remediation plan with a rating equal to or better than a "satisfactory" or "proficient" rating. Districts and teachers subject to dismissal hearings are precluded from compelling the testimony of consulting teachers at such hearings under subsection (d) of Section 24-12 or Section 24-16.5 or 34-85 of this Code, either as to the rating process or for opinions of performances by teachers under remediation.
        (n) After the implementation date of an evaluation
    	
system for teachers in a district as specified in Section 24A-2.5 of this Code, if a teacher in contractual continued service successfully completes a remediation plan following a rating of "unsatisfactory" in an annual or biennial overall performance evaluation received after the foregoing implementation date and receives a subsequent rating of "unsatisfactory" in any of the teacher's annual or biennial overall performance evaluation ratings received during the 36-month period following the teacher's completion of the remediation plan, then the school district may forego remediation and seek dismissal in accordance with subsection (d) of Section 24-12 or Section 34-85 of this Code.
    Nothing in this Section or Section 24A-4 shall be construed as preventing immediate dismissal of a teacher for deficiencies which are deemed irremediable or for actions which are injurious to or endanger the health or person of students in the classroom or school, or preventing the dismissal or non-renewal of teachers not in contractual continued service for any reason not prohibited by applicable employment, labor, and civil rights laws. Failure to strictly comply with the time requirements contained in Section 24A-5 shall not invalidate the results of the remediation plan.
    Nothing contained in this amendatory Act of the 98th General Assembly repeals, supersedes, invalidates, or nullifies final decisions in lawsuits pending on the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 98th General Assembly in Illinois courts involving the interpretation of Public Act 97-8.
    If the Governor has declared a disaster due to a public health emergency pursuant to Section 7 of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act that suspends in-person instruction, the timelines in this Section connected to the commencement and completion of any remediation plan are waived. Except if the parties mutually agree otherwise and the agreement is in writing, any remediation plan that had been in place for more than 45 days prior to the suspension of in-person instruction shall resume when in-person instruction resumes and any remediation plan that had been in place for fewer than 45 days prior to the suspension of in-person instruction shall be discontinued and a new remediation period shall begin when in-person instruction resumes. The requirements of this paragraph apply regardless of whether they are included in a school district's teacher evaluation plan.
(Source: P.A. 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24A-5.5)
    Sec. 24A-5.5. Local appeal process for unsatisfactory ratings. Beginning with the first school year following the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 101st General Assembly, each school district shall, in good faith cooperation with its teachers or, if applicable, through good faith bargaining with the exclusive bargaining representative of its teachers, develop and implement an appeals process for "unsatisfactory" ratings under Section 24A-5 that includes, but is not limited to, an assessment of the original rating by a panel of qualified evaluators agreed to by the joint committee referred to in subsection (b) of Section 24A-4 that has the power to revoke the "unsatisfactory" rating it deems to be erroneous. The joint committee shall determine the criteria for successful appeals; however, the issuance of a rating to replace an "unsatisfactory" rating must be determined through bargaining between the exclusive bargaining representative, if any, and the school district.
(Source: P.A. 101-591, eff. 8-27-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24A-6)
    Sec. 24A-6. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 86-201. Repealed by P.A. 96-861, eff. 1-15-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24A-7) (from Ch. 122, par. 24A-7)
    Sec. 24A-7. Rules. The State Board of Education is authorized to adopt such rules as are deemed necessary to implement and accomplish the purposes and provisions of this Article, including, but not limited to, rules (i) relating to the methods for measuring student growth (including, but not limited to, limitations on the age of useable data; the amount of data needed to reliably and validly measure growth for the purpose of teacher and principal evaluations; and whether and at what time annual State assessments may be used as one of multiple measures of student growth), (ii) defining the term "significant factor" for purposes of including consideration of student growth in performance ratings, (iii) controlling for such factors as student characteristics (including, but not limited to, students receiving special education and English Language Learner services), student attendance, and student mobility so as to best measure the impact that a teacher, principal, school and school district has on students' academic achievement, (iv) establishing minimum requirements for district teacher and principal evaluation instruments and procedures, and (v) establishing a model evaluation plan for use by school districts in which student growth shall comprise 50% of the performance rating. Notwithstanding any provision in this Section, such rules shall not preclude a school district having 500,000 or more inhabitants from using an annual State assessment as the sole measure of student growth for purposes of teacher or principal evaluations.
    The State Superintendent of Education shall convene a Performance Evaluation Advisory Council, which shall be staffed by the State Board of Education. Members of the Council shall be selected by the State Superintendent and include, without limitation, representatives of teacher unions and school district management, persons with expertise in performance evaluation processes and systems, as well as other stakeholders. The Council shall meet at least quarterly, and may also meet at the call of the chairperson of the Council, following the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 100th General Assembly until June 30, 2021. The Council shall advise the State Board of Education on the ongoing implementation of performance evaluations in this State, which may include gathering public feedback, sharing best practices, consulting with the State Board on any proposed rule changes regarding evaluations, and other subjects as determined by the chairperson of the Council.
    Prior to the applicable implementation date, these rules shall not apply to teachers assigned to schools identified in an agreement entered into between the board of a school district operating under Article 34 of this Code and the exclusive representative of the district's teachers in accordance with Section 34-85c of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 100-211, eff. 8-18-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24A-7.1)
    Sec. 24A-7.1. Teacher, principal, and superintendent performance evaluations. Except as otherwise provided under this Act, disclosure of public school teacher, principal, and superintendent performance evaluations is prohibited.
(Source: P.A. 96-861, eff. 1-15-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24A-8) (from Ch. 122, par. 24A-8)
    Sec. 24A-8. Evaluation of teachers not in contractual continued service. Each teacher not in contractual continued service shall be evaluated at least once each school year.
(Source: P.A. 96-861, eff. 1-15-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24A-15)
    Sec. 24A-15. Development of evaluation plan for principals and assistant principals.
    (a) Each school district, except for a school district organized under Article 34 of this Code, shall establish a principal and assistant principal evaluation plan in accordance with this Section. The plan must ensure that each principal and assistant principal is evaluated as follows:
        (1) For a principal or assistant principal on a
    	
single-year contract, the evaluation must take place by March 1 of each year.
        (2) For a principal or assistant principal on a
    	
multi-year contract under Section 10-23.8a of this Code, the evaluation must take place by March 1 of the final year of the contract.
    On and after September 1, 2012, the plan must:
        (i) rate the principal's or assistant principal's
    	
performance as "excellent", "proficient", "needs improvement" or "unsatisfactory"; and
        (ii) ensure that each principal and assistant
    	
principal is evaluated at least once every school year.
    Nothing in this Section prohibits a school district from conducting additional evaluations of principals and assistant principals.
    (b) The evaluation shall include a description of the principal's or assistant principal's duties and responsibilities and the standards to which the principal or assistant principal is expected to conform.
    (c) The evaluation for a principal must be performed by the district superintendent, the superintendent's designee, or, in the absence of the superintendent or his or her designee, an individual appointed by the school board who holds a registered Type 75 State administrative certificate.
    Prior to September 1, 2012, the evaluation must be in writing and must at least do all of the following:
        (1) Consider the principal's specific duties,
    	
responsibilities, management, and competence as a principal.
        (2) Specify the principal's strengths and weaknesses,
    	
with supporting reasons.
        (3) Align with research-based standards established
    	
by administrative rule.
    On and after September 1, 2012, the evaluation must, in addition to the requirements in items (1), (2), and (3) of this subsection (c), provide for the use of data and indicators on student growth as a significant factor in rating performance.
    (c-5) The evaluation of an assistant principal must be performed by the principal, the district superintendent, the superintendent's designee, or, in the absence of the superintendent or his or her designee, an individual appointed by the school board who holds a registered Type 75 State administrative certificate. The evaluation must be in writing and must at least do all of the following:
        (1) Consider the assistant principal's specific
    	
duties, responsibilities, management, and competence as an assistant principal.
        (2) Specify the assistant principal's strengths and
    	
weaknesses with supporting reasons.
        (3) Align with the Illinois Professional Standards
    	
for School Leaders or research-based district standards.
    On and after September 1, 2012, the evaluation must, in addition to the requirements in items (1), (2), and (3) of this subsection (c-5), provide for the use of data and indicators on student growth as a significant factor in rating performance.
    (d) One copy of the evaluation must be included in the principal's or assistant principal's personnel file and one copy of the evaluation must be provided to the principal or assistant principal.
    (e) Failure by a district to evaluate a principal or assistant principal and to provide the principal or assistant principal with a copy of the evaluation at least once during the term of the principal's or assistant principal's contract, in accordance with this Section, is evidence that the principal or assistant principal is performing duties and responsibilities in at least a satisfactory manner and shall serve to automatically extend the principal's or assistant principal's contract for a period of one year after the contract would otherwise expire, under the same terms and conditions as the prior year's contract. The requirements in this Section are in addition to the right of a school board to reclassify a principal or assistant principal pursuant to Section 10-23.8b of this Code.
    (f) Nothing in this Section prohibits a school board from ordering lateral transfers of principals or assistant principals to positions of similar rank and salary.
(Source: P.A. 96-861, eff. 1-15-10; 97-217, eff. 7-28-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/24A-20)
    Sec. 24A-20. State Board of Education data collection and evaluation assessment and support systems.
    (a) On or before the date established in subsection (b) of this Section, the State Board of Education shall, through a process involving collaboration with the Performance Evaluation Advisory Council, develop or contract for the development of and implement all of the following data collection and evaluation assessment and support systems:
        (1) A system to annually collect and publish data by
    	
district and school on teacher and administrator performance evaluation outcomes. The system must ensure that no teacher or administrator can be personally identified by publicly reported data.
        (2) Both a teacher and principal model evaluation
    	
template. The model templates must incorporate the requirements of this Article and any other requirements established by the State Board by administrative rule, but allow customization by districts in a manner that does not conflict with such requirements.
        (3) An evaluator pre-qualification program based on
    	
the model teacher evaluation template.
        (4) An evaluator training program based on the model
    	
teacher evaluation template. The training program shall provide multiple training options that account for the prior training and experience of the evaluator.
        (5) A superintendent training program based on the
    	
model principal evaluation template.
        (6) One or more instruments to provide feedback to
    	
principals on the instructional environment within a school.
        (7) A State Board-provided or approved technical
    	
assistance system that supports districts with the development and implementation of teacher and principal evaluation systems.
        (8) Web-based systems and tools supporting
    	
implementation of the model templates and the evaluator pre-qualification and training programs.
        (9) A process for measuring and reporting
    	
correlations between local principal and teacher evaluations and (A) student growth in tested grades and subjects and (B) retention rates of teachers.
        (10) A process for assessing whether school district
    	
evaluation systems developed pursuant to this Act and that consider student growth as a significant factor in the rating of a teacher's and principal's performance are valid and reliable, contribute to the development of staff, and improve student achievement outcomes. By no later than September 1, 2014, a research-based study shall be issued assessing such systems for validity and reliability, contribution to the development of staff, and improvement of student performance and recommending, based on the results of this study, changes, if any, that need to be incorporated into teacher and principal evaluation systems that consider student growth as a significant factor in the rating performance for remaining school districts to be required to implement such systems.
    (b) If the State of Illinois receives a Race to the Top Grant, the data collection and support systems described in subsection (a) must be developed on or before September 30, 2011. If the State of Illinois does not receive a Race to the Top Grant, the data collection and support systems described in subsection (a) must be developed on or before September 30, 2012; provided, however, that the data collection and support systems set forth in items (3) and (4) of subsection (a) of this Section must be developed by September 30, 2011 regardless of whether the State of Illinois receives a Race to the Top Grant. By no later than September 1, 2011, if the State of Illinois receives a Race to the Top Grant, or September 1, 2012, if the State of Illinois does not receive a Race to the Top Grant, the State Board of Education must execute or contract for the execution of the assessment referenced in item (10) of subsection (a) of this Section to determine whether the school district evaluation systems developed pursuant to this Act have been valid and reliable, contributed to the development of staff, and improved student performance.
    (c) Districts shall submit data and information to the State Board on teacher and principal performance evaluations and evaluation plans in accordance with procedures and requirements for submissions established by the State Board. Such data shall include, without limitation, (i) data on the performance rating given to all teachers in contractual continued service, (ii) data on district recommendations to renew or not renew teachers not in contractual continued service, and (iii) data on the performance rating given to all principals.
    (d) If the State Board of Education does not timely fulfill any of the requirements set forth in Sections 24A-7 and 24A-20, and adequate and sustainable federal, State, or other funds are not provided to the State Board of Education and school districts to meet their responsibilities under this Article, the applicable implementation date shall be postponed by the number of calendar days equal to those needed by the State Board of Education to fulfill such requirements and for the adequate and sustainable funds to be provided to the State Board of Education and school districts. The determination as to whether the State Board of Education has fulfilled any or all requirements set forth in Sections 24A-7 and 24A-20 and whether adequate and sustainable funds have been provided to the State Board of Education and school districts shall be made by the State Board of Education in consultation with the P-20 Council.
(Source: P.A. 96-861, eff. 1-15-10.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 26 heading)
ARTICLE 26. PUPILS--COMPULSORY ATTENDANCE

    (105 ILCS 5/26-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 26-1)
    Sec. 26-1. Compulsory school age; exemptions. Whoever has custody or control of any child (i) between the ages of 7 and 17 years (unless the child has already graduated from high school) for school years before the 2014-2015 school year or (ii) between the ages of 6 (on or before September 1) and 17 years (unless the child has already graduated from high school) beginning with the 2014-2015 school year shall cause such child to attend some public school in the district wherein the child resides the entire time it is in session during the regular school term, except as provided in Section 10-19.1, and during a required summer school program established under Section 10-22.33B; provided, that the following children shall not be required to attend the public schools:
        1. Any child attending a private or a parochial
    	
school where children are taught the branches of education taught to children of corresponding age and grade in the public schools, and where the instruction of the child in the branches of education is in the English language;
        2. Any child who is physically or mentally unable to
    	
attend school, such disability being certified to the county or district truant officer by a competent physician licensed in Illinois to practice medicine and surgery in all its branches, a chiropractic physician licensed under the Medical Practice Act of 1987, a licensed advanced practice registered nurse, a licensed physician assistant, or a Christian Science practitioner residing in this State and listed in the Christian Science Journal; or who is excused for temporary absence for cause by the principal or teacher of the school which the child attends; the exemptions in this paragraph (2) do not apply to any female who is pregnant or the mother of one or more children, except where a female is unable to attend school due to a complication arising from her pregnancy and the existence of such complication is certified to the county or district truant officer by a competent physician;
        3. Any child necessarily and lawfully employed
    	
according to the provisions of the law regulating child labor may be excused from attendance at school by the county superintendent of schools or the superintendent of the public school which the child should be attending, on certification of the facts by and the recommendation of the school board of the public school district in which the child resides. In districts having part-time continuation schools, children so excused shall attend such schools at least 8 hours each week;
        4. Any child over 12 and under 14 years of age while
    	
in attendance at confirmation classes;
        5. Any child absent from a public school on a
    	
particular day or days or at a particular time of day for the reason that he is unable to attend classes or to participate in any examination, study or work requirements on a particular day or days or at a particular time of day, because the tenets of his religion forbid secular activity on a particular day or days or at a particular time of day. Each school board shall prescribe rules and regulations relative to absences for religious holidays including, but not limited to, a list of religious holidays on which it shall be mandatory to excuse a child; but nothing in this paragraph 5 shall be construed to limit the right of any school board, at its discretion, to excuse an absence on any other day by reason of the observance of a religious holiday. A school board may require the parent or guardian of a child who is to be excused from attending school due to the observance of a religious holiday to give notice, not exceeding 5 days, of the child's absence to the school principal or other school personnel. Any child excused from attending school under this paragraph 5 shall not be required to submit a written excuse for such absence after returning to school;
        6. Any child 16 years of age or older who (i)
    	
submits to a school district evidence of necessary and lawful employment pursuant to paragraph 3 of this Section and (ii) is enrolled in a graduation incentives program pursuant to Section 26-16 of this Code or an alternative learning opportunities program established pursuant to Article 13B of this Code;
        7. A child in any of grades 6 through 12 absent from
    	
a public school on a particular day or days or at a particular time of day for the purpose of sounding "Taps" at a military honors funeral held in this State for a deceased veteran. In order to be excused under this paragraph 7, the student shall notify the school's administration at least 2 days prior to the date of the absence and shall provide the school's administration with the date, time, and location of the military honors funeral. The school's administration may waive this 2-day notification requirement if the student did not receive at least 2 days advance notice, but the student shall notify the school's administration as soon as possible of the absence. A student whose absence is excused under this paragraph 7 shall be counted as if the student attended school for purposes of calculating the average daily attendance of students in the school district. A student whose absence is excused under this paragraph 7 must be allowed a reasonable time to make up school work missed during the absence. If the student satisfactorily completes the school work, the day of absence shall be counted as a day of compulsory attendance and he or she may not be penalized for that absence; and
        8. Any child absent from a public school on a
    	
particular day or days or at a particular time of day for the reason that his or her parent or legal guardian is an active duty member of the uniformed services and has been called to duty for, is on leave from, or has immediately returned from deployment to a combat zone or combat-support postings. Such a student shall be granted 5 days of excused absences in any school year and, at the discretion of the school board, additional excused absences to visit the student's parent or legal guardian relative to such leave or deployment of the parent or legal guardian. In the case of excused absences pursuant to this paragraph 8, the student and parent or legal guardian shall be responsible for obtaining assignments from the student's teacher prior to any period of excused absence and for ensuring that such assignments are completed by the student prior to his or her return to school from such period of excused absence.
(Source: P.A. 99-173, eff. 7-29-15; 99-804, eff. 1-1-17; 100-185, eff. 8-18-17; 100-513, eff. 1-1-18; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/26-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 26-2)
    Sec. 26-2. Enrolled pupils not of compulsory school age.
    (a) For school years before the 2014-2015 school year, any person having custody or control of a child who is below the age of 7 years or is 17 years of age or above and who is enrolled in any of grades kindergarten through 12 in the public school shall cause him to attend the public school in the district wherein he resides when it is in session during the regular school term, unless he is excused under paragraph 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 of Section 26-1. Beginning with the 2014-2015 school year, any person having custody or control of a child who is below the age of 6 years or is 17 years of age or above and who is enrolled in any of grades kindergarten through 12 in the public school shall cause the child to attend the public school in the district wherein he or she resides when it is in session during the regular school term, unless the child is excused under paragraph 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 of Section 26-1 of this Code.
    (b) A school district shall deny reenrollment in its secondary schools to any child 19 years of age or above who has dropped out of school and who could not, because of age and lack of credits, attend classes during the normal school year and graduate before his or her twenty-first birthday. A district may, however, enroll the child in a graduation incentives program under Section 26-16 of this Code or an alternative learning opportunities program established under Article 13B. No child shall be denied reenrollment for the above reasons unless the school district first offers the child due process as required in cases of expulsion under Section 10-22.6. If a child is denied reenrollment after being provided with due process, the school district must provide counseling to that child and must direct that child to alternative educational programs, including adult education programs, that lead to graduation or receipt of a high school equivalency certificate.
    (c) A school or school district may deny enrollment to a student 17 years of age or older for one semester for failure to meet minimum attendance standards if all of the following conditions are met:
        (1) The student was absent without valid cause for
    	
20% or more of the attendance days in the semester immediately prior to the current semester.
        (2) The student and the student's parent or guardian
    	
are given written notice warning that the student is subject to denial from enrollment for one semester unless the student is absent without valid cause less than 20% of the attendance days in the current semester.
        (3) The student's parent or guardian is provided with
    	
the right to appeal the notice, as determined by the State Board of Education in accordance with due process.
        (4) The student is provided with attendance
    	
remediation services, including without limitation assessment, counseling, and support services.
        (5) The student is absent without valid cause for 20%
    	
or more of the attendance days in the current semester.
    A school or school district may not deny enrollment to a student (or reenrollment to a dropout) who is at least 17 years of age or older but below 19 years for more than one consecutive semester for failure to meet attendance standards.
    (d) No child may be denied reenrollment under this Section in violation of the federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Act or the Americans with Disabilities Act.
    (e) In this subsection (e), "reenrolled student" means a dropout who has reenrolled full-time in a public school. Each school district shall identify, track, and report on the educational progress and outcomes of reenrolled students as a subset of the district's required reporting on all enrollments. A reenrolled student who again drops out must not be counted again against a district's dropout rate performance measure. The State Board of Education shall set performance standards for programs serving reenrolled students.
    (f) The State Board of Education shall adopt any rules necessary to implement the changes to this Section made by Public Act 93-803.
(Source: P.A. 100-825, eff. 8-13-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/26-2a) (from Ch. 122, par. 26-2a)
    Sec. 26-2a. A "truant" is defined as a child who is subject to compulsory school attendance and who is absent without valid cause, as defined under this Section, from such attendance for more than 1% but less than 5% of the past 180 school days.
    "Valid cause" for absence shall be illness, observance of a religious holiday, death in the immediate family, family emergency, and shall include such other situations beyond the control of the student as determined by the board of education in each district, or such other circumstances which cause reasonable concern to the parent for the mental, emotional, or physical health or safety of the student.
    "Chronic or habitual truant" shall be defined as a child who is subject to compulsory school attendance and who is absent without valid cause from such attendance for 5% or more of the previous 180 regular attendance days.
    "Truant minor" is defined as a chronic truant to whom supportive services, including prevention, diagnostic, intervention and remedial services, alternative programs and other school and community resources have been provided and have failed to result in the cessation of chronic truancy, or have been offered and refused.
    A "dropout" is defined as any child enrolled in grades 9 through 12 whose name has been removed from the district enrollment roster for any reason other than the student's death, extended illness, removal for medical non-compliance, expulsion, aging out, graduation, or completion of a program of studies and who has not transferred to another public or private school and is not known to be home-schooled by his or her parents or guardians or continuing school in another country.
    "Religion" for the purposes of this Article, includes all aspects of religious observance and practice, as well as belief.
(Source: P.A. 100-810, eff. 1-1-19; 100-918, eff. 8-17-18; 101-81, eff. 7-12-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/26-2b) (from Ch. 122, par. 26-2b)
    Sec. 26-2b. Any child enrolled in a public school who is unable, because of the observance of a religious holiday, to attend classes on a particular day or days or at a particular time of day shall be excused from any examination or any study or work assignments on such particular day or days or at such particular time of day. It shall be the responsibility of the teachers and of the administrative officials of each public school to make available to each child who is absent from school because of the observance of a religious holiday an equivalent opportunity to make up any examination, study or work requirements which he has missed because of such absence on any particular day or days or at any particular time of day. No special fees of any kind shall be charged to the child for making available to such child such equivalent opportunity. No adverse or prejudicial effects shall result to any child because of his availing himself of the provisions of this Section.
    The provisions of this Section shall apply only if the rules and regulations of the school board promulgated pursuant to paragraph 5 of Section 26-1 have been complied with.
(Source: P.A. 84-212.)

    (105 ILCS 5/26-3) (from Ch. 122, par. 26-3)
    Sec. 26-3. Teachers furnished list-Report of non-attendance-Report of persons not on list.
    The clerk or secretary of the school board of all school districts except those employing district truant officers shall furnish the superintendent of schools at the beginning of the school year a list of the names and addresses of the children living in the district who come under the provisions of this Article and of persons having custody or control of such children. The superintendent shall at the opening of school and at other times when required by the regional superintendent of schools compare the list with the enrollment of the school or schools and report to the regional superintendent of schools the names of persons having custody or control of children included under the provisions of this Article who are truant or who are chronic or habitual truants for whom supportive services and other school resources have failed to correct the truant behavior and who are not in regular attendance at the public school, and the names of such children and their ages, stating in each case, if known, the cause of such absence. The report shall also contain the names of any other persons who were not enumerated in the list at the beginning of school and who have the custody or control of children not attending school. The regional superintendent shall, without delay, place such information at the disposal of the regional truant officer.
(Source: P.A. 80-908.)

    (105 ILCS 5/26-3a) (from Ch. 122, par. 26-3a)
    Sec. 26-3a. Report of pupils no longer enrolled in school.
    The clerk or secretary of the school board of all school districts shall furnish quarterly on the first school day of October, January, April and July to the regional superintendent and to the Secretary of State a list of pupils, excluding transferees, who have been expelled or have withdrawn or who have left school and have been removed from the regular attendance rolls during the period of time school was in regular session from the time of the previous quarterly report. Such list shall include the names and addresses of pupils formerly in attendance, the names and addresses of persons having custody or control of such pupils, the reason, if known, such pupils are no longer in attendance and the date of removal from the attendance rolls. The list shall also include the names of: pupils whose withdrawal is due to extraordinary circumstances, including but not limited to economic or medical necessity or family hardship, as determined by the criteria established by the school district; pupils who have re-enrolled in school since their names were removed from the attendance rolls; any pupil certified to be a chronic or habitual truant, as defined in Section 26-2a; and pupils previously certified as chronic or habitual truants who have resumed regular school attendance. The regional superintendent shall inform the county or district truant officer who shall investigate to see that such pupils are in compliance with the requirements of this Article.
    Each local school district shall establish, in writing, a set of criteria for use by the local superintendent of schools in determining whether a pupil's failure to attend school is the result of extraordinary circumstances, including but not limited to economic or medical necessity or family hardship.
    If a pupil re-enrolls in school after his or her name was removed from the attendance rolls or resumes regular attendance after being certified a chronic or habitual truant, the pupil must obtain and forward to the Secretary of State, on a form designated by the Secretary of State, verification of his or her re-enrollment. The verification may be in the form of a signature or seal or in any other form determined by the school board.
    The State Board of Education shall, if possible, make available to any person, upon request, a comparison of drop out rates before and after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 94th General Assembly.
(Source: P.A. 94-916, eff. 7-1-07; 95-496, eff. 8-28-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/26-3b) (from Ch. 122, par. 26-3b)
    Sec. 26-3b. Beginning July 1, 1986, if any child enrolled in a public school in grades Kindergarten through 8 is absent from school, and there is no record that such absence is for a valid cause, as defined under Article 26 of this Code, nor notification that the absence has been authorized by the parent, legal guardian or other person having legal custody of such child, an employee or other agent, whether a volunteer or otherwise, designated by the public school in which the child is enrolled shall, within 2 hours after the first class in which the child is enrolled, make a reasonable effort to promptly telephone and notify the parent, legal guardian, or other person having legal custody of the child, of the child's absence from school. Such notification shall not be given for an absence authorized by the parent, legal guardian or other person having legal custody of such child. Prior to any enrollment of a child in a public school, the school district shall notify parents, legal guardians, or other persons having legal custody of a child, of their responsibility to authorize any absence and to notify the school in advance or at the time of any such absence, and that the school requires at least one and not more than 2 telephone numbers be given for purposes of this Section. The school district shall require that such telephone numbers be given at the time of enrollment of the child in school, which said numbers may be changed from time to time upon notification to the school.
    The requirements of this Section shall have been met by the school if notification of an absence has been attempted by telephoning the 1 or 2 numbers given the school by the parent, legal guardian or other person having legal custody of a child, whether or not there is any answer at such telephone number or numbers. Further, the requirements of this Section shall have been met if the said notification is given to a member of the household of the child's parent, legal guardian or other person having legal custody of the child, which said member of the household must be 10 years of age or older.
    An employee or other agent designated by the public school who in good faith makes a reasonable effort to notify the parent, legal guardian or other person having legal custody of a child of the child's absence from school, when required by this Section, shall not, as a result of his acts or omissions, except wilful or wanton misconduct on the part of such employee or agent in attempting to comply with the notification requirements of this Section, be liable for civil damages.
(Source: P.A. 84-178; 84-682.)

    (105 ILCS 5/26-3d) (from Ch. 122, par. 26-3d)
    Sec. 26-3d. All regional superintendents, district superintendents, and special education joint agreement directors shall collect data concerning truants, chronic truants, and truant minor pupils as designated by the State Board of Education. On or before August 15 of each year, this data must be submitted to the State Board of Education.
(Source: P.A. 96-734, eff. 8-25-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/26-4)
    Sec. 26-4. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 88-50.)

    (105 ILCS 5/26-5) (from Ch. 122, par. 26-5)
    Sec. 26-5. Duties of truant officers.
    The truant officer of the school district, whenever notified by the Superintendent, teacher, or other person of violations of this Article, or the county truant officer, when notified by the County Superintendent, shall investigate all cases of truancy or non-attendance at school in their respective jurisdictions, and if the children complained of are not exempt under the provisions of this Article, the truant officer shall proceed as is provided in this Article. The county truant officer, within the county and the district truant officers, within their respective districts, shall in the exercise of their duties be conservators of the peace and shall keep the same, suppress riots, routs, affray, fighting, breaches of the peace, and prevent crime; and may arrest offenders on view and cause them to be brought before proper officials for trial or examination.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/26-6) (from Ch. 122, par. 26-6)
    Sec. 26-6. List and reports in districts employing truant officers.
    In school districts which employ truant officers the clerk or secretary of the school board shall at the beginning of each school year furnish a copy of the last school census to the superintendent of schools (or principal teacher) in the district, together with the names and addresses of the truant officers in the district, and the superintendent, (or principal teacher) shall compare the census list with the enrollment of the school or schools and, from time to time, report to the proper truant officers the names and addresses of persons having custody or control of children included under the provisions of this Article who are truant or who are chronic or habitual truants for whom supportive services and other school resources have failed to correct the truant behavior and who are not in regular attendance at public schools and also the names of persons having custody or control of children who are not in regular attendance at school and whose names are not included in the census list.
(Source: P.A. 80-908.)

    (105 ILCS 5/26-7) (from Ch. 122, par. 26-7)
    Sec. 26-7. Notice to custodian-Notice of non-compliance. If any person fails to send any child under his custody or control to some lawful school, the truant officer or, in a school district that does not have a truant officer, the regional superintendent of schools or his or her designee shall, as soon as practicable after he is notified thereof, give notice in person or by mail to such person that such child shall be present at the proper public school on the day following the receipt of such notice. The notice shall state the date that attendance at school must begin and that such attendance must be continuous and consecutive in the district during the remainder of the school year. The truant officer or, in a school district that does not have a truant officer, the regional superintendent of schools or his or her designee shall at the same time that such notice is given notify the teacher or superintendent of the proper public school thereof and the teacher or superintendent shall notify the truant officer or regional superintendent of schools of any non-compliance therewith.
(Source: P.A. 93-858, eff. 1-1-05.)

    (105 ILCS 5/26-8) (from Ch. 122, par. 26-8)
    Sec. 26-8. Determination as to compliance - Complaint in circuit court. A truant officer or, in a school district that does not have a truant officer, the regional superintendent of schools or his or her designee, after giving the notice provided in Section 26-7, shall determine whether the notice has been complied with. If 3 notices have been given and the notices have not been complied with, and if the persons having custody or control have knowingly and wilfully permitted the truant behavior to continue, the regional superintendent of schools, or his or her designee, of the school district where the child resides shall conduct a truancy hearing. If the regional superintendent determines as a result of the hearing that the child is truant, the regional superintendent shall, if age appropriate at the discretion of the regional superintendent, require the student to complete 20 to 40 hours of community service over a period of 90 days. If the truancy persists, the regional superintendent shall (i) make complaint against the persons having custody or control to the state's attorney or in the circuit court in the county where such person resides for failure to comply with the provisions of this Article or (ii) conduct truancy mediation and encourage the student to enroll in a graduation incentives program under Section 26-16 of this Code. If, however, after giving the notice provided in Section 26-7 the truant behavior has continued, and the child is beyond the control of the parents, guardians or custodians, a truancy petition shall be filed under the provisions of Article III of the Juvenile Court Act of 1987.
(Source: P.A. 93-858, eff. 1-1-05; 93-1079, eff. 1-21-05.)

    (105 ILCS 5/26-8a) (from Ch. 122, par. 26-8a)
    Sec. 26-8a. The petition for court action shall include the name of the truant minor, the names and addresses of persons having custody or control of the student, the dates of the truant behavior, the dates and nature of contacts or conferences with the student and the persons having custody or control of the student, and the nature of the supportive services, alternative programs and other school resources the school district provided to that child in an effort to correct that child's truant behavior.
(Source: P.A. 80-908.)

    (105 ILCS 5/26-8b) (from Ch. 122, par. 26-8b)
    Sec. 26-8b. When a petition is filed, it shall be set for an adjudicatory hearing within 10 days and acted upon within 30 days, subject to the provisions of the Juvenile Court Act or the Juvenile Court Act of 1987 if filed thereunder.
(Source: P.A. 85-1209.)

    (105 ILCS 5/26-9) (from Ch. 122, par. 26-9)
    Sec. 26-9. School officers and teachers to assist truant officers.
    School officers, superintendents, teachers or other persons shall render such assistance and furnish such information as they have to aid truant officers in the performance of their duties.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/26-10) (from Ch. 122, par. 26-10)
    Sec. 26-10. Fine for noncompliance.) Any person having custody or control of a child subject to the provisions of this Article to whom notice has been given of the child's truancy and who knowingly and wilfully permits such a child to persist in his truancy within that school year, upon conviction thereof shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and shall be subject to not more than 30 days imprisonment and/or a fine of up to $500.
(Source: P.A. 80-908.)

    (105 ILCS 5/26-11) (from Ch. 122, par. 26-11)
    Sec. 26-11. Punishment for certain offenses.
    Any person who induces or attempts to induce any child to be absent from school unlawfully, or who knowingly employs or harbors, while school is in session, any child absent unlawfully from school for 3 consecutive school days, is guilty of a Class C misdemeanor.
(Source: P.A. 77-2267.)

    (105 ILCS 5/26-12) (from Ch. 122, par. 26-12)
    Sec. 26-12. Punitive action.
    (a) No punitive action, including out-of-school suspensions, expulsions, or court action, shall be taken against truant minors for such truancy unless appropriate and available supportive services and other school resources have been provided to the student. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 10-22.6 of this Code, a truant minor may not be expelled for nonattendance unless he or she has accrued 15 consecutive days of absences without valid cause and the student cannot be located by the school district or the school district has located the student but cannot, after exhausting all available supportive services, compel the student to return to school.
    (b) A school district may not refer a truant, chronic truant, or truant minor to any other local public entity, as defined under Section 1-206 of the Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act, for that local public entity to issue the child a fine or a fee as punishment for his or her truancy.
    (c) A school district may refer any person having custody or control of a truant, chronic truant, or truant minor to any other local public entity, as defined under Section 1-206 of the Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act, for that local public entity to issue the person a fine or fee for the child's truancy only if the school district's truant officer, regional office of education, or intermediate service center has been notified of the truant behavior and the school district, regional office of education, or intermediate service center has offered all appropriate and available supportive services and other school resources to the child. Before a school district may refer a person having custody or control of a child to a municipality, as defined under Section 1-1-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code, the school district must provide the following appropriate and available services:
        (1) For any child who is a homeless child, as defined
    	
under Section 1-5 of the Education for Homeless Children Act, a meeting between the child, the person having custody or control of the child, relevant school personnel, and a homeless liaison to discuss any barriers to the child's attendance due to the child's transitional living situation and to construct a plan that removes these barriers.
        (2) For any child with a documented disability, a
    	
meeting between the child, the person having custody or control of the child, and relevant school personnel to review the child's current needs and address the appropriateness of the child's placement and services. For any child subject to Article 14 of this Code, this meeting shall be an individualized education program meeting and shall include relevant members of the individualized education program team. For any child with a disability under Section 504 of the federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794), this meeting shall be a Section 504 plan review and include relevant members of the Section 504 plan team.
        (3) For any child currently being evaluated by a
    	
school district for a disability or for whom the school has a basis of knowledge that the child is a child with a disability under 20 U.S.C. 1415(k)(5), the completion of the evaluation and determination of the child's eligibility for special education services.
    (d) Before a school district may refer a person having custody or control of a child to a local public entity under this Section, the school district must document any appropriate and available supportive services offered to the child. In the event a meeting under this Section does not occur, a school district must have documentation that it made reasonable efforts to convene the meeting at a mutually convenient time and date for the school district and the person having custody or control of the child and, but for the conduct of that person, the meeting would have occurred.
(Source: P.A. 100-810, eff. 1-1-19; 100-825, eff. 8-13-18; 101-81, eff. 7-12-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/26-13) (from Ch. 122, par. 26-13)
    Sec. 26-13. Absenteeism and truancy policies. School districts shall adopt policies, consistent with rules adopted by the State Board of Education, which identify the appropriate supportive services and available resources which are provided for truants and chronic truants.
(Source: P.A. 84-1420.)

    (105 ILCS 5/26-14) (from Ch. 122, par. 26-14)
    Sec. 26-14. Truancy programs for dropouts. Any dropout, as defined in Section 26-2a, who is 17 years of age may apply to a school district for status as a truant, and the school district shall permit such person to participate in the district's various programs and resources for truants. At the time of the person's application, the district may request documentation of his dropout status for the previous 6 months.
(Source: P.A. 93-858, eff. 1-1-05.)

    (105 ILCS 5/26-15) (from Ch. 122, par. 26-15)
    Sec. 26-15. Truant minors. When a regional superintendent has reason to believe that a pupil is a truant minor as defined in Section 26-2a, the regional superintendent may report such pupil under the provisions of the Juvenile Court Act.
(Source: P.A. 85-1209.)

    (105 ILCS 5/26-16)
    Sec. 26-16. Graduation incentives program.
    (a) The General Assembly finds that it is critical to provide options for children to succeed in school. The purpose of this Section is to provide incentives for and encourage all Illinois students who have experienced or are experiencing difficulty in the traditional education system to enroll in alternative programs.
    (b) Any student who is below the age of 20 years is eligible to enroll in a graduation incentives program if he or she:
        (1) is considered a dropout pursuant to Section
    	
26-2a of this Code;
        (2) has been suspended or expelled pursuant to
    	
Section 10-22.6 or 34-19 of this Code;
        (3) is pregnant or is a parent;
        (4) has been assessed as chemically dependent; or
        (5) is enrolled in a bilingual education or LEP
    	
program.
    (c) The following programs qualify as graduation incentives programs for students meeting the criteria established in this Section:
        (1) Any public elementary or secondary education
    	
graduation incentives program established by a school district or by a regional office of education.
        (2) Any alternative learning opportunities program
    	
established pursuant to Article 13B of this Code.
        (3) Vocational or job training courses approved by
    	
the State Superintendent of Education that are available through the Illinois public community college system. Students may apply for reimbursement of 50% of tuition costs for one course per semester or a maximum of 3 courses per school year. Subject to available funds, students may apply for reimbursement of up to 100% of tuition costs upon a showing of employment within 6 months after completion of a vocational or job training program. The qualifications for reimbursement shall be established by the State Superintendent of Education by rule.
        (4) Job and career programs approved by the State
    	
Superintendent of Education that are available through Illinois-accredited private business and vocational schools. Subject to available funds, pupils may apply for reimbursement of up to 100% of tuition costs upon a showing of employment within 6 months after completion of a job or career program. The State Superintendent of Education shall establish, by rule, the qualifications for reimbursement, criteria for determining reimbursement amounts, and limits on reimbursement.
        (5) Adult education courses that offer preparation
    	
for high school equivalency testing.
    (d) Graduation incentives programs established by school districts are entitled to claim general State aid and evidence-based funding, subject to Sections 13B-50, 13B-50.5, and 13B-50.10 of this Code. Graduation incentives programs operated by regional offices of education are entitled to receive general State aid and evidence-based funding at the foundation level of support per pupil enrolled. A school district must ensure that its graduation incentives program receives supplemental general State aid, transportation reimbursements, and special education resources, if appropriate, for students enrolled in the program.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/26-17)
    Sec. 26-17. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-911, eff. 8-8-12. Repealed internally, eff. 11-2-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/26-18)
    Sec. 26-18. Chronic absenteeism report and support.
    (a) As used in this Section:
    "Chronic absence" means absences that total 10% or more of school days of the most recent academic school year, including absences with and without valid cause, as defined in Section 26-2a of this Code, and out-of-school suspensions for an enrolled student.
    "Student" means any enrolled student that is subject to compulsory attendance under Section 26-1 of this Code but does not mean a student for whom a documented homebound or hospital record is on file during the student's absence from school.
    (b) The General Assembly finds that:
        (1) The early years are a critical period in
    	
children's learning and development. Every child should be counted present every day. Every day of school matters.
        (2) Being absent too many days from school can make
    	
it difficult for students to stay on-track academically and maintain the momentum to graduate from high school in order to be college- or career-ready.
        (3) Every day of school attendance matters for all
    	
students and their families. It is crucial, therefore, that the implications of chronic absence be understood and reviewed regularly.
    (c) Beginning July 1, 2018, every school district, charter school, or alternative school or any school receiving public funds shall collect and review its chronic absence data and determine what systems of support and resources are needed to engage chronically absent students and their families to encourage the habit of daily attendance and promote success. The review shall include an analysis of chronic absence data from each attendance center or campus of the school district, charter school, or alternative school or other school receiving public funds.
    (d) School districts, charter schools, or alternative schools or any school receiving public funds are encouraged to provide a system of support to students who are at risk of reaching or exceeding chronic absence levels with strategies such as those available through the Illinois Multi-tiered Systems of Support Network. Schools additionally are encouraged to make resources available to families such as those available through the State Board of Education's Family Engagement Framework to support and engage students and their families to encourage heightened school engagement and improved daily school attendance.
(Source: P.A. 100-156, eff. 1-1-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/26-19)
    Sec. 26-19. Chronic absenteeism in preschool children.
    (a) In this Section, "chronic absence" has the meaning ascribed to that term in Section 26-18 of this Code.
    (b) The General Assembly makes all of the following findings:
        (1) The early years are an extremely important period
    	
in a child's learning and development.
        (2) Missed learning opportunities in the early years
    	
make it difficult for a child to enter kindergarten ready for success.
        (3) Attendance patterns in the early years serve as
    	
predictors of chronic absenteeism and reduced educational outcomes in later school years. Therefore, it is crucial that the implications of chronic absence be understood and reviewed regularly in all publicly funded early childhood programs receiving State funds under Section 2-3.71 of this Code.
    (c) Beginning July 1, 2019, any publicly funded early childhood program receiving State funds under Section 2-3.71 of this Code shall collect and review its chronic absence data and determine what support and resources are needed to positively engage chronically absent students and their families to encourage the habit of daily attendance and promote success.
    (d) Publicly funded early childhood programs receiving State funds under Section 2-3.71 of this Code are encouraged to do all of the following:
        (1) Provide support to students who are at risk of
    	
reaching or exceeding chronic absence levels.
        (2) Make resources available to families, such as
    	
those available through the State Board of Education's Family Engagement Framework, to support and encourage families to ensure their children's daily program attendance.
        (3) Include information about chronic absenteeism as
    	
part of their preschool to kindergarten transition resources.
    (e) On or before July 1, 2020, and annually thereafter, an early childhood program shall report all data collected under subsection (c) of this Section to the State Board of Education, which shall make the report publicly available via the Illinois Early Childhood Asset Map Internet website and the Preschool for All Program or Preschool for All Expansion Program triennial report.
(Source: P.A. 100-819, eff. 7-1-19.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 27 heading)
ARTICLE 27. COURSES OF STUDY--SPECIAL INSTRUCTION

    (105 ILCS 5/27-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-1)
    Sec. 27-1. Areas of education taught - discrimination on account of sex. The State of Illinois, having the responsibility of defining requirements for elementary and secondary education, establishes that the primary purpose of schooling is the transmission of knowledge and culture through which children learn in areas necessary to their continuing development and entry into the world of work. Such areas include the language arts, mathematics, the biological, physical and social sciences, the fine arts and physical development and health.
    Each school district shall give priority in the allocation of resources, including funds, time allocation, personnel, and facilities, to fulfilling the primary purpose of schooling.
    The State Board of Education shall establish goals and learning standards consistent with the above purposes and define the knowledge and skills which the State expects students to master and apply as a consequence of their education.
    Each school district shall establish learning objectives consistent with the State Board of Education's goals and learning standards for the areas referred to in this Section, shall develop appropriate testing and assessment systems for determining the degree to which students are achieving the objectives, and shall develop reporting systems to apprise the community and State of the assessment results.
    Each school district shall make available to all students academic and vocational courses for the attainment of learning objectives.
    No student shall be refused admission into or be excluded from any course of instruction offered in the common schools by reason of that person's sex. No student shall, solely by reason of that person's sex, be denied equal access to physical education and interscholastic athletic programs or comparable programs supported from school district funds. This Section is violated when a high school subject to this Act participates in the post-season basketball tournament of any organization or association that does not conduct post-season high school basketball tournaments for both boys and girls, which tournaments are identically structured. Conducting identically structured tournaments includes having the same number of girls' teams as boys' teams playing, in their respective tournaments, at any common location chosen for the final series of games in a tournament; provided, that nothing in this paragraph shall be deemed to prohibit the selection for the final series of games in the girls' tournaments of a common location that is different than the common location selected for the final series of games in the boys' tournaments. Except as specifically stated in this Section, equal access to programs supported by school district funds and comparable programs will be defined in rules promulgated by the State Board of Education in consultation with the Illinois High School Association.
(Source: P.A. 94-875, eff. 7-1-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-1.5)
    Sec. 27-1.5. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 96-1374, eff. 7-29-10. Repealed internally, eff. 7-1-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-2)
    Sec. 27-2. Instruction in English language. Instruction in all public elementary and secondary schools of the State shall be in the English language except in second language programs and except in conjunction with programs which the school board may provide, with the approval of the State Board of Education pursuant to Article 14C, in a language other than English for children whose first language is other than English.
(Source: P.A. 85-1389.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-3) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-3)
    Sec. 27-3. Patriotism and principles of representative government - Proper use of flag - Method of voting - Pledge of Allegiance. American patriotism and the principles of representative government, as enunciated in the American Declaration of Independence, the Constitution of the United States of America and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the proper use and display of the American flag, shall be taught in all public schools and other educational institutions supported or maintained in whole or in part by public funds. No student shall receive a certificate of graduation without passing a satisfactory examination upon such subjects, which may be administered remotely.
    Instruction shall be given in all such schools and institutions in the method of voting at elections by means of the Australian Ballot system and the method of the counting of votes for candidates.
    The Pledge of Allegiance shall be recited each school day by pupils in elementary and secondary educational institutions supported or maintained in whole or in part by public funds.
(Source: P.A. 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-3.5)
    Sec. 27-3.5. Congressional Medal of Honor film. Each school district shall require that all students in grade 7 and all high school students enrolled in a course concerning history of the United States or a combination of history of the United States and American government view a Congressional Medal of Honor film made by the Congressional Medal of Honor Foundation. This requirement does not apply if the Congressional Medal of Honor Foundation charges the school district a fee for a film.
(Source: P.A. 96-99, eff. 7-27-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-3.10)
    Sec. 27-3.10. Elementary school civics course of study. In addition to the instruction required to be provided under Section 27-3 of this Code, every public elementary school shall include in its 6th, 7th, or 8th grade curriculum, beginning with the 2020-2021 school year, at least one semester of civics education, which shall help young people acquire and learn to use the skills, knowledge, and attitudes that will prepare them to be competent and responsible citizens throughout their lives. Civics education course content shall focus on government institutions, the discussion of current and societal issues, service learning, and simulations of the democratic process. Civics education in 6th, 7th, or 8th grade shall be in accordance with Illinois Learning Standards for social science. Additionally, school districts may consult with civics education stakeholders, deemed appropriate by the State Board of Education, with regard to civics education curriculum for 6th, 7th, or 8th grade. School districts may utilize private funding available for the purposes of offering civics education.
(Source: P.A. 101-254, eff. 7-1-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-4) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-4)
    Sec. 27-4. Time devoted to subjects mentioned in Section 27-3. Not less than one hour of each school week shall be devoted to the study of the subject mentioned in Section 27-3 in the seventh and eighth grades or their equivalent, and not less than one hour of each school week to the advanced study thereof in all high school grades, in the public schools and other institutions mentioned in such Section.
    This Section does not prevent the study of such subjects in any of the lower grades in such schools or institutions.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-5) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-5)
    Sec. 27-5. Physical education and training. School boards of public schools and the Board of Governors of State Colleges and Universities shall provide for the physical education and training of pupils of the schools and laboratory schools under their respective control, and shall include physical education and training in the courses of study regularly taught therein. The physical education and training course offered in grades 5 through 10 may include the health education course required in the Critical Health Problems and Comprehensive Health Education Act.
(Source: P.A. 89-618, eff. 8-9-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-6) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-6)
    Sec. 27-6. Courses in physical education required; special activities.
    (a) Pupils enrolled in the public schools and State universities engaged in preparing teachers shall be required to engage during the school day, except on block scheduled days for those public schools engaged in block scheduling, in courses of physical education for such periods as are compatible with the optimum growth and developmental needs of individuals at the various age levels except when appropriate excuses are submitted to the school by a pupil's parent or guardian or by a person licensed under the Medical Practice Act of 1987 and except as provided in subsection (b) of this Section. A school board may determine the schedule or frequency of physical education courses, provided that a pupil engages in a course of physical education for a minimum of 3 days per 5-day week.
    Special activities in physical education shall be provided for pupils whose physical or emotional condition, as determined by a person licensed under the Medical Practice Act of 1987, prevents their participation in the courses provided for normal children.
    (b) A school board is authorized to excuse pupils enrolled in grades 11 and 12 from engaging in physical education courses if those pupils request to be excused for any of the following reasons: (1) for ongoing participation in an interscholastic athletic program; (2) to enroll in academic classes which are required for admission to an institution of higher learning, provided that failure to take such classes will result in the pupil being denied admission to the institution of his or her choice; or (3) to enroll in academic classes which are required for graduation from high school, provided that failure to take such classes will result in the pupil being unable to graduate. A school board may also excuse pupils in grades 9 through 12 enrolled in a marching band program for credit from engaging in physical education courses if those pupils request to be excused for ongoing participation in such marching band program. A school board may also, on a case-by-case basis, excuse pupils in grades 7 through 12 who participate in an interscholastic or extracurricular athletic program from engaging in physical education courses. In addition, a pupil in any of grades 3 through 12 who is eligible for special education may be excused if the pupil's parent or guardian agrees that the pupil must utilize the time set aside for physical education to receive special education support and services or, if there is no agreement, the individualized education program team for the pupil determines that the pupil must utilize the time set aside for physical education to receive special education support and services, which agreement or determination must be made a part of the individualized education program. However, a pupil requiring adapted physical education must receive that service in accordance with the individualized education program developed for the pupil. If requested, a school board is authorized to excuse a pupil from engaging in a physical education course if the pupil has an individualized educational program under Article 14 of this Code, is participating in an adaptive athletic program outside of the school setting, and documents such participation as determined by the school board. A school board may also excuse pupils in grades 9 through 12 enrolled in a Reserve Officer's Training Corps (ROTC) program sponsored by the school district from engaging in physical education courses. School boards which choose to exercise this authority shall establish a policy to excuse pupils on an individual basis.
    (c) The provisions of this Section are subject to the provisions of Section 27-22.05.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-6.5)
    Sec. 27-6.5. Physical fitness assessments in schools.
    (a) As used in this Section, "physical fitness assessment" means a series of assessments to measure aerobic capacity, body composition, muscular strength, muscular endurance, and flexibility.
    (b) To measure the effectiveness of State Goal 20 of the Illinois Learning Standards for Physical Development and Health, beginning with the 2016-2017 school year and every school year thereafter, the State Board of Education shall require all public schools to use a scientifically-based, health-related physical fitness assessment for grades 3 through 12 and periodically report fitness information to the State Board of Education, as set forth in subsections (c) and (e) of this Section, to assess student fitness indicators.
    Public schools shall integrate health-related fitness testing into the curriculum as an instructional tool, except in grades before the 3rd grade. Fitness tests must be appropriate to students' developmental levels and physical abilities. The testing must be used to teach students how to assess their fitness levels, set goals for improvement, and monitor progress in reaching their goals. Fitness scores shall not be used for grading students or evaluating teachers.
    (c) On or before October 1, 2014, the State Superintendent of Education shall appoint a 15-member stakeholder and expert task force, including members representing organizations that represent physical education teachers, school officials, principals, health promotion and disease prevention advocates and experts, school health advocates and experts, and other experts with operational and academic expertise in the measurement of fitness. The task force shall make recommendations to the State Board of Education on the following:
        (1) methods for ensuring the validity and uniformity
    	
of reported physical fitness assessment scores, including assessment administration protocols and professional development approaches for physical education teachers;
        (2) how often physical fitness assessment scores
    	
should be reported to the State Board of Education;
        (3) the grade levels within elementary, middle, and
    	
high school categories for which physical fitness assessment scores should be reported to the State Board of Education;
        (4) the minimum fitness indicators that should be
    	
reported to the State Board of Education, including, but not limited to, a score for aerobic capacity (for grades 4 through 12); muscular strength; endurance; and flexibility;
        (5) the demographic information that should accompany
    	
the scores, including, but not limited to, grade and gender;
        (6) the development of protocols regarding the
    	
protection of students' confidentiality and individual information and identifiers; and
        (7) how physical fitness assessment data should be
    	
reported by the State Board of Education to the public, including potential correlations with student academic achievement, attendance, and discipline data and other recommended uses of the reported data.
    The State Board of Education shall provide administrative and other support to the task force.
    The task force shall submit its recommendations on physical fitness assessments on or before April 1, 2015. The task force may also recommend methods for assessing student progress on State Goals 19 and 21 through 24 of the Illinois Learning Standards for Physical Development and Health. The task force is dissolved on April 30, 2015.
    The provisions of this subsection (c), other than this sentence, are inoperative after March 31, 2016.
    (d) On or before December 31, 2015, the State Board of Education shall use the recommendations of the task force under subsection (c) of this Section to adopt rules for the implementation of physical fitness assessments by each public school for the 2016-2017 school year and every school year thereafter. The requirements of this Section do not apply if the Governor has declared a disaster due to a public health emergency pursuant to Section 7 of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act.
    (e) On or before September 1, 2016, the State Board of Education shall adopt rules for data submission by school districts and develop a system for collecting and reporting the aggregated fitness information from the physical fitness assessments. This system shall also support the collection of data from school districts that use a fitness testing software program.
    (f) School districts may report the aggregate findings of physical fitness assessments by grade level and school to parents and members of the community through typical communication channels, such as Internet websites, school newsletters, school board reports, and presentations. Districts may also provide individual fitness assessment reports to students' parents.
    (g) Nothing in this Section precludes schools from implementing a physical fitness assessment before the 2016-2017 school year or from implementing more robust forms of a physical fitness assessment.
(Source: P.A. 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-7) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-7)
    Sec. 27-7. Physical education course of study. A physical education course of study shall include a developmentally planned and sequential curriculum that fosters the development of movement skills, enhances health-related fitness, increases students' knowledge, offers direct opportunities to learn how to work cooperatively in a group setting, and encourages healthy habits and attitudes for a healthy lifestyle. A physical education course of study shall provide students with an opportunity for an appropriate amount of physical activity. A physical education course of study must be part of the regular school curriculum and not extra-curricular in nature or organization.
    The State Board of Education shall prepare and make available guidelines for the various grades and types of schools in order to make effective the purposes set forth in this Section and the requirements provided in Section 27-6, and shall see that the general provisions and intent of Sections 27-5 to 27-9, inclusive, are enforced.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-8.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-8.1)
    Sec. 27-8.1. Health examinations and immunizations.
    (1) In compliance with rules and regulations which the Department of Public Health shall promulgate, and except as hereinafter provided, all children in Illinois shall have a health examination as follows: within one year prior to entering kindergarten or the first grade of any public, private, or parochial elementary school; upon entering the sixth and ninth grades of any public, private, or parochial school; prior to entrance into any public, private, or parochial nursery school; and, irrespective of grade, immediately prior to or upon entrance into any public, private, or parochial school or nursery school, each child shall present proof of having been examined in accordance with this Section and the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder. Any child who received a health examination within one year prior to entering the fifth grade for the 2007-2008 school year is not required to receive an additional health examination in order to comply with the provisions of Public Act 95-422 when he or she attends school for the 2008-2009 school year, unless the child is attending school for the first time as provided in this paragraph.
    A tuberculosis skin test screening shall be included as a required part of each health examination included under this Section if the child resides in an area designated by the Department of Public Health as having a high incidence of tuberculosis. Additional health examinations of pupils, including eye examinations, may be required when deemed necessary by school authorities. Parents are encouraged to have their children undergo eye examinations at the same points in time required for health examinations.
    (1.5) In compliance with rules adopted by the Department of Public Health and except as otherwise provided in this Section, all children in kindergarten and the second, sixth, and ninth grades of any public, private, or parochial school shall have a dental examination. Each of these children shall present proof of having been examined by a dentist in accordance with this Section and rules adopted under this Section before May 15th of the school year. If a child in the second, sixth, or ninth grade fails to present proof by May 15th, the school may hold the child's report card until one of the following occurs: (i) the child presents proof of a completed dental examination or (ii) the child presents proof that a dental examination will take place within 60 days after May 15th. A school may not withhold a child's report card during a school year in which the Governor has declared a disaster due to a public health emergency pursuant to Section 7 of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act. The Department of Public Health shall establish, by rule, a waiver for children who show an undue burden or a lack of access to a dentist. Each public, private, and parochial school must give notice of this dental examination requirement to the parents and guardians of students at least 60 days before May 15th of each school year.
    (1.10) Except as otherwise provided in this Section, all children enrolling in kindergarten in a public, private, or parochial school on or after January 1, 2008 (the effective date of Public Act 95-671) and any student enrolling for the first time in a public, private, or parochial school on or after January 1, 2008 (the effective date of Public Act 95-671) shall have an eye examination. Each of these children shall present proof of having been examined by a physician licensed to practice medicine in all of its branches or a licensed optometrist within the previous year, in accordance with this Section and rules adopted under this Section, before October 15th of the school year. If the child fails to present proof by October 15th, the school may hold the child's report card until one of the following occurs: (i) the child presents proof of a completed eye examination or (ii) the child presents proof that an eye examination will take place within 60 days after October 15th. A school may not withhold a child's report card during a school year in which the Governor has declared a disaster due to a public health emergency pursuant to Section 7 of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act. The Department of Public Health shall establish, by rule, a waiver for children who show an undue burden or a lack of access to a physician licensed to practice medicine in all of its branches who provides eye examinations or to a licensed optometrist. Each public, private, and parochial school must give notice of this eye examination requirement to the parents and guardians of students in compliance with rules of the Department of Public Health. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to allow a school to exclude a child from attending because of a parent's or guardian's failure to obtain an eye examination for the child.
    (2) The Department of Public Health shall promulgate rules and regulations specifying the examinations and procedures that constitute a health examination, which shall include an age-appropriate developmental screening, an age-appropriate social and emotional screening, and the collection of data relating to asthma and obesity (including at a minimum, date of birth, gender, height, weight, blood pressure, and date of exam), and a dental examination and may recommend by rule that certain additional examinations be performed. The rules and regulations of the Department of Public Health shall specify that a tuberculosis skin test screening shall be included as a required part of each health examination included under this Section if the child resides in an area designated by the Department of Public Health as having a high incidence of tuberculosis. With respect to the developmental screening and the social and emotional screening, the Department of Public Health must, no later than January 1, 2019, develop rules and appropriate revisions to the Child Health Examination form in conjunction with a statewide organization representing school boards; a statewide organization representing pediatricians; statewide organizations representing individuals holding Illinois educator licenses with school support personnel endorsements, including school social workers, school psychologists, and school nurses; a statewide organization representing children's mental health experts; a statewide organization representing school principals; the Director of Healthcare and Family Services or his or her designee, the State Superintendent of Education or his or her designee; and representatives of other appropriate State agencies and, at a minimum, must recommend the use of validated screening tools appropriate to the child's age or grade, and, with regard to the social and emotional screening, require recording only whether or not the screening was completed. The rules shall take into consideration the screening recommendations of the American Academy of Pediatrics and must be consistent with the State Board of Education's social and emotional learning standards. The Department of Public Health shall specify that a diabetes screening as defined by rule shall be included as a required part of each health examination. Diabetes testing is not required.
    Physicians licensed to practice medicine in all of its branches, licensed advanced practice registered nurses, or licensed physician assistants shall be responsible for the performance of the health examinations, other than dental examinations, eye examinations, and vision and hearing screening, and shall sign all report forms required by subsection (4) of this Section that pertain to those portions of the health examination for which the physician, advanced practice registered nurse, or physician assistant is responsible. If a registered nurse performs any part of a health examination, then a physician licensed to practice medicine in all of its branches must review and sign all required report forms. Licensed dentists shall perform all dental examinations and shall sign all report forms required by subsection (4) of this Section that pertain to the dental examinations. Physicians licensed to practice medicine in all its branches or licensed optometrists shall perform all eye examinations required by this Section and shall sign all report forms required by subsection (4) of this Section that pertain to the eye examination. For purposes of this Section, an eye examination shall at a minimum include history, visual acuity, subjective refraction to best visual acuity near and far, internal and external examination, and a glaucoma evaluation, as well as any other tests or observations that in the professional judgment of the doctor are necessary. Vision and hearing screening tests, which shall not be considered examinations as that term is used in this Section, shall be conducted in accordance with rules and regulations of the Department of Public Health, and by individuals whom the Department of Public Health has certified. In these rules and regulations, the Department of Public Health shall require that individuals conducting vision screening tests give a child's parent or guardian written notification, before the vision screening is conducted, that states, "Vision screening is not a substitute for a complete eye and vision evaluation by an eye doctor. Your child is not required to undergo this vision screening if an optometrist or ophthalmologist has completed and signed a report form indicating that an examination has been administered within the previous 12 months.".
    (2.5) With respect to the developmental screening and the social and emotional screening portion of the health examination, each child may present proof of having been screened in accordance with this Section and the rules adopted under this Section before October 15th of the school year. With regard to the social and emotional screening only, the examining health care provider shall only record whether or not the screening was completed. If the child fails to present proof of the developmental screening or the social and emotional screening portions of the health examination by October 15th of the school year, qualified school support personnel may, with a parent's or guardian's consent, offer the developmental screening or the social and emotional screening to the child. Each public, private, and parochial school must give notice of the developmental screening and social and emotional screening requirements to the parents and guardians of students in compliance with the rules of the Department of Public Health. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to allow a school to exclude a child from attending because of a parent's or guardian's failure to obtain a developmental screening or a social and emotional screening for the child. Once a developmental screening or a social and emotional screening is completed and proof has been presented to the school, the school may, with a parent's or guardian's consent, make available appropriate school personnel to work with the parent or guardian, the child, and the provider who signed the screening form to obtain any appropriate evaluations and services as indicated on the form and in other information and documentation provided by the parents, guardians, or provider.
    (3) Every child shall, at or about the same time as he or she receives a health examination required by subsection (1) of this Section, present to the local school proof of having received such immunizations against preventable communicable diseases as the Department of Public Health shall require by rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this Section and the Communicable Disease Prevention Act.
    (4) The individuals conducting the health examination, dental examination, or eye examination shall record the fact of having conducted the examination, and such additional information as required, including for a health examination data relating to asthma and obesity (including at a minimum, date of birth, gender, height, weight, blood pressure, and date of exam), on uniform forms which the Department of Public Health and the State Board of Education shall prescribe for statewide use. The examiner shall summarize on the report form any condition that he or she suspects indicates a need for special services, including for a health examination factors relating to asthma or obesity. The duty to summarize on the report form does not apply to social and emotional screenings. The confidentiality of the information and records relating to the developmental screening and the social and emotional screening shall be determined by the statutes, rules, and professional ethics governing the type of provider conducting the screening. The individuals confirming the administration of required immunizations shall record as indicated on the form that the immunizations were administered.
    (5) If a child does not submit proof of having had either the health examination or the immunization as required, then the child shall be examined or receive the immunization, as the case may be, and present proof by October 15 of the current school year, or by an earlier date of the current school year established by a school district. To establish a date before October 15 of the current school year for the health examination or immunization as required, a school district must give notice of the requirements of this Section 60 days prior to the earlier established date. If for medical reasons one or more of the required immunizations must be given after October 15 of the current school year, or after an earlier established date of the current school year, then the child shall present, by October 15, or by the earlier established date, a schedule for the administration of the immunizations and a statement of the medical reasons causing the delay, both the schedule and the statement being issued by the physician, advanced practice registered nurse, physician assistant, registered nurse, or local health department that will be responsible for administration of the remaining required immunizations. If a child does not comply by October 15, or by the earlier established date of the current school year, with the requirements of this subsection, then the local school authority shall exclude that child from school until such time as the child presents proof of having had the health examination as required and presents proof of having received those required immunizations which are medically possible to receive immediately. During a child's exclusion from school for noncompliance with this subsection, the child's parents or legal guardian shall be considered in violation of Section 26-1 and subject to any penalty imposed by Section 26-10. This subsection (5) does not apply to dental examinations, eye examinations, and the developmental screening and the social and emotional screening portions of the health examination. If the student is an out-of-state transfer student and does not have the proof required under this subsection (5) before October 15 of the current year or whatever date is set by the school district, then he or she may only attend classes (i) if he or she has proof that an appointment for the required vaccinations has been scheduled with a party authorized to submit proof of the required vaccinations. If the proof of vaccination required under this subsection (5) is not submitted within 30 days after the student is permitted to attend classes, then the student is not to be permitted to attend classes until proof of the vaccinations has been properly submitted. No school district or employee of a school district shall be held liable for any injury or illness to another person that results from admitting an out-of-state transfer student to class that has an appointment scheduled pursuant to this subsection (5).
    (6) Every school shall report to the State Board of Education by November 15, in the manner which that agency shall require, the number of children who have received the necessary immunizations and the health examination (other than a dental examination or eye examination) as required, indicating, of those who have not received the immunizations and examination as required, the number of children who are exempt from health examination and immunization requirements on religious or medical grounds as provided in subsection (8). On or before December 1 of each year, every public school district and registered nonpublic school shall make publicly available the immunization data they are required to submit to the State Board of Education by November 15. The immunization data made publicly available must be identical to the data the school district or school has reported to the State Board of Education.
    Every school shall report to the State Board of Education by June 30, in the manner that the State Board requires, the number of children who have received the required dental examination, indicating, of those who have not received the required dental examination, the number of children who are exempt from the dental examination on religious grounds as provided in subsection (8) of this Section and the number of children who have received a waiver under subsection (1.5) of this Section.
    Every school shall report to the State Board of Education by June 30, in the manner that the State Board requires, the number of children who have received the required eye examination, indicating, of those who have not received the required eye examination, the number of children who are exempt from the eye examination as provided in subsection (8) of this Section, the number of children who have received a waiver under subsection (1.10) of this Section, and the total number of children in noncompliance with the eye examination requirement.
    The reported information under this subsection (6) shall be provided to the Department of Public Health by the State Board of Education.
    (7) Upon determining that the number of pupils who are required to be in compliance with subsection (5) of this Section is below 90% of the number of pupils enrolled in the school district, 10% of each State aid payment made pursuant to Section 18-8.05 or 18-8.15 to the school district for such year may be withheld by the State Board of Education until the number of students in compliance with subsection (5) is the applicable specified percentage or higher.
    (8) Children of parents or legal guardians who object to health, dental, or eye examinations or any part thereof, to immunizations, or to vision and hearing screening tests on religious grounds shall not be required to undergo the examinations, tests, or immunizations to which they so object if such parents or legal guardians present to the appropriate local school authority a signed Certificate of Religious Exemption detailing the grounds for objection and the specific immunizations, tests, or examinations to which they object. The grounds for objection must set forth the specific religious belief that conflicts with the examination, test, immunization, or other medical intervention. The signed certificate shall also reflect the parent's or legal guardian's understanding of the school's exclusion policies in the case of a vaccine-preventable disease outbreak or exposure. The certificate must also be signed by the authorized examining health care provider responsible for the performance of the child's health examination confirming that the provider provided education to the parent or legal guardian on the benefits of immunization and the health risks to the student and to the community of the communicable diseases for which immunization is required in this State. However, the health care provider's signature on the certificate reflects only that education was provided and does not allow a health care provider grounds to determine a religious exemption. Those receiving immunizations required under this Code shall be provided with the relevant vaccine information statements that are required to be disseminated by the federal National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act of 1986, which may contain information on circumstances when a vaccine should not be administered, prior to administering a vaccine. A healthcare provider may consider including without limitation the nationally accepted recommendations from federal agencies such as the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, the information outlined in the relevant vaccine information statement, and vaccine package inserts, along with the healthcare provider's clinical judgment, to determine whether any child may be more susceptible to experiencing an adverse vaccine reaction than the general population, and, if so, the healthcare provider may exempt the child from an immunization or adopt an individualized immunization schedule. The Certificate of Religious Exemption shall be created by the Department of Public Health and shall be made available and used by parents and legal guardians by the beginning of the 2015-2016 school year. Parents or legal guardians must submit the Certificate of Religious Exemption to their local school authority prior to entering kindergarten, sixth grade, and ninth grade for each child for which they are requesting an exemption. The religious objection stated need not be directed by the tenets of an established religious organization. However, general philosophical or moral reluctance to allow physical examinations, eye examinations, immunizations, vision and hearing screenings, or dental examinations does not provide a sufficient basis for an exception to statutory requirements. The local school authority is responsible for determining if the content of the Certificate of Religious Exemption constitutes a valid religious objection. The local school authority shall inform the parent or legal guardian of exclusion procedures, in accordance with the Department's rules under Part 690 of Title 77 of the Illinois Administrative Code, at the time the objection is presented.
    If the physical condition of the child is such that any one or more of the immunizing agents should not be administered, the examining physician, advanced practice registered nurse, or physician assistant responsible for the performance of the health examination shall endorse that fact upon the health examination form.
    Exempting a child from the health, dental, or eye examination does not exempt the child from participation in the program of physical education training provided in Sections 27-5 through 27-7 of this Code.
    (8.5) The school board of a school district shall include informational materials regarding influenza and influenza vaccinations and meningococcal disease and meningococcal vaccinations developed, provided, or approved by the Department of Public Health under Section 2310-700 of the Department of Public Health Powers and Duties Law of the Civil Administrative Code of Illinois when the board provides information on immunizations, infectious diseases, medications, or other school health issues to the parents or guardians of students.
    (9) For the purposes of this Section, "nursery schools" means those nursery schools operated by elementary school systems or secondary level school units or institutions of higher learning.
(Source: P.A. 100-238, eff. 1-1-18; 100-465, eff. 8-31-17; 100-513, eff. 1-1-18; 100-829, eff. 1-1-19; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18; 100-977, eff. 1-1-19; 100-1011, eff. 8-21-18; 101-81, eff. 7-12-19; 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-9) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-9)
    Sec. 27-9. Training teachers to teach physical education. The curriculum in all elementary educator preparation programs approved by the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board shall contain instruction in methods and materials of physical education and training for teachers. No teacher candidate shall be graduated from such an educator preparation program who has not successfully completed instruction in methods and materials in the teaching of physical education and training, whether by way of a specific course or as incorporated in existing courses taught in the educator preparation program.
(Source: P.A. 99-58, eff. 7-16-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-9.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-9.1)
    Sec. 27-9.1. Sex education.
    (a) In this Section:
    "Adapt" means to modify an evidence-based program model for use with a particular demographic, ethnic, linguistic, or cultural group.
    "Age appropriate" means suitable to particular ages or age groups of children and adolescents, based on the developing cognitive, emotional, and behavioral capacity typical for the age or age group.
    "Evidence-based program" means a program for which systematic, empirical research or evaluation has provided evidence of effectiveness.
    "Medically accurate" means verified or supported by the weight of research conducted in compliance with accepted scientific methods and published in peer-reviewed journals, if applicable, or comprising information recognized as accurate, objective, and complete.
    (a-5) No pupil shall be required to take or participate in any class or course in comprehensive sex education if his parent or guardian submits written objection thereto, and refusal to take or participate in such course or program shall not be reason for suspension or expulsion of such pupil. Each class or course in comprehensive sex education offered in any of grades 6 through 12 shall include instruction on both abstinence and contraception for the prevention of pregnancy and sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS. Nothing in this Section prohibits instruction in sanitation, hygiene or traditional courses in biology.
    (b) All public school classes that teach sex education and discuss sexual intercourse in grades 6 through 12 shall emphasize that abstinence from sexual intercourse is a responsible and positive decision and is the only protection that is 100% effective against unwanted teenage pregnancy, sexually transmitted diseases, and acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) when transmitted sexually.
    (c) All classes that teach sex education and discuss sexual intercourse in grades 6 through 12 shall satisfy the following criteria:
        (1) Course material and instruction shall be
    	
developmentally and age appropriate, medically accurate, and complete.
        (1.5) Course material and instruction shall replicate
    	
evidence-based programs or substantially incorporate elements of evidence-based programs.
        (2) Course material and instruction shall teach honor
    	
and respect for monogamous heterosexual marriage.
        (3) Course material and instruction shall place
    	
substantial emphasis on both abstinence, including abstinence until marriage, and contraception for the prevention of pregnancy and sexually transmitted diseases among youth and shall stress that abstinence is the ensured method of avoiding unintended pregnancy, sexually transmitted diseases, and HIV/AIDS.
        (4) Course material and instruction shall include a
    	
discussion of the possible emotional and psychological consequences of preadolescent and adolescent sexual intercourse and the consequences of unwanted adolescent pregnancy.
        (5) Course material and instruction shall stress that
    	
sexually transmitted diseases are serious possible hazards of sexual intercourse. Pupils shall be provided with statistics based on the latest medical information citing the failure and success rates of condoms in preventing AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases.
        (6) Course material and instruction shall advise
    	
pupils of the laws pertaining to their financial responsibility to children born in and out of wedlock.
        (7) Course material and instruction shall advise
    	
pupils of the circumstances under which it is unlawful for a person to have sexual relations with an individual who is under the age of 17 and for a person who is in a position of trust, authority, or supervision to have sexual relations with an individual who is under the age of 18 pursuant to Article 11 of the Criminal Code of 2012.
        (8) Course material and instruction shall teach
    	
pupils to not make unwanted physical and verbal sexual advances and how to say no to unwanted sexual advances. Pupils shall be taught that it is wrong to take advantage of or to exploit another person. The material and instruction shall also encourage youth to resist negative peer pressure. The material and instruction shall include discussion on what may be considered sexual harassment or sexual assault.
        (9) (Blank).
        (10) Course material and instruction shall teach
    	
pupils about the dangers associated with drug and alcohol consumption during pregnancy.
        (11) Course material and instruction must include an
    	
age-appropriate discussion on the meaning of consent that includes discussion on recognizing all of the following:
            (A) That consent is a freely given agreement to
        	
sexual activity.
            (B) That consent to one particular sexual
        	
activity does not constitute consent to other types of sexual activities.
            (C) That a person's lack of verbal or physical
        	
resistance or submission resulting from the use or threat of force does not constitute consent.
            (D) That a person's manner of dress does not
        	
constitute consent.
            (E) That a person's consent to past sexual
        	
activity does not constitute consent to future sexual activity.
            (F) That a person's consent to engage in sexual
        	
activity with one person does not constitute consent to engage in sexual activity with another person.
            (G) That a person can withdraw consent at any
        	
time.
            (H) That a person cannot consent to sexual
        	
activity if that person is unable to understand the nature of the activity or give knowing consent due to certain circumstances that include, but are not limited to, (i) the person is incapacitated due to the use or influence of alcohol or drugs, (ii) the person is asleep or unconscious, (iii) the person is a minor, or (iv) the person is incapacitated due to a mental disability.
    (d) An opportunity shall be afforded to individuals, including parents or guardians, to examine the instructional materials to be used in such class or course.
    (e) The State Board of Education shall make available resource materials, with the cooperation and input of the agency that administers grant programs consistent with criteria (1) and (1.5) of subsection (c) of this Section, for educating children regarding sex education and may take into consideration the curriculum on this subject developed by other states, as well as any other curricular materials suggested by education experts and other groups that work on sex education issues. Materials may include without limitation model sex education curriculums and sexual health education programs. The State Board of Education shall make these resource materials available on its Internet website. School districts that do not currently provide sex education are not required to teach sex education. If a sex education class or course is offered in any of grades 6 through 12, the school district may choose and adapt the developmentally and age-appropriate, medically accurate, evidence-based, and complete sex education curriculum that meets the specific needs of its community.
(Source: P.A. 100-684, eff. 8-3-18; 101-579, eff. 1-1-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-9.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-9.2)
    Sec. 27-9.2. Family Life. If any school district provides courses of instruction designed to promote wholesome and comprehensive understanding of the emotional, psychological, physiological, hygienic and social responsibility aspects of family life, then such courses of instruction shall include the teaching of the alternatives to abortion, appropriate to the various grade levels; and whenever such courses of instruction are provided in any of grades 6 through 12, then such courses also shall include instruction on the prevention, transmission and spread of AIDS. However, no pupil shall be required to take or participate in any family life class or course on AIDS instruction if his parent or guardian submits written objection thereto, and refusal to take or participate in such course or program shall not be reason for suspension or expulsion of such pupil.
    The State Superintendent of Education shall prepare and make available to local school districts courses of instruction designed to satisfy the requirements of this Section.
    The State Superintendent of Education shall develop a procedure for evaluating and measuring the effectiveness of the family life courses of instruction in each local school district, including the setting of reasonable goals for reduced sexual activity, sexually transmitted diseases and premarital pregnancy. The goals shall be set by the beginning of the 1991-92 school year. The State Superintendent shall distribute a copy of the procedure to each local school district. Each local school district may develop additional procedures or methods for measuring the effectiveness of the family life courses of instruction within the district. Before the beginning of the 1993-94 school year, the State Superintendent shall collect and evaluate all relevant data to determine whether the goals are being achieved.
(Source: P.A. 86-941.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-11) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-11)
    Sec. 27-11. Instruction on diseases.
    No pupil shall be required to take or participate in instruction on diseases if a parent or guardian files written objection thereto on constitutional grounds, and refusal to take or participate in such instruction on such grounds shall not be reason for suspension or expulsion of such pupil. Nothing in this act shall prohibit instruction in sanitation and hygiene.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-12) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-12)
    Sec. 27-12. Character education. Every public school teacher shall teach character education, which includes the teaching of respect, responsibility, fairness, caring, trustworthiness, and citizenship, in order to raise pupils' honesty, kindness, justice, discipline, respect for others, and moral courage for the purpose of lessening crime and raising the standard of good character.
(Source: P.A. 94-187, eff. 7-12-05.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-12.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-12.1)
    Sec. 27-12.1. Consumer education.
    (a) Pupils in the public schools in grades 9 through 12 shall be taught and be required to study courses which include instruction in the area of consumer education, including but not necessarily limited to (i) understanding the basic concepts of financial literacy, including consumer debt and installment purchasing (including credit scoring, managing credit debt, and completing a loan application), budgeting, savings and investing, banking (including balancing a checkbook, opening a deposit account, and the use of interest rates), understanding simple contracts, State and federal income taxes, personal insurance policies, the comparison of prices, higher education student loans, identity-theft security, and homeownership (including the basic process of obtaining a mortgage and the concepts of fixed and adjustable rate mortgages, subprime loans, and predatory lending), and (ii) understanding the roles of consumers interacting with agriculture, business, labor unions and government in formulating and achieving the goals of the mixed free enterprise system. The State Board of Education shall devise or approve the consumer education curriculum for grades 9 through 12 and specify the minimum amount of instruction to be devoted thereto.
    (b) (Blank).
    (c) The Financial Literacy Fund is created as a special fund in the State treasury. State funds and private contributions for the promotion of financial literacy shall be deposited into the Financial Literacy Fund. All money in the Financial Literacy Fund shall be used, subject to appropriation, by the State Board of Education to award grants to school districts for the following:
        (1) Defraying the costs of financial literacy
    	
training for teachers.
        (2) Rewarding a school or teacher who wins or
    	
achieves results at a certain level of success in a financial literacy competition.
        (3) Rewarding a student who wins or achieves
    	
results at a certain level of success in a financial literacy competition.
        (4) Funding activities, including books, games,
    	
field trips, computers, and other activities, related to financial literacy education.
    In awarding grants, every effort must be made to ensure that all geographic areas of the State are represented.
    (d) A school board may establish a special fund in which to receive public funds and private contributions for the promotion of financial literacy. Money in the fund shall be used for the following:
        (1) Defraying the costs of financial literacy
    	
training for teachers.
        (2) Rewarding a school or teacher who wins or
    	
achieves results at a certain level of success in a financial literacy competition.
        (3) Rewarding a student who wins or achieves
    	
results at a certain level of success in a financial literacy competition.
        (4) Funding activities, including books, games,
    	
field trips, computers, and other activities, related to financial literacy education.
    (e) The State Board of Education, upon the next comprehensive review of the Illinois Learning Standards, is urged to include the basic principles of personal insurance policies and understanding simple contracts.
(Source: P.A. 99-284, eff. 8-5-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-13.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-13.1)
    Sec. 27-13.1. In every public school there shall be instruction, study and discussion of current problems and needs in the conservation of natural resources, including but not limited to air pollution, water pollution, waste reduction and recycling, the effects of excessive use of pesticides, preservation of wilderness areas, forest management, protection of wildlife and humane care of domestic animals.
(Source: P.A. 86-229.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-13.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-13.2)
    Sec. 27-13.2. Required instruction. In every public school there shall be instruction, study and discussion of effective methods by which pupils may recognize the danger of and avoid abduction, and in every public school maintaining any of grades kindergarten through 8 there shall be, for such grades, instruction, study, and discussion of effective methods for the prevention and avoidance of drug and substance abuse. School boards may include such required instruction, study and discussion in the courses of study regularly taught in the public schools of their respective districts; provided, however, that such instruction shall be given each year to all pupils in grades kindergarten through 8. The State Superintendent of Education may prepare and make available to all public and non-public schools instructional materials which may be used by such schools as guidelines for development of a program of instruction under this Section; provided, however, that each school board shall itself determine the minimum amount of instruction time which shall qualify as a program of instruction which will satisfy the requirements of this Section.
    The State Superintendent of Education, in cooperation with the Department of Children and Family Services, shall prepare and disseminate to all public schools and non-public schools, information on instructional materials and programs about child sexual abuse which may be used by such schools for their own or community programs. Such information may also be disseminated by such schools to parents.
    Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Section, no pupil in any of grades kindergarten through 8 shall be required to take or participate in any class or course providing instruction in recognizing and avoiding sexual abuse if the parent or guardian of the pupil submits written objection thereto; and refusal to take or participate in such class or course after such written objection is made shall not be reason for failing, suspending or expelling such pupil. Each school board intending to offer any such class or course to pupils in any of grades kindergarten through 8 shall give not less than 5 days written notice to the parents or guardians of such pupils before commencing the class or course.
(Source: P.A. 86-788.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-13.3)
    Sec. 27-13.3. Internet safety education curriculum.
    (a) The purpose of this Section is to inform and protect students from inappropriate or illegal communications and solicitation and to encourage school districts to provide education about Internet threats and risks, including without limitation child predators, fraud, and other dangers.
    (b) The General Assembly finds and declares the following:
        (1) it is the policy of this State to protect
    	
consumers and Illinois residents from deceptive and unsafe communications that result in harassment, exploitation, or physical harm;
        (2) children have easy access to the Internet at
    	
home, school, and public places;
        (3) the Internet is used by sexual predators and
    	
other criminals to make initial contact with children and other vulnerable residents in Illinois; and
        (4) education is an effective method for preventing
    	
children from falling prey to online predators, identity theft, and other dangers.
    (c) Each school may adopt an age-appropriate curriculum for Internet safety instruction of students in grades kindergarten through 12. However, beginning with the 2009-2010 school year, a school district must incorporate into the school curriculum a component on Internet safety to be taught at least once each school year to students in grades 3 through 12. The school board shall determine the scope and duration of this unit of instruction. The age-appropriate unit of instruction may be incorporated into the current courses of study regularly taught in the district's schools, as determined by the school board, and it is recommended that the unit of instruction include the following topics:
        (1) Safe and responsible use of social networking
    	
websites, chat rooms, electronic mail, bulletin boards, instant messaging, and other means of communication on the Internet.
        (2) Recognizing, avoiding, and reporting online
    	
solicitations of students, their classmates, and their friends by sexual predators.
        (3) Risks of transmitting personal information on the
    	
Internet.
        (4) Recognizing and avoiding unsolicited or deceptive
    	
communications received online.
        (5) Recognizing and reporting online harassment and
    	
cyber-bullying.
        (6) Reporting illegal activities and communications
    	
on the Internet.
        (7) Copyright laws on written materials, photographs,
    	
music, and video.
    (d) Curricula devised in accordance with subsection (c) of this Section may be submitted for review to the Office of the Illinois Attorney General.
    (e) The State Board of Education shall make available resource materials for educating children regarding child online safety and may take into consideration the curriculum on this subject developed by other states, as well as any other curricular materials suggested by education experts, child psychologists, or technology companies that work on child online safety issues. Materials may include without limitation safe online communications, privacy protection, cyber-bullying, viewing inappropriate material, file sharing, and the importance of open communication with responsible adults. The State Board of Education shall make these resource materials available on its Internet website.
(Source: P.A. 95-509, eff. 8-28-07; 95-869, eff. 1-1-09; 96-734, eff. 8-25-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-14) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-14)
    Sec. 27-14. Experiments upon animals.
    No experiment upon any living animal for the purpose of demonstration in any study shall be made in any public school. No animal provided by, or killed in the presence of any pupil of a public school shall be used for dissection in such school, and in no case shall dogs or cats be killed for such purposes. Dissection of dead animals, or parts thereof, shall be confined to the classroom and shall not be practiced in the presence of any pupil not engaged in the study to be illustrated thereby.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-15) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-15)
    Sec. 27-15. Moral and humane education - In institute programs. The superintendent of each region and city shall include once each year moral and humane education in the program of the teachers' institute which is held under his supervision.
(Source: P.A. 79-597.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-16)
    Sec. 27-16. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-17) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-17)
    Sec. 27-17. Safety education. School boards of public schools and all boards in charge of educational institutions supported wholly or partially by the State may provide instruction in safety education in all grades and include such instruction in the courses of study regularly taught therein.
    In this section "safety education" means and includes instruction in the following:
        1. automobile safety, including traffic regulations,
    	
highway safety, and the consequences of alcohol consumption and the operation of a motor vehicle;
        2. safety in the home;
        3. safety in connection with recreational activities;
        4. safety in and around school buildings;
        5. safety in connection with vocational work or
    	
training;
        6. cardio-pulmonary resuscitation for students
    	
enrolled in grades 9 through 11; and
        7. for students enrolled in grades 6 through 8,
    	
cardio-pulmonary resuscitation and how to use an automated external defibrillator by watching a training video on those subjects.
    Such boards may make suitable provisions in the schools and institutions under their jurisdiction for instruction in safety education for not less than 16 hours during each school year.
    The curriculum in all educator preparation programs approved by the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board shall contain instruction in safety education for teachers that is appropriate to the grade level of the educator license. This instruction may be by specific courses in safety education or may be incorporated in existing subjects taught in the educator preparation program.
(Source: P.A. 99-58, eff. 7-16-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-18) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-18)
    Sec. 27-18. Arbor and bird day. The last Friday in April is designated as "Arbor and Bird Day," to be observed throughout the State as a day for planting trees, shrubs and vines about public grounds, and as a day on which to hold appropriate exercises in the public schools and elsewhere tending to show the value of trees and birds and the necessity for their protection.
(Source: P.A. 92-85, eff. 7-12-01.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-19) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-19)
    Sec. 27-19. Leif Erickson day.
    October 9, if a school day, otherwise the school day nearest such date, is designated as Leif Erikson Day. On such day one-half hour may be devoted in the schools to instruction and appropriate exercises relative to and in commemoration of the life and history of Leif Erickson and the principles and ideals he fostered.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-20) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-20)
    Sec. 27-20. American Indian day.
    The fourth Friday of September is designated "American Indian Day," to be observed throughout the State as a day on which to hold appropriate exercises in commemoration of the American Indians.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-20.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-20.1)
    Sec. 27-20.1. Illinois Law Week. The first full school week in May is designated "Illinois Law Week". During that week, the public schools may devote appropriate time, instruction, study, and exercises in the procedures of the legislature and the enactment of laws, the courts and the administration of justice, the police and the enforcement of law, citizen responsibilities, and other principles and ideals to promote the importance of government under law in the State.
(Source: P.A. 92-85, eff. 7-12-01.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-20.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-20.2)
    Sec. 27-20.2. "Just Say No" Day. May 15, 1987, and in each calendar year thereafter, a school day in May designated by official proclamation of the Governor, shall be known as "Just Say No" Day, to be observed throughout the State as a day on which children and teenagers declare and reaffirm their commitment to living a life free of drugs and alcohol abuse, and as a day on which to hold and participate in appropriate special programs, ceremonies and exercises, in the public schools and elsewhere, tending to encourage children to lead a healthy lifestyle, aware and free of the dangers of using drugs and alcohol abuse.
(Source: P.A. 85-386.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-20.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-20.3)
    Sec. 27-20.3. Holocaust and Genocide Study. Every public elementary school and high school shall include in its curriculum a unit of instruction studying the events of the Nazi atrocities of 1933 to 1945. This period in world history is known as the Holocaust, during which 6,000,000 Jews and millions of non-Jews were exterminated. One of the universal lessons of the Holocaust is that national, ethnic, racial, or religious hatred can overtake any nation or society, leading to calamitous consequences. To reinforce that lesson, such curriculum shall include an additional unit of instruction studying other acts of genocide across the globe. This unit shall include, but not be limited to, the Armenian Genocide, the Famine-Genocide in Ukraine, and more recent atrocities in Cambodia, Bosnia, Rwanda, and Sudan. The studying of this material is a reaffirmation of the commitment of free peoples from all nations to never again permit the occurrence of another Holocaust and a recognition that crimes of genocide continue to be perpetrated across the globe as they have been in the past and to deter indifference to crimes against humanity and human suffering wherever they may occur.
    The State Superintendent of Education may prepare and make available to all school boards instructional materials which may be used as guidelines for development of a unit of instruction under this Section; provided, however, that each school board shall itself determine the minimum amount of instruction time which shall qualify as a unit of instruction satisfying the requirements of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 94-478, eff. 8-5-05.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-20.4) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-20.4)
    Sec. 27-20.4. Black History study. Every public elementary school and high school shall include in its curriculum a unit of instruction studying the events of Black History, including the history of the pre-enslavement of Black people from 3,000 BCE to AD 1619, the African slave trade, slavery in America, the study of the reasons why Black people came to be enslaved, the vestiges of slavery in this country, and the study of the American civil rights renaissance. These events shall include not only the contributions made by individual African-Americans in government and in the arts, humanities and sciences to the economic, cultural and political development of the United States and Africa, but also the socio-economic struggle which African-Americans experienced collectively in striving to achieve fair and equal treatment under the laws of this nation. The studying of this material shall constitute an affirmation by students of their commitment to respect the dignity of all races and peoples and to forever eschew every form of discrimination in their lives and careers.
    The State Superintendent of Education may prepare and make available to all school boards instructional materials, including those established by the Amistad Commission, which may be used as guidelines for development of a unit of instruction under this Section; provided, however, that each school board shall itself determine the minimum amount of instruction time which shall qualify as a unit of instruction satisfying the requirements of this Section.
    A school may meet the requirements of this Section through an online program or course.
(Source: P.A. 100-634, eff. 1-1-19; 101-654, eff. 3-8-21.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-20.5) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-20.5)
    Sec. 27-20.5. Study of the History of Women. Every public elementary school and high school shall include in its curriculum a unit of instruction studying the events of the history of women in America. These events shall include not only the contributions made by individual women in government, the arts, sciences, education, and in the economic, cultural, and political development of Illinois and of the United States, but shall also include a study of women's struggles to gain the right to vote and to be treated equally as they strive to earn and occupy positions of merit in our society.
    The State Superintendent of Education may prepare and make available to all school boards instructional materials that may be used as guidelines for development of a unit of instruction under this Section. Each school board shall determine the minimum amount of instructional time that shall qualify as a unit of instruction satisfying the requirements of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 86-1256.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-20.6)
    Sec. 27-20.6. "Irish Famine" study. Every public elementary school and high school may include in its curriculum a unit of instruction studying the causes and effects of mass starvation in mid-19th century Ireland. This period in world history is known as the "Irish Famine", in which millions of Irish died or emigrated. The study of this material is a reaffirmation of the commitment of free people of all nations to eradicate the causes of famine that exist in the modern world.
    The State Superintendent of Education may prepare and make available to all school boards instructional materials that may be used as guidelines for development of a unit of instruction under this Section; provided, however, that each school board shall itself determine the minimum amount of instruction time that shall qualify as a unit of instruction satisfying the requirements of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 95-331, eff. 8-21-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-20.7)
    Sec. 27-20.7. Cursive writing. Beginning with the 2018-2019 school year, public elementary schools shall offer at least one unit of instruction in cursive writing. School districts shall, by policy, determine at what grade level or levels students are to be offered cursive writing, provided that such instruction must be offered before students complete grade 5.
(Source: P.A. 100-548, eff. 7-1-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-21) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-21)
    Sec. 27-21. History of United States. History of the United States shall be taught in all public schools and in all other educational institutions in this State supported or maintained, in whole or in part, by public funds. The teaching of history shall have as one of its objectives the imparting to pupils of a comprehensive idea of our democratic form of government and the principles for which our government stands as regards other nations, including the studying of the place of our government in world-wide movements and the leaders thereof, with particular stress upon the basic principles and ideals of our representative form of government. The teaching of history shall include a study of the role and contributions of African Americans and other ethnic groups, including, but not restricted to, Polish, Lithuanian, German, Hungarian, Irish, Bohemian, Russian, Albanian, Italian, Czech, Slovak, French, Scots, Hispanics, Asian Americans, etc., in the history of this country and this State. To reinforce the study of the role and contributions of Hispanics, such curriculum shall include the study of the events related to the forceful removal and illegal deportation of Mexican-American U.S. citizens during the Great Depression. In public schools only, the teaching of history shall include a study of the roles and contributions of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people in the history of this country and this State. The teaching of history also shall include a study of the role of labor unions and their interaction with government in achieving the goals of a mixed free enterprise system. Beginning with the 2020-2021 school year, the teaching of history must also include instruction on the history of Illinois. No pupils shall be graduated from the eighth grade of any public school unless he or she has received such instruction in the history of the United States and gives evidence of having a comprehensive knowledge thereof, which may be administered remotely.
(Source: P.A. 101-227, eff. 7-1-20; 101-341, eff. 1-1-20; 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-22) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-22)
    Sec. 27-22. Required high school courses.
    (a) (Blank).
    (b) (Blank).
    (c) (Blank).
    (d) (Blank).
    (e) As a prerequisite to receiving a high school diploma, each pupil entering the 9th grade must, in addition to other course requirements, successfully complete all of the following courses:
        (1) Four years of language arts.
        (2) Two years of writing intensive courses, one of
    	
which must be English and the other of which may be English or any other subject. When applicable, writing-intensive courses may be counted towards the fulfillment of other graduation requirements.
        (3) Three years of mathematics, one of which must be
    	
Algebra I, one of which must include geometry content, and one of which may be an Advanced Placement computer science course. A mathematics course that includes geometry content may be offered as an integrated, applied, interdisciplinary, or career and technical education course that prepares a student for a career readiness path.
        (4) Two years of science.
        (5) Two years of social studies, of which at least
    	
one year must be history of the United States or a combination of history of the United States and American government and, beginning with pupils entering the 9th grade in the 2016-2017 school year and each school year thereafter, at least one semester must be civics, which shall help young people acquire and learn to use the skills, knowledge, and attitudes that will prepare them to be competent and responsible citizens throughout their lives. Civics course content shall focus on government institutions, the discussion of current and controversial issues, service learning, and simulations of the democratic process. School districts may utilize private funding available for the purposes of offering civics education.
        (6) One year chosen from (A) music, (B) art, (C)
    	
foreign language, which shall be deemed to include American Sign Language, or (D) vocational education.
    (f) The State Board of Education shall develop and inform school districts of standards for writing-intensive coursework.
    (f-5) If a school district offers an Advanced Placement computer science course to high school students, then the school board must designate that course as equivalent to a high school mathematics course and must denote on the student's transcript that the Advanced Placement computer science course qualifies as a mathematics-based, quantitative course for students in accordance with subdivision (3) of subsection (e) of this Section.
    (g) This amendatory Act of 1983 does not apply to pupils entering the 9th grade in 1983-1984 school year and prior school years or to students with disabilities whose course of study is determined by an individualized education program.
    This amendatory Act of the 94th General Assembly does not apply to pupils entering the 9th grade in the 2004-2005 school year or a prior school year or to students with disabilities whose course of study is determined by an individualized education program.
    (h) The provisions of this Section are subject to the provisions of Section 27-22.05 of this Code and the Postsecondary and Workforce Readiness Act.
    (i) The State Board of Education may adopt rules to modify the requirements of this Section for any students enrolled in grades 9 through 12 if the Governor has declared a disaster due to a public health emergency pursuant to Section 7 of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act.
(Source: P.A. 100-443, eff. 8-25-17; 101-464, eff. 1-1-20; 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-22.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-22.1)
    Sec. 27-22.1. Summer school - required instructional time. Each course offered for high school graduation credit during summer school or any period of the calendar year not embraced within the regular school year, whether or not such course must be successfully completed as a prerequisite to receiving a high school diploma and whether or not such course if successfully completed would be included in the minimum units of credit required by regulation of the State Board of Education for high school graduation, shall provide no fewer than 60 hours of classroom instruction for the equivalent of one semester of high school course credit.
(Source: P.A. 85-839.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-22.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-22.2)
    Sec. 27-22.2. Vocational education elective. Whenever the school board of any school district which maintains grades 9 through 12 establishes a list of courses from which secondary school students each must elect at least one course, to be completed along with other course requirements as a pre-requisite to receiving a high school diploma, that school board must include on the list of such elective courses at least one course in vocational education.
(Source: P.A. 84-1334; 84-1438.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-22.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-22.3)
    Sec. 27-22.3. Volunteer service credit program.
    (a) A school district may establish a volunteer service credit program that enables secondary school students to earn credit towards graduation through performance of community service. This community service may include participation in the organization of a high school or community blood drive or other blood donor recruitment campaign. Any program so established shall begin with students entering grade 9 in the 1993-1994 school year or later. The amount of credit given for program participation shall not exceed that given for completion of one semester of language arts, math, science or social studies.
    (b) Any community service performed as part of a course for which credit is given towards graduation shall not qualify under a volunteer service credit program. Any service for which a student is paid shall not qualify under a volunteer service credit program. Any community work assigned as a disciplinary measure shall not qualify under a volunteer service credit program.
    (c) School districts that establish volunteer service credit programs shall establish any necessary rules, regulations and procedures.
(Source: P.A. 93-547, eff. 8-19-03.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-22.05)
    Sec. 27-22.05. Required course substitute. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article or this Code, a school board that maintains any of grades 9 through 12 is authorized to adopt a policy under which a student who is enrolled in any of those grades may satisfy one or more high school course or graduation requirements, including, but not limited to, any requirements under Sections 27-6 and 27-22, by successfully completing a registered apprenticeship program under rules adopted by the State Board of Education under Section 2-3.175 of this Code, or by substituting for and successfully completing in place of the high school course or graduation requirement a related vocational or technical education course. A vocational or technical education course shall not qualify as a related vocational or technical education course within the meaning of this Section unless it contains at least 50% of the content of the required course or graduation requirement for which it is substituted, as determined by the State Board of Education in accordance with standards that it shall adopt and uniformly apply for purposes of this Section. No vocational or technical education course may be substituted for a required course or graduation requirement under any policy adopted by a school board as authorized in this Section unless the pupil's parent or guardian first requests the substitution and approves it in writing on forms that the school district makes available for purposes of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 100-992, eff. 8-20-18; 101-81, eff. 7-12-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-22.10)
    Sec. 27-22.10. Course credit for high school diploma.
    (a) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the school board of a school district that maintains any of grades 9 through 12 is authorized to adopt a policy under which a student enrolled in grade 7 or 8 who is enrolled in the unit school district or would be enrolled in the high school district upon completion of elementary school, whichever is applicable, may enroll in a course required under Section 27-22 of this Code, provided that the course is offered by the high school that the student would attend, and (i) the student participates in the course at the location of the high school, and the elementary student's enrollment in the course would not prevent a high school student from being able to enroll, or (ii) the student participates in the course where the student attends school as long as the course is taught by a teacher who holds a professional educator license issued under Article 21B of this Code and endorsed for the grade level and content area of the course.
    (b) A school board that adopts a policy pursuant to subsection (a) of this Section must grant academic credit to an elementary school student who successfully completes the high school course, and that credit shall satisfy the requirements of Section 27-22 of this Code for that course.
    (c) A school board must award high school course credit to a student transferring to its school district for any course that the student successfully completed pursuant to subsection (a) of this Section, unless evidence about the course's rigor and content shows that it does not address the relevant Illinois Learning Standard at the level appropriate for the high school grade during which the course is usually taken, and that credit shall satisfy the requirements of Section 27-22 of this Code for that course.
    (d) A student's grade in any course successfully completed under this Section must be included in his or her grade point average in accordance with the school board's policy for making that calculation.
(Source: P.A. 99-189, eff. 7-30-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-23)
    Sec. 27-23. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 95-793, eff. 1-1-09. Repealed by P.A. 96-734, eff. 8-25-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-23.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-23.1)
    Sec. 27-23.1. Parenting education.
    (a) The State Board of Education must assist each school district that offers an evidence-based parenting education model. School districts may provide instruction in parenting education for grades 6 through 12 and include such instruction in the courses of study regularly taught therein. School districts may give regular school credit for satisfactory completion by the student of such courses.
    As used in this subsection (a), "parenting education" means and includes instruction in the following:
        (1) Child growth and development, including prenatal
    	
development.
        (2) Childbirth and child care.
        (3) Family structure, function and management.
        (4) Prenatal and postnatal care for mothers and
    	
infants.
        (5) Prevention of child abuse.
        (6) The physical, mental, emotional, social, economic
    	
and psychological aspects of interpersonal and family relationships.
        (7) Parenting skill development.
    The State Board of Education shall assist those districts offering parenting education instruction, upon request, in developing instructional materials, training teachers, and establishing appropriate time allotments for each of the areas included in such instruction.
    School districts may offer parenting education courses during that period of the day which is not part of the regular school day. Residents of the school district may enroll in such courses. The school board may establish fees and collect such charges as may be necessary for attendance at such courses in an amount not to exceed the per capita cost of the operation thereof, except that the board may waive all or part of such charges if it determines that the individual is indigent or that the educational needs of the individual requires his or her attendance at such courses.
    (b) Beginning with the 2019-2020 school year, from appropriations made for the purposes of this Section, the State Board of Education shall implement and administer a 3-year pilot program supporting the health and wellness student-learning requirement by utilizing a unit of instruction on parenting education in participating school districts that maintain grades 9 through 12, to be determined by the participating school districts. The program is encouraged to include, but is not be limited to, instruction on (i) family structure, function, and management, (ii) the prevention of child abuse, (iii) the physical, mental, emotional, social, economic, and psychological aspects of interpersonal and family relationships, and (iv) parenting education competency development that is aligned to the social and emotional learning standards of the student's grade level. Instruction under this subsection (b) may be included in the Comprehensive Health Education Program set forth under Section 3 of the Critical Health Problems and Comprehensive Health Education Act. The State Board of Education is authorized to make grants to school districts that apply to participate in the pilot program under this subsection (b). The State Board of Education shall by rule provide for the form of the application and criteria to be used and applied in selecting participating urban, suburban, and rural school districts. The provisions of this subsection (b), other than this sentence, are inoperative at the conclusion of the pilot program.
(Source: P.A. 100-1043, eff. 8-23-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-23.2)
    Sec. 27-23.2. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 86-650. Repealed by P.A. 95-793, eff. 1-1-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-23.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-23.3)
    Sec. 27-23.3. Education in steroid abuse prevention. School districts shall provide instruction in relation to the prevention of abuse of anabolic steroids in grades 7 through 12 and shall include such instruction in science, health, drug abuse, physical education or other appropriate courses of study. School districts shall also provide this instruction to students who participate in interscholastic athletic programs. The instruction shall emphasize that the use of anabolic steroids presents a serious health hazard to persons who use steroids to enhance athletic performance or physical development. The State Board of Education may assist in the development of instructional materials and teacher training in relation to steroid abuse prevention.
(Source: P.A. 94-14, eff. 1-1-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-23.4)
    Sec. 27-23.4. Violence prevention and conflict resolution education. School districts shall provide instruction in violence prevention and conflict resolution education for grades kindergarten through 12 and may include such instruction in the courses of study regularly taught therein. School districts may give regular school credit for satisfactory completion by the student of such courses.
    As used in this Section, "violence prevention and conflict resolution education" means and includes instruction in the following:
        (1) The consequences of violent behavior.
        (2) The causes of violent reactions to conflict.
        (3) Nonviolent conflict resolution techniques.
        (4) The relationship between drugs, alcohol and
    	
violence.
    The State Board of Education shall prepare and make available to all school boards instructional materials that may be used as guidelines for development of a violence prevention program under this Section, provided that each school board shall determine the appropriate curriculum for satisfying the requirements of this Section. The State Board of Education shall assist in training teachers to provide effective instruction in the violence prevention curriculum.
    The State Board of Education and local school boards shall not be required to implement the provisions of this Section unless grants of funds are made available and are received after July 1, 1993 from private sources or from the federal government in amounts sufficient to enable the State Board and local school boards to meet the requirements of this Section. Any funds received by the State or a local educational agency pursuant to the federal Safe and Drug-Free Schools and Communities Act of 1994 shall first be applied or appropriated to meet the requirements and implement the provisions of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 97-87, eff. 7-8-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-23.5)
    Sec. 27-23.5. Organ/tissue and blood donor and transplantation programs. Each school district that maintains grades 9 and 10 may include in its curriculum and teach to the students of either such grade one unit of instruction on organ/tissue and blood donor and transplantation programs. No student shall be required to take or participate in instruction on organ/tissue and blood donor and transplantation programs if a parent or guardian files written objection thereto on constitutional grounds, and refusal to take or participate in such instruction on those grounds shall not be reason for suspension or expulsion of a student or result in any academic penalty.
    The regional superintendent of schools in which a school district that maintains grades 9 and 10 is located shall obtain and distribute to each school that maintains grades 9 and 10 in his or her district information and data, including instructional materials provided at no cost by America's Blood Centers, the American Red Cross, and Gift of Hope, that may be used by the school in developing a unit of instruction under this Section. However, each school board shall determine the minimum amount of instructional time that shall qualify as a unit of instruction satisfying the requirements of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 95-331, eff. 8-21-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-23.6)
    Sec. 27-23.6. Anti-bias education.
    (a) The General Assembly finds that there is a significant increase in violence in the schools and that much of that violence is the result of intergroup tensions. The General Assembly further finds that anti-bias education and intergroup conflict resolution are effective methods for preventing violence and lessening tensions in the schools and that these methods are most effective when they are respectful of individuals and their divergent viewpoints and religious beliefs, which are protected by the First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States.
    (b) Beginning with the 2002-2003 school year, public elementary and secondary schools may incorporate activities to address intergroup conflict, with the objectives of improving intergroup relations on and beyond the school campus, defusing intergroup tensions, and promoting peaceful resolution of conflict. The activities must be respectful of individuals and their divergent viewpoints and religious beliefs, which are protected by the First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States. Such activities may include, but not be limited to, instruction and teacher training programs.
    (c) A school board that adopts a policy to incorporate activities to address intergroup conflict as authorized under subsection (b) of this Section shall make information available to the public that describes the manner in which the board has implemented the authority granted to it in this Section. The means for disseminating this information (i) shall include posting the information on the school district's Internet web site, if any, and making the information available, upon request, in district offices, and (ii) may include without limitation incorporating the information in a student handbook and including the information in a district newsletter.
(Source: P.A. 92-763, eff. 8-6-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-23.7)
    Sec. 27-23.7. Bullying prevention.
    (a) The General Assembly finds that a safe and civil school environment is necessary for students to learn and achieve and that bullying causes physical, psychological, and emotional harm to students and interferes with students' ability to learn and participate in school activities. The General Assembly further finds that bullying has been linked to other forms of antisocial behavior, such as vandalism, shoplifting, skipping and dropping out of school, fighting, using drugs and alcohol, sexual harassment, and sexual violence. Because of the negative outcomes associated with bullying in schools, the General Assembly finds that school districts, charter schools, and non-public, non-sectarian elementary and secondary schools should educate students, parents, and school district, charter school, or non-public, non-sectarian elementary or secondary school personnel about what behaviors constitute prohibited bullying.
    Bullying on the basis of actual or perceived race, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, age, marital status, physical or mental disability, military status, sexual orientation, gender-related identity or expression, unfavorable discharge from military service, association with a person or group with one or more of the aforementioned actual or perceived characteristics, or any other distinguishing characteristic is prohibited in all school districts, charter schools, and non-public, non-sectarian elementary and secondary schools. No student shall be subjected to bullying:
        (1) during any school-sponsored education program or
    	
activity;
        (2) while in school, on school property, on school
    	
buses or other school vehicles, at designated school bus stops waiting for the school bus, or at school-sponsored or school-sanctioned events or activities;
        (3) through the transmission of information from a
    	
school computer, a school computer network, or other similar electronic school equipment; or
        (4) through the transmission of information from a
    	
computer that is accessed at a nonschool-related location, activity, function, or program or from the use of technology or an electronic device that is not owned, leased, or used by a school district or school if the bullying causes a substantial disruption to the educational process or orderly operation of a school. This item (4) applies only in cases in which a school administrator or teacher receives a report that bullying through this means has occurred and does not require a district or school to staff or monitor any nonschool-related activity, function, or program.
    (a-5) Nothing in this Section is intended to infringe upon any right to exercise free expression or the free exercise of religion or religiously based views protected under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution or under Section 3 of Article I of the Illinois Constitution.
    (b) In this Section:
    "Bullying" includes "cyber-bullying" and means any severe or pervasive physical or verbal act or conduct, including communications made in writing or electronically, directed toward a student or students that has or can be reasonably predicted to have the effect of one or more of the following:
        (1) placing the student or students in reasonable
    	
fear of harm to the student's or students' person or property;
        (2) causing a substantially detrimental effect on the
    	
student's or students' physical or mental health;
        (3) substantially interfering with the student's or
    	
students' academic performance; or
        (4) substantially interfering with the student's or
    	
students' ability to participate in or benefit from the services, activities, or privileges provided by a school.
    Bullying, as defined in this subsection (b), may take various forms, including without limitation one or more of the following: harassment, threats, intimidation, stalking, physical violence, sexual harassment, sexual violence, theft, public humiliation, destruction of property, or retaliation for asserting or alleging an act of bullying. This list is meant to be illustrative and non-exhaustive.
    "Cyber-bullying" means bullying through the use of technology or any electronic communication, including without limitation any transfer of signs, signals, writing, images, sounds, data, or intelligence of any nature transmitted in whole or in part by a wire, radio, electromagnetic system, photoelectronic system, or photooptical system, including without limitation electronic mail, Internet communications, instant messages, or facsimile communications. "Cyber-bullying" includes the creation of a webpage or weblog in which the creator assumes the identity of another person or the knowing impersonation of another person as the author of posted content or messages if the creation or impersonation creates any of the effects enumerated in the definition of bullying in this Section. "Cyber-bullying" also includes the distribution by electronic means of a communication to more than one person or the posting of material on an electronic medium that may be accessed by one or more persons if the distribution or posting creates any of the effects enumerated in the definition of bullying in this Section.
    "Policy on bullying" means a bullying prevention policy that meets the following criteria:
        (1) Includes the bullying definition provided in this
    	
Section.
        (2) Includes a statement that bullying is contrary to
    	
State law and the policy of the school district, charter school, or non-public, non-sectarian elementary or secondary school and is consistent with subsection (a-5) of this Section.
        (3) Includes procedures for promptly reporting
    	
bullying, including, but not limited to, identifying and providing the school e-mail address (if applicable) and school telephone number for the staff person or persons responsible for receiving such reports and a procedure for anonymous reporting; however, this shall not be construed to permit formal disciplinary action solely on the basis of an anonymous report.
        (4) Consistent with federal and State laws and rules
    	
governing student privacy rights, includes procedures for promptly informing parents or guardians of all students involved in the alleged incident of bullying and discussing, as appropriate, the availability of social work services, counseling, school psychological services, other interventions, and restorative measures.
        (5) Contains procedures for promptly investigating
    	
and addressing reports of bullying, including the following:
            (A) Making all reasonable efforts to complete the
        	
investigation within 10 school days after the date the report of the incident of bullying was received and taking into consideration additional relevant information received during the course of the investigation about the reported incident of bullying.
            (B) Involving appropriate school support
        	
personnel and other staff persons with knowledge, experience, and training on bullying prevention, as deemed appropriate, in the investigation process.
            (C) Notifying the principal or school
        	
administrator or his or her designee of the report of the incident of bullying as soon as possible after the report is received.
            (D) Consistent with federal and State laws and
        	
rules governing student privacy rights, providing parents and guardians of the students who are parties to the investigation information about the investigation and an opportunity to meet with the principal or school administrator or his or her designee to discuss the investigation, the findings of the investigation, and the actions taken to address the reported incident of bullying.
        (6) Includes the interventions that can be taken to
    	
address bullying, which may include, but are not limited to, school social work services, restorative measures, social-emotional skill building, counseling, school psychological services, and community-based services.
        (7) Includes a statement prohibiting reprisal or
    	
retaliation against any person who reports an act of bullying and the consequences and appropriate remedial actions for a person who engages in reprisal or retaliation.
        (8) Includes consequences and appropriate remedial
    	
actions for a person found to have falsely accused another of bullying as a means of retaliation or as a means of bullying.
        (9) Is based on the engagement of a range of school
    	
stakeholders, including students and parents or guardians.
        (10) Is posted on the school district's, charter
    	
school's, or non-public, non-sectarian elementary or secondary school's existing Internet website, is included in the student handbook, and, where applicable, posted where other policies, rules, and standards of conduct are currently posted in the school and provided periodically throughout the school year to students and faculty, and is distributed annually to parents, guardians, students, and school personnel, including new employees when hired.
        (11) As part of the process of reviewing and
    	
re-evaluating the policy under subsection (d) of this Section, contains a policy evaluation process to assess the outcomes and effectiveness of the policy that includes, but is not limited to, factors such as the frequency of victimization; student, staff, and family observations of safety at a school; identification of areas of a school where bullying occurs; the types of bullying utilized; and bystander intervention or participation. The school district, charter school, or non-public, non-sectarian elementary or secondary school may use relevant data and information it already collects for other purposes in the policy evaluation. The information developed as a result of the policy evaluation must be made available on the Internet website of the school district, charter school, or non-public, non-sectarian elementary or secondary school. If an Internet website is not available, the information must be provided to school administrators, school board members, school personnel, parents, guardians, and students.
        (12) Is consistent with the policies of the school
    	
board, charter school, or non-public, non-sectarian elementary or secondary school.
    "Restorative measures" means a continuum of school-based alternatives to exclusionary discipline, such as suspensions and expulsions, that: (i) are adapted to the particular needs of the school and community, (ii) contribute to maintaining school safety, (iii) protect the integrity of a positive and productive learning climate, (iv) teach students the personal and interpersonal skills they will need to be successful in school and society, (v) serve to build and restore relationships among students, families, schools, and communities, and (vi) reduce the likelihood of future disruption by balancing accountability with an understanding of students' behavioral health needs in order to keep students in school.
    "School personnel" means persons employed by, on contract with, or who volunteer in a school district, charter school, or non-public, non-sectarian elementary or secondary school, including without limitation school and school district administrators, teachers, school guidance counselors, school social workers, school counselors, school psychologists, school nurses, cafeteria workers, custodians, bus drivers, school resource officers, and security guards.
    (c) (Blank).
    (d) Each school district, charter school, and non-public, non-sectarian elementary or secondary school shall create, maintain, and implement a policy on bullying, which policy must be filed with the State Board of Education. The policy or implementing procedure shall include a process to investigate whether a reported act of bullying is within the permissible scope of the district's or school's jurisdiction and shall require that the district or school provide the victim with information regarding services that are available within the district and community, such as counseling, support services, and other programs. School personnel available for help with a bully or to make a report about bullying shall be made known to parents or legal guardians, students, and school personnel. Every 2 years, each school district, charter school, and non-public, non-sectarian elementary or secondary school shall conduct a review and re-evaluation of its policy and make any necessary and appropriate revisions. The policy must be filed with the State Board of Education after being updated. The State Board of Education shall monitor and provide technical support for the implementation of policies created under this subsection (d).
    (e) This Section shall not be interpreted to prevent a victim from seeking redress under any other available civil or criminal law.
(Source: P.A. 99-78, eff. 7-20-15; 100-137, eff. 8-18-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-23.8)
    Sec. 27-23.8. Disability history and awareness.
    (a) A school district shall provide instruction on disability history, people with disabilities, and the disability rights movement. Instruction may be included in those courses that the school district chooses. This instruction must be founded on the principle that all students, including students with disabilities, have the right to exercise self-determination. When possible, individuals with disabilities should be incorporated into the development and delivery of this instruction. This instruction may be supplemented by knowledgeable guest speakers from the disability community. A school board may collaborate with community-based organizations, such as centers for independent living, parent training and information centers, and other consumer-driven groups, and disability membership organizations in creating this instruction.
    (b) The State Board of Education may prepare and make available to all school boards resource materials that may be used as guidelines for the development of instruction for disability history and awareness under this Section.
    (c) Each school board shall determine the minimum amount of instructional time required under this Section.
    (d) The regional superintendent of schools shall monitor a school district's compliance with this Section's curricular requirement during his or her annual compliance visit.
(Source: P.A. 96-191, eff. 1-1-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-23.9)
    Sec. 27-23.9. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 96-952, eff. 6-28-10. Repealed internally, eff. 3-2-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-23.10)
    Sec. 27-23.10. Gang resistance education and training.
    (a) The General Assembly finds that the instance of youth delinquent gangs continues to rise on a statewide basis. Given the higher rates of criminal offending among gang members, as well as the availability of increasingly lethal weapons, the level of criminal activity by gang members has taken on new importance for law enforcement agencies, schools, the community, and prevention efforts.
    (b) As used in this Section:
    "Gang resistance education and training" means and includes instruction in, without limitation, each of the following subject matters when accompanied by a stated objective of reducing gang activity and educating children in grades K through 12 about the consequences of gang involvement:
        (1) conflict resolution;
        (2) cultural sensitivity;
        (3) personal goal setting; and
        (4) resisting peer pressure.
    (c) Each school district and non-public, non-sectarian elementary or secondary school in this State may make suitable provisions for instruction in gang resistance education and training in all grades and include that instruction in the courses of study regularly taught in those grades. For the purposes of gang resistance education and training, a school board or the governing body of a non-public, non-sectarian elementary or secondary school must collaborate with State and local law enforcement agencies. The State Board of Education may assist in the development of instructional materials and teacher training in relation to gang resistance education and training.
(Source: P.A. 96-952, eff. 6-28-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-23.11)
    Sec. 27-23.11. Traffic injury prevention; policy. The school board of a school district that maintains any of grades kindergarten through 8 shall adopt a policy on educating students on the effective methods of preventing and avoiding traffic injuries related to walking and bicycling, which education must be made available to students in grades kindergarten through 8.
(Source: P.A. 100-1056, eff. 8-24-18; 101-81, eff. 7-12-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-23.12)
    Sec. 27-23.12. Emotional Intelligence and Social and Emotional Learning Task Force. The Emotional Intelligence and Social and Emotional Learning Task Force is created to develop curriculum and assessment guidelines and best practices on emotional intelligence and social and emotional learning, including strategies and instruction to address the needs of students with anger management issues. The Task Force shall consist of the State Superintendent of Education or his or her designee and all of the following members, appointed by the State Superintendent:
        (1) A representative of a school district organized
    	
under Article 34 of this Code.
        (2) A representative of a statewide organization
    	
representing school boards.
        (3) A representative of a statewide organization
    	
representing individuals holding professional educator licenses with school support personnel endorsements under Article 21B of this Code, including school social workers, school psychologists, and school nurses.
        (4) A representative of a statewide organization
    	
representing children's mental health experts.
        (5) A representative of a statewide organization
    	
representing school principals.
        (6) An employee of a school under Article 13A of this
    	
Code.
        (7) A school psychologist employed by a school
    	
district in Cook County.
        (8) Representatives of other appropriate State
    	
agencies, as determined by the State Superintendent.
    Members appointed by the State Superintendent shall serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed for their reasonable and necessary expenses from funds appropriated to the State Board of Education for that purpose, including travel, subject to the rules of the appropriate travel control board. The Task Force shall meet at the call of the State Superintendent. The State Board of Education shall provide administrative and other support to the Task Force.
    The Task Force shall develop age-appropriate, emotional intelligence and social and emotional learning curriculum and assessment guidelines and best practices for elementary schools and high schools. The guidelines shall, at a minimum, include teaching how to recognize, direct, and positively express emotions. The Task Force must also make recommendations on the funding of appropriate services and the availability of sources of funding, including, but not limited to, federal funding, to address social and emotional learning. The Task Force shall complete the guidelines and recommendations on or before March 1, 2020. Upon completion of the guidelines and recommendations the Task Force is dissolved.
(Source: P.A. 100-1139, eff. 11-28-18; 101-81, eff. 7-12-19; 101-498, eff. 6-1-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-23.13)
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-152)
    Sec. 27-23.13. Hunting safety. A school district may offer its students a course on hunting safety as part of its curriculum during the school day or as part of an after-school program. The State Board of Education may prepare and make available to school boards resources on hunting safety that may be used as guidelines for the development of a course under this Section.
(Source: P.A. 101-152, eff. 7-26-19.)
 
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-347)
    Sec. 27-23.13. Workplace preparation course. A school district that maintains any of grades 9 through 12 may include in its high school curriculum a unit of instruction on workplace preparation that covers legal protections in the workplace, including protection against sexual harassment and racial and other forms of discrimination and other protections for employees. A school board may determine the minimum amount of instruction time that qualifies as a unit of instruction under this Section.
(Source: P.A. 101-347, eff. 1-1-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-23.15)
    Sec. 27-23.15. Computer science.
    (a) In this Section, "computer science" means the study of computers and algorithms, including their principles, their hardware and software designs, their implementation, and their impact on society. "Computer science" does not include the study of everyday uses of computers and computer applications, such as keyboarding or accessing the Internet.
    (b) Beginning with the 2023-2024 school year, the school board of a school district that maintains any of grades 9 through 12 shall provide an opportunity for every high school student to take at least one computer science course aligned to rigorous learning standards of the State Board of Education.
(Source: P.A. 101-654, eff. 3-8-21.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-24) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-24)
    Sec. 27-24. Short title. Sections 27-24 through 27-24.10 of this Article are known and may be cited as the Driver Education Act.
(Source: P.A. 98-756, eff. 7-16-14.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-24.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-24.1)
    Sec. 27-24.1. Definitions. As used in the Driver Education Act unless the context otherwise requires:
    "State Board" means the State Board of Education;
    "Driver education course" and "course" means a course of instruction in the use and operation of cars, including instruction in the safe operation of cars and rules of the road and the laws of this State relating to motor vehicles, which meets the minimum requirements of this Act and the rules and regulations issued thereunder by the State Board and has been approved by the State Board as meeting such requirements;
    "Car" means a motor vehicle of the first division as defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code;
    "Motorcycle" or "motor driven cycle" means such a vehicle as defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code;
    "Driver's license" means any license or permit issued by the Secretary of State under Chapter 6 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
    "Distance learning program" means a program of study in which all participating teachers and students do not physically meet in the classroom and instead use the Internet, email, or any other method other than the classroom to provide instruction.
    With reference to persons, the singular number includes the plural and vice versa, and the masculine gender includes the feminine.
(Source: P.A. 101-183, eff. 8-2-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-24.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-24.2)
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-183)
    Sec. 27-24.2. Safety education; driver education course. Instruction shall be given in safety education in each of grades one through 8, equivalent to one class period each week, and any school district which maintains grades 9 through 12 shall offer a driver education course in any such school which it operates. Its curriculum shall include content dealing with Chapters 11, 12, 13, 15, and 16 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, the rules adopted pursuant to those Chapters insofar as they pertain to the operation of motor vehicles, and the portions of the Litter Control Act relating to the operation of motor vehicles. The course of instruction given in grades 10 through 12 shall include an emphasis on the development of knowledge, attitudes, habits, and skills necessary for the safe operation of motor vehicles, including motorcycles insofar as they can be taught in the classroom, and instruction on distracted driving as a major traffic safety issue. In addition, the course shall include instruction on special hazards existing at and required safety and driving precautions that must be observed at emergency situations, highway construction and maintenance zones, and railroad crossings and the approaches thereto. Beginning with the 2017-2018 school year, the course shall also include instruction concerning law enforcement procedures for traffic stops, including a demonstration of the proper actions to be taken during a traffic stop and appropriate interactions with law enforcement. The course of instruction required of each eligible student at the high school level shall consist of a minimum of 30 clock hours of classroom instruction and a minimum of 6 clock hours of individual behind-the-wheel instruction in a dual control car on public roadways taught by a driver education instructor endorsed by the State Board of Education. A school district's decision to allow a student to take a portion of the driver education course through a distance learning program must be determined on a case-by-case basis and must be approved by the school's administration, including the student's driver education teacher, and the student's parent or guardian. Under no circumstances may the student take the entire driver education course through a distance learning program. Both the classroom instruction part and the practice driving part of a driver education course shall be open to a resident or non-resident student attending a non-public school in the district wherein the course is offered. Each student attending any public or non-public high school in the district must receive a passing grade in at least 8 courses during the previous 2 semesters prior to enrolling in a driver education course, or the student shall not be permitted to enroll in the course; provided that the local superintendent of schools (with respect to a student attending a public high school in the district) or chief school administrator (with respect to a student attending a non-public high school in the district) may waive the requirement if the superintendent or chief school administrator, as the case may be, deems it to be in the best interest of the student. A student may be allowed to commence the classroom instruction part of such driver education course prior to reaching age 15 if such student then will be eligible to complete the entire course within 12 months after being allowed to commence such classroom instruction.
    A school district may offer a driver education course in a school by contracting with a commercial driver training school to provide both the classroom instruction part and the practice driving part or either one without having to request a modification or waiver of administrative rules of the State Board of Education if the school district approves the action during a public hearing on whether to enter into a contract with a commercial driver training school. The public hearing shall be held at a regular or special school board meeting prior to entering into such a contract. If a school district chooses to approve a contract with a commercial driver training school, then the district must provide evidence to the State Board of Education that the commercial driver training school with which it will contract holds a license issued by the Secretary of State under Article IV of Chapter 6 of the Illinois Vehicle Code and that each instructor employed by the commercial driver training school to provide instruction to students served by the school district holds a valid teaching license issued under the requirements of this Code and rules of the State Board of Education. Such evidence must include, but need not be limited to, a list of each instructor assigned to teach students served by the school district, which list shall include the instructor's name, personal identification number as required by the State Board of Education, birth date, and driver's license number. Once the contract is entered into, the school district shall notify the State Board of Education of any changes in the personnel providing instruction either (i) within 15 calendar days after an instructor leaves the program or (ii) before a new instructor is hired. Such notification shall include the instructor's name, personal identification number as required by the State Board of Education, birth date, and driver's license number. If the school district maintains an Internet website, then the district shall post a copy of the final contract between the district and the commercial driver training school on the district's Internet website. If no Internet website exists, then the school district shall make available the contract upon request. A record of all materials in relation to the contract must be maintained by the school district and made available to parents and guardians upon request. The instructor's date of birth and driver's license number and any other personally identifying information as deemed by the federal Driver's Privacy Protection Act of 1994 must be redacted from any public materials.
    Such a course may be commenced immediately after the completion of a prior course. Teachers of such courses shall meet the licensure requirements of this Code and regulations of the State Board as to qualifications.
    Subject to rules of the State Board of Education, the school district may charge a reasonable fee, not to exceed $50, to students who participate in the course, unless a student is unable to pay for such a course, in which event the fee for such a student must be waived. However, the district may increase this fee to an amount not to exceed $250 by school board resolution following a public hearing on the increase, which increased fee must be waived for students who participate in the course and are unable to pay for the course. The total amount from driver education fees and reimbursement from the State for driver education must not exceed the total cost of the driver education program in any year and must be deposited into the school district's driver education fund as a separate line item budget entry. All moneys deposited into the school district's driver education fund must be used solely for the funding of a high school driver education program approved by the State Board of Education that uses driver education instructors endorsed by the State Board of Education.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17; 101-183, eff. 8-2-19.)
 
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-450)
    Sec. 27-24.2. Safety education; driver education course. Instruction shall be given in safety education in each of grades one through 8, equivalent to one class period each week, and any school district which maintains grades 9 through 12 shall offer a driver education course in any such school which it operates. Its curriculum shall include content dealing with Chapters 11, 12, 13, 15, and 16 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, the rules adopted pursuant to those Chapters insofar as they pertain to the operation of motor vehicles, and the portions of the Litter Control Act relating to the operation of motor vehicles. The course of instruction given in grades 10 through 12 shall include an emphasis on the development of knowledge, attitudes, habits, and skills necessary for the safe operation of motor vehicles, including motorcycles insofar as they can be taught in the classroom, and instruction on distracted driving as a major traffic safety issue. In addition, the course shall include instruction on special hazards existing at and required safety and driving precautions that must be observed at emergency situations, highway construction and maintenance zones, and railroad crossings and the approaches thereto. Beginning with the 2017-2018 school year, the course shall also include instruction concerning law enforcement procedures for traffic stops, including a demonstration of the proper actions to be taken during a traffic stop and appropriate interactions with law enforcement. The course of instruction required of each eligible student at the high school level shall consist of a minimum of 30 clock hours of classroom instruction and a minimum of 6 clock hours of individual behind-the-wheel instruction in a dual control car on public roadways taught by a driver education instructor endorsed by the State Board of Education. Both the classroom instruction part and the practice driving part of such driver education course shall be open to a resident or non-resident student attending a non-public school in the district wherein the course is offered. Each student attending any public or non-public high school in the district must receive a passing grade in at least 8 courses during the previous 2 semesters prior to enrolling in a driver education course, or the student shall not be permitted to enroll in the course; provided that the local superintendent of schools (with respect to a student attending a public high school in the district) or chief school administrator (with respect to a student attending a non-public high school in the district) may waive the requirement if the superintendent or chief school administrator, as the case may be, deems it to be in the best interest of the student. A student may be allowed to commence the classroom instruction part of such driver education course prior to reaching age 15 if such student then will be eligible to complete the entire course within 12 months after being allowed to commence such classroom instruction.
    A school district may offer a driver education course in a school by contracting with a commercial driver training school to provide both the classroom instruction part and the practice driving part or either one without having to request a modification or waiver of administrative rules of the State Board of Education if the school district approves the action during a public hearing on whether to enter into a contract with a commercial driver training school. The public hearing shall be held at a regular or special school board meeting prior to entering into such a contract. If a school district chooses to approve a contract with a commercial driver training school, then the district must provide evidence to the State Board of Education that the commercial driver training school with which it will contract holds a license issued by the Secretary of State under Article IV of Chapter 6 of the Illinois Vehicle Code and that each instructor employed by the commercial driver training school to provide instruction to students served by the school district holds a valid teaching license issued under the requirements of this Code and rules of the State Board of Education. Such evidence must include, but need not be limited to, a list of each instructor assigned to teach students served by the school district, which list shall include the instructor's name, personal identification number as required by the State Board of Education, birth date, and driver's license number. Once the contract is entered into, the school district shall notify the State Board of Education of any changes in the personnel providing instruction either (i) within 15 calendar days after an instructor leaves the program or (ii) before a new instructor is hired. Such notification shall include the instructor's name, personal identification number as required by the State Board of Education, birth date, and driver's license number. If the school district maintains an Internet website, then the district shall post a copy of the final contract between the district and the commercial driver training school on the district's Internet website. If no Internet website exists, then the school district shall make available the contract upon request. A record of all materials in relation to the contract must be maintained by the school district and made available to parents and guardians upon request. The instructor's date of birth and driver's license number and any other personally identifying information as deemed by the federal Driver's Privacy Protection Act of 1994 must be redacted from any public materials.
    Such a course may be commenced immediately after the completion of a prior course. Teachers of such courses shall meet the licensure requirements of this Code and regulations of the State Board as to qualifications. Except for a contract with a Certified Driver Rehabilitation Specialist, a school district that contracts with a third party to teach a driver education course under this Section must ensure the teacher meets the educator licensure and endorsement requirements under Article 21B and must follow the same evaluation and observation requirements that apply to non-tenured teachers under Article 24A. The teacher evaluation must be conducted by a school administrator employed by the school district and must be submitted annually to the district superintendent and all school board members for oversight purposes.
    Subject to rules of the State Board of Education, the school district may charge a reasonable fee, not to exceed $50, to students who participate in the course, unless a student is unable to pay for such a course, in which event the fee for such a student must be waived. However, the district may increase this fee to an amount not to exceed $250 by school board resolution following a public hearing on the increase, which increased fee must be waived for students who participate in the course and are unable to pay for the course. The total amount from driver education fees and reimbursement from the State for driver education must not exceed the total cost of the driver education program in any year and must be deposited into the school district's driver education fund as a separate line item budget entry. All moneys deposited into the school district's driver education fund must be used solely for the funding of a high school driver education program approved by the State Board of Education that uses driver education instructors endorsed by the State Board of Education.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17; 101-450, eff. 8-23-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-24.2a)
    Sec. 27-24.2a. Non-public school driver education course. Beginning with the 2017-2018 school year, any non-public school's driver education course shall include instruction concerning law enforcement procedures for traffic stops, including a demonstration of the proper actions to be taken during a traffic stop and appropriate interactions with law enforcement.
(Source: P.A. 99-720, eff. 1-1-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-24.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-24.3)
    Sec. 27-24.3. Reimbursement. In order for the school district to receive reimbursement from the State as hereinafter provided, the driver education course offered in its schools shall consist of at least 30 clock hours of classroom instruction and, subject to modification as hereinafter allowed, at least 6 clock hours of practice driving in a car having dual operating controls under direct individual instruction.
(Source: P.A. 95-310, eff. 7-1-08.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-24.4) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-24.4)
    Sec. 27-24.4. Reimbursement amount.
    (a) Each school district shall be entitled to reimbursement for each student who finishes either the classroom instruction part or the practice driving part of a driver education course that meets the minimum requirements of this Act. Reimbursement under this Act is payable from the Drivers Education Fund in the State treasury.
    Each year all funds appropriated from the Drivers Education Fund to the State Board of Education, with the exception of those funds necessary for administrative purposes of the State Board of Education, shall be distributed in the manner provided in this paragraph to school districts by the State Board of Education for reimbursement of claims from the previous school year. As soon as may be after each quarter of the year, if moneys are available in the Drivers Education Fund in the State treasury for payments under this Section, the State Comptroller shall draw his or her warrants upon the State Treasurer as directed by the State Board of Education. The warrant for each quarter shall be in an amount equal to one-fourth of the total amount to be distributed to school districts for the year. Payments shall be made to school districts as soon as may be after receipt of the warrants.
    The base reimbursement amount shall be calculated by the State Board by dividing the total amount appropriated for distribution by the total of: (a) the number of students who have completed the classroom instruction part for whom valid claims have been made times 0.2; plus (b) the number of students who have completed the practice driving instruction part for whom valid claims have been made times 0.8.
    The amount of reimbursement to be distributed on each claim shall be 0.2 times the base reimbursement amount for each validly claimed student who has completed the classroom instruction part, plus 0.8 times the base reimbursement amount for each validly claimed student who has completed the practice driving instruction part.
    (b) The school district which is the residence of a student who attends a nonpublic school in another district that has furnished the driver education course shall reimburse the district offering the course, the difference between the actual per capita cost of giving the course the previous school year and the amount reimbursed by the State, which, for purposes of this subsection (b), shall be referred to as "course cost". If the course cost offered by the student's resident district is less than the course cost of the course in the district where the nonpublic school is located, then the student is responsible for paying the district that furnished the course the difference between the 2 amounts. If a nonpublic school student chooses to attend a driver's education course in a school district besides the district where the nonpublic school is located, then the student is wholly responsible for the course cost; however, the nonpublic school student may take the course in his or her resident district on the same basis as public school students who are enrolled in that district.
    By April 1 the nonpublic school shall notify the district offering the course of the names and district numbers of the nonresident students desiring to take such course the next school year. The district offering such course shall notify the district of residence of those students affected by April 15. The school district furnishing the course may claim the nonresident student for the purpose of making a claim for State reimbursement under this Act.
(Source: P.A. 96-734, eff. 8-25-09; 97-1025, eff. 1-1-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-24.5) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-24.5)
    Sec. 27-24.5. Submission of claims. The district shall report on forms prescribed by the State Board, on an ongoing basis, a list of students by name, birth date and sex, with the date the behind-the-wheel instruction or the classroom instruction or both were completed and with the status of the course completion.
    The State shall not reimburse any district for any student who has repeated any part of the course more than once or who did not meet the age requirements of this Act during the period that the student was instructed in any part of the drivers education course.
(Source: P.A. 96-734, eff. 8-25-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-24.6) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-24.6)
    Sec. 27-24.6. Attendance records. The school board shall require the teachers of drivers education courses to keep daily attendance records for students attending such courses in the same manner as is prescribed in Section 24-18 of this Act and such records shall be used to prepare and certify claims made under the Driver Education Act. Claims for reimbursement shall be made under oath or affirmation of the chief school administrator for the district employed by the school board or authorized driver education personnel employed by the school board.
    Whoever submits a false claim under the Driver Education Act or makes a false record upon which a claim is based shall be fined in an amount equal to the sum falsely claimed.
(Source: P.A. 96-734, eff. 8-25-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-24.7) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-24.7)
    Sec. 27-24.7. School code to apply.
    The provisions of this Act not inconsistent with the provisions of the Driver Education Act shall apply to the conduct of instruction offered by a school district under the provisions of the Driver Education Act.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-24.8) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-24.8)
    Sec. 27-24.8. Rules and regulations. The State Board may promulgate rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of the Driver Education Act for the administration of the Driver Education Act.
(Source: P.A. 81-1508.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-24.9)
    Sec. 27-24.9. Driver education standards. The State Board of Education, in consultation with the Secretary of State, shall adopt course content standards for driver education for those persons under the age of 18 years, which shall include the operation and equipment of motor vehicles.
(Source: P.A. 97-1025, eff. 1-1-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-24.10)
    Sec. 27-24.10. Cost report. The State Board of Education shall annually prepare a report to be posted on the State Board's Internet website that indicates the approximate per capita driver education cost for each school district required to provide driver education. This report, compiled each spring from data reported the previous school year, shall be computed from expenditure data for driver education submitted by school districts on the annual financial statements required pursuant to Section 3-15.1 of this Code and the number of students provided driver education for that school year, as required to be reported under Section 27-24.5 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 97-1025, eff. 1-1-13.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/prec. Sec. 27-25 heading)
NUCLEAR ENERGY EDUCATION ACT
(Repealed)
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 95-793, eff. 1-1-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-25)
    Sec. 27-25. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 76-1835. Repealed by P.A. 95-793, eff. 1-1-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-25.1)
    Sec. 27-25.1. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 81-1508. Repealed by P.A. 95-793, eff. 1-1-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-25.2)
    Sec. 27-25.2. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 81-1508. Repealed by P.A. 95-793, eff. 1-1-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-25.3)
    Sec. 27-25.3. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 81-1508. Repealed by P.A. 95-793, eff. 1-1-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-25.4)
    Sec. 27-25.4. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 81-1508. Repealed by P.A. 95-793, eff. 1-1-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-26)
    Sec. 27-26. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 78-1245. Repealed by P.A. 94-600, eff. 8-16-05.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27-27) (from Ch. 122, par. 27-27)
    Sec. 27-27. When school districts use a system of categorizing classes of instruction by degree of difficulty and issues grades in accordance therewith, identification of said system shall be reflected in the affected students' class ranking and permanent records.
(Source: P.A. 81-707.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 27A heading)
ARTICLE 27A
CHARTER SCHOOLS

    (105 ILCS 5/27A-1)
    Sec. 27A-1. Short title and application. This Article may be cited as the Charter Schools Law. This Article applies in all school districts, including special charter districts and school districts located in cities having a population of more than 500,000.
(Source: P.A. 89-450, eff. 4-10-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27A-2)
    Sec. 27A-2. Legislative declaration.
    (a) The General Assembly finds and declares as follows:
        (1) Encouraging educational excellence is in the best
    	
interests of the people of this State.
        (2) There are educators, community members, and
    	
parents in Illinois who can offer flexible and innovative educational techniques and programs, but who lack an avenue through which to provide them within the public school system.
        (3) The enactment of legislation authorizing charter
    	
schools to operate in Illinois will promote new options within the public school system and will provide pupils, educators, community members, and parents with the stimulus to strive for educational excellence.
    (b) The General Assembly further finds and declares that this Article is enacted for the following purposes:
        (1) To improve pupil learning by creating schools
    	
with high, rigorous standards for pupil performance.
        (2) To increase learning opportunities for all
    	
pupils, with special emphasis on expanded learning experiences for at-risk pupils, consistent, however, with an equal commitment to increase learning opportunities for all other groups of pupils in a manner that does not discriminate on the basis of disability, race, creed, color, gender, national origin, religion, ancestry, marital status, or need for special education services.
        (3) To encourage the use of teaching methods that may
    	
be different in some respects than others regularly used in the public school system.
        (4) To allow the development of new, different, or
    	
alternative forms of measuring pupil learning and achievement.
        (5) To create new professional opportunities for
    	
teachers, including the opportunity to be responsible for the learning program at the school site.
        (6) To provide parents and pupils with expanded
    	
choices within the public school system.
        (7) To encourage parental and community involvement
    	
with public schools.
        (8) To hold charter schools accountable for meeting
    	
rigorous school content standards and to provide those schools with the opportunity to improve accountability.
    (c) In authorizing charter schools, it is the intent of the General Assembly to create a legitimate avenue for parents, teachers, and community members to take responsible risks and create new, innovative, and more flexible ways of educating children within the public school system. The General Assembly seeks to create opportunities within the public school system of Illinois for development of innovative and accountable teaching techniques. The provisions of this Article should be interpreted liberally to support the findings and goals of this Section and to advance a renewed commitment by the State of Illinois to the mission, goals, and diversity of public education.
(Source: P.A. 89-450, eff. 4-10-96; 90-548, eff. 1-1-98.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27A-3)
    Sec. 27A-3. Definitions. For purposes of this Article:
    "At-risk pupil" means a pupil who, because of physical, emotional, socioeconomic, or cultural factors, is less likely to succeed in a conventional educational environment.
    "Authorizer" means an entity authorized under this Article to review applications, decide whether to approve or reject applications, enter into charter contracts with applicants, oversee charter schools, and decide whether to renew, not renew, or revoke a charter.
    "Commission" means the State Charter School Commission established under Section 27A-7.5 of this Code.
    "Local school board" means the duly elected or appointed school board or board of education of a public school district, including special charter districts and school districts located in cities having a population of more than 500,000, organized under the laws of this State.
    "State Board" means the State Board of Education.
(Source: P.A. 97-152, eff. 7-20-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27A-4)
    Sec. 27A-4. General provisions.
    (a) The General Assembly does not intend to alter or amend the provisions of any court-ordered desegregation plan in effect for any school district. A charter school shall be subject to all federal and State laws and constitutional provisions prohibiting discrimination on the basis of disability, race, creed, color, gender, national origin, religion, ancestry, marital status, or need for special education services.
    (b) The total number of charter schools operating under this Article at any one time shall not exceed 120. Not more than 70 charter schools shall operate at any one time in any city having a population exceeding 500,000, with at least 5 charter schools devoted exclusively to students from low-performing or overcrowded schools operating at any one time in that city; and not more than 45 charter schools shall operate at any one time in the remainder of the State, with not more than one charter school that has been initiated by a board of education, or by an intergovernmental agreement between or among boards of education, operating at any one time in the school district where the charter school is located. In addition to these charter schools, up to but no more than 5 charter schools devoted exclusively to re-enrolled high school dropouts and/or students 16 or 15 years old at risk of dropping out may operate at any one time in any city having a population exceeding 500,000. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in subsection (b) of Section 27A-5 of this Code, each such dropout charter may operate up to 15 campuses within the city. Any of these dropout charters may have a maximum of 1,875 enrollment seats, any one of the campuses of the dropout charter may have a maximum of 165 enrollment seats, and each campus of the dropout charter must be operated, through a contract or payroll, by the same legal entity as that for which the charter is approved and certified.
    For purposes of implementing this Section, the State Board shall assign a number to each charter submission it receives under Section 27A-6 for its review and certification, based on the chronological order in which the submission is received by it. The State Board shall promptly notify local school boards when the maximum numbers of certified charter schools authorized to operate have been reached.
    (c) No charter shall be granted under this Article that would convert any existing private, parochial, or non-public school to a charter school.
    (d) Enrollment in a charter school shall be open to any pupil who resides within the geographic boundaries of the area served by the local school board, provided that the board of education in a city having a population exceeding 500,000 may designate attendance boundaries for no more than one-third of the charter schools permitted in the city if the board of education determines that attendance boundaries are needed to relieve overcrowding or to better serve low-income and at-risk students. Students residing within an attendance boundary may be given priority for enrollment, but must not be required to attend the charter school.
    (e) Nothing in this Article shall prevent 2 or more local school boards from jointly issuing a charter to a single shared charter school, provided that all of the provisions of this Article are met as to those local school boards.
    (f) No local school board shall require any employee of the school district to be employed in a charter school.
    (g) No local school board shall require any pupil residing within the geographic boundary of its district to enroll in a charter school.
    (h) If there are more eligible applicants for enrollment in a charter school than there are spaces available, successful applicants shall be selected by lottery. However, priority shall be given to siblings of pupils enrolled in the charter school and to pupils who were enrolled in the charter school the previous school year, unless expelled for cause, and priority may be given to pupils residing within the charter school's attendance boundary, if a boundary has been designated by the board of education in a city having a population exceeding 500,000.
    Beginning with student enrollment for the 2015-2016 school year, any lottery required under this subsection (h) must be administered and videotaped by the charter school. The authorizer or its designee must be allowed to be present or view the lottery in real time. The charter school must maintain a videotaped record of the lottery, including a time/date stamp. The charter school shall transmit copies of the videotape and all records relating to the lottery to the authorizer on or before September 1 of each year.
    Subject to the requirements for priority applicant groups set forth in paragraph (1) of this subsection (h), any lottery required under this subsection (h) must be administered in a way that provides each student an equal chance at admission. If an authorizer makes a determination that a charter school's lottery is in violation of this subsection (h), it may administer the lottery directly. After a lottery, each student randomly selected for admission to the charter school must be notified. Charter schools may not create an admissions process subsequent to a lottery that may operate as a barrier to registration or enrollment.
    Charter schools may undertake additional intake activities, including without limitation student essays, school-parent compacts, or open houses, but in no event may a charter school require participation in these activities as a condition of enrollment. A charter school must submit an updated waitlist to the authorizer on a quarterly basis. A waitlist must be submitted to the authorizer at the same time as quarterly financial statements, if quarterly financial statements are required by the authorizer.
    Dual enrollment at both a charter school and a public school or non-public school shall not be allowed. A pupil who is suspended or expelled from a charter school shall be deemed to be suspended or expelled from the public schools of the school district in which the pupil resides. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this subsection (h):
        (1) any charter school with a mission exclusive to
    	
educating high school dropouts may grant priority admission to students who are high school dropouts and/or students 16 or 15 years old at risk of dropping out and any charter school with a mission exclusive to educating students from low-performing or overcrowded schools may restrict admission to students who are from low-performing or overcrowded schools; "priority admission" for charter schools exclusively devoted to re-enrolled dropouts or students at risk of dropping out means a minimum of 90% of students enrolled shall be high school dropouts; and
        (2) any charter school located in a school district
    	
that contains all or part of a federal military base may set aside up to 33% of its current charter enrollment to students with parents assigned to the federal military base, with the remaining 67% subject to the general enrollment and lottery requirements of subsection (d) of this Section and this subsection (h); if a student with a parent assigned to the federal military base withdraws from the charter school during the course of a school year for reasons other than grade promotion, those students with parents assigned to the federal military base shall have preference in filling the vacancy.
    (i) (Blank).
    (j) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, a school district in a city having a population exceeding 500,000 shall not have a duty to collectively bargain with an exclusive representative of its employees over decisions to grant or deny a charter school proposal under Section 27A-8 of this Code, decisions to renew or revoke a charter under Section 27A-9 of this Code, and the impact of these decisions, provided that nothing in this Section shall have the effect of negating, abrogating, replacing, reducing, diminishing, or limiting in any way employee rights, guarantees, or privileges granted in Sections 2, 3, 7, 8, 10, 14, and 15 of the Illinois Educational Labor Relations Act.
    (k) In this Section:
    "Low-performing school" means a public school in a school district organized under Article 34 of this Code that enrolls students in any of grades kindergarten through 8 and that is ranked within the lowest 10% of schools in that district in terms of the percentage of students meeting or exceeding standards on the assessments required under Section 2-3.64a-5 of this Code.
    "Overcrowded school" means a public school in a school district organized under Article 34 of this Code that (i) enrolls students in any of grades kindergarten through 8, (ii) has a percentage of low-income students of 70% or more, as identified in the most recently available School Report Card published by the State Board of Education, and (iii) is determined by the Chicago Board of Education to be in the most severely overcrowded 5% of schools in the district. On or before November 1 of each year, the Chicago Board of Education shall file a report with the State Board of Education on which schools in the district meet the definition of "overcrowded school". "Students at risk of dropping out" means students 16 or 15 years old in a public school in a district organized under Article 34 of this Code that enrolls students in any grades 9-12 who have been absent at least 90 school attendance days of the previous 180 school attendance days.
    (l) For advertisements created after January 1, 2015 (the effective date of Public Act 98-783), any advertisement, including a radio, television, print, Internet, social media, or billboard advertisement, purchased by a school district or public school, including a charter school, with public funds must include a disclaimer stating that the advertisement was paid for using public funds.
    This disclaimer requirement does not extend to materials created by the charter school, including, but not limited to, a school website, informational pamphlets or leaflets, or clothing with affixed school logos.
(Source: P.A. 98-474, eff. 8-16-13; 98-783, eff. 1-1-15; 98-972, eff. 8-15-14; 99-78, eff. 7-20-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27A-5)
    Sec. 27A-5. Charter school; legal entity; requirements.
    (a) A charter school shall be a public, nonsectarian, nonreligious, non-home based, and non-profit school. A charter school shall be organized and operated as a nonprofit corporation or other discrete, legal, nonprofit entity authorized under the laws of the State of Illinois.
    (b) A charter school may be established under this Article by creating a new school or by converting an existing public school or attendance center to charter school status. Beginning on April 16, 2003 (the effective date of Public Act 93-3), in all new applications to establish a charter school in a city having a population exceeding 500,000, operation of the charter school shall be limited to one campus. The changes made to this Section by Public Act 93-3 do not apply to charter schools existing or approved on or before April 16, 2003 (the effective date of Public Act 93-3).
    (b-5) In this subsection (b-5), "virtual-schooling" means a cyber school where students engage in online curriculum and instruction via the Internet and electronic communication with their teachers at remote locations and with students participating at different times.
    From April 1, 2013 through December 31, 2016, there is a moratorium on the establishment of charter schools with virtual-schooling components in school districts other than a school district organized under Article 34 of this Code. This moratorium does not apply to a charter school with virtual-schooling components existing or approved prior to April 1, 2013 or to the renewal of the charter of a charter school with virtual-schooling components already approved prior to April 1, 2013.
    (c) A charter school shall be administered and governed by its board of directors or other governing body in the manner provided in its charter. The governing body of a charter school shall be subject to the Freedom of Information Act and the Open Meetings Act. No later than January 1, 2021 (one year after the effective date of Public Act 101-291), a charter school's board of directors or other governing body must include at least one parent or guardian of a pupil currently enrolled in the charter school who may be selected through the charter school or a charter network election, appointment by the charter school's board of directors or other governing body, or by the charter school's Parent Teacher Organization or its equivalent.
    (c-5) No later than January 1, 2021 (one year after the effective date of Public Act 101-291) or within the first year of his or her first term, every voting member of a charter school's board of directors or other governing body shall complete a minimum of 4 hours of professional development leadership training to ensure that each member has sufficient familiarity with the board's or governing body's role and responsibilities, including financial oversight and accountability of the school, evaluating the principal's and school's performance, adherence to the Freedom of Information Act and the Open Meetings Act, and compliance with education and labor law. In each subsequent year of his or her term, a voting member of a charter school's board of directors or other governing body shall complete a minimum of 2 hours of professional development training in these same areas. The training under this subsection may be provided or certified by a statewide charter school membership association or may be provided or certified by other qualified providers approved by the State Board of Education.
    (d) For purposes of this subsection (d), "non-curricular health and safety requirement" means any health and safety requirement created by statute or rule to provide, maintain, preserve, or safeguard safe or healthful conditions for students and school personnel or to eliminate, reduce, or prevent threats to the health and safety of students and school personnel. "Non-curricular health and safety requirement" does not include any course of study or specialized instructional requirement for which the State Board has established goals and learning standards or which is designed primarily to impart knowledge and skills for students to master and apply as an outcome of their education.
    A charter school shall comply with all non-curricular health and safety requirements applicable to public schools under the laws of the State of Illinois. On or before September 1, 2015, the State Board shall promulgate and post on its Internet website a list of non-curricular health and safety requirements that a charter school must meet. The list shall be updated annually no later than September 1. Any charter contract between a charter school and its authorizer must contain a provision that requires the charter school to follow the list of all non-curricular health and safety requirements promulgated by the State Board and any non-curricular health and safety requirements added by the State Board to such list during the term of the charter. Nothing in this subsection (d) precludes an authorizer from including non-curricular health and safety requirements in a charter school contract that are not contained in the list promulgated by the State Board, including non-curricular health and safety requirements of the authorizing local school board.
    (e) Except as otherwise provided in the School Code, a charter school shall not charge tuition; provided that a charter school may charge reasonable fees for textbooks, instructional materials, and student activities.
    (f) A charter school shall be responsible for the management and operation of its fiscal affairs including, but not limited to, the preparation of its budget. An audit of each charter school's finances shall be conducted annually by an outside, independent contractor retained by the charter school. To ensure financial accountability for the use of public funds, on or before December 1 of every year of operation, each charter school shall submit to its authorizer and the State Board a copy of its audit and a copy of the Form 990 the charter school filed that year with the federal Internal Revenue Service. In addition, if deemed necessary for proper financial oversight of the charter school, an authorizer may require quarterly financial statements from each charter school.
    (g) A charter school shall comply with all provisions of this Article, the Illinois Educational Labor Relations Act, all federal and State laws and rules applicable to public schools that pertain to special education and the instruction of English learners, and its charter. A charter school is exempt from all other State laws and regulations in this Code governing public schools and local school board policies; however, a charter school is not exempt from the following:
        (1) Sections 10-21.9 and 34-18.5 of this Code
    	
regarding criminal history records checks and checks of the Statewide Sex Offender Database and Statewide Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth Database of applicants for employment;
        (2) Sections 10-20.14, 10-22.6, 24-24, 34-19, and
    	
34-84a of this Code regarding discipline of students;
        (3) the Local Governmental and Governmental Employees
    	
Tort Immunity Act;
        (4) Section 108.75 of the General Not For Profit
    	
Corporation Act of 1986 regarding indemnification of officers, directors, employees, and agents;
        (5) the Abused and Neglected Child Reporting Act;
        (5.5) subsection (b) of Section 10-23.12 and
    	
subsection (b) of Section 34-18.6 of this Code;
        (6) the Illinois School Student Records Act;
        (7) Section 10-17a of this Code regarding school
    	
report cards;
        (8) the P-20 Longitudinal Education Data System Act;
        (9) Section 27-23.7 of this Code regarding bullying
    	
prevention;
        (10) Section 2-3.162 of this Code regarding student
    	
discipline reporting;
        (11) Sections 22-80 and 27-8.1 of this Code;
        (12) Sections 10-20.60 and 34-18.53 of this Code;
        (13) Sections 10-20.63 and 34-18.56 of this Code;
        (14) Section 26-18 of this Code;
        (15) Section 22-30 of this Code;
        (16) Sections 24-12 and 34-85 of this Code;
        (17) the Seizure Smart School Act; and
        (18) Section 2-3.64a-10 of this Code.
    The change made by Public Act 96-104 to this subsection (g) is declaratory of existing law.
    (h) A charter school may negotiate and contract with a school district, the governing body of a State college or university or public community college, or any other public or for-profit or nonprofit private entity for: (i) the use of a school building and grounds or any other real property or facilities that the charter school desires to use or convert for use as a charter school site, (ii) the operation and maintenance thereof, and (iii) the provision of any service, activity, or undertaking that the charter school is required to perform in order to carry out the terms of its charter. However, a charter school that is established on or after April 16, 2003 (the effective date of Public Act 93-3) and that operates in a city having a population exceeding 500,000 may not contract with a for-profit entity to manage or operate the school during the period that commences on April 16, 2003 (the effective date of Public Act 93-3) and concludes at the end of the 2004-2005 school year. Except as provided in subsection (i) of this Section, a school district may charge a charter school reasonable rent for the use of the district's buildings, grounds, and facilities. Any services for which a charter school contracts with a school district shall be provided by the district at cost. Any services for which a charter school contracts with a local school board or with the governing body of a State college or university or public community college shall be provided by the public entity at cost.
    (i) In no event shall a charter school that is established by converting an existing school or attendance center to charter school status be required to pay rent for space that is deemed available, as negotiated and provided in the charter agreement, in school district facilities. However, all other costs for the operation and maintenance of school district facilities that are used by the charter school shall be subject to negotiation between the charter school and the local school board and shall be set forth in the charter.
    (j) A charter school may limit student enrollment by age or grade level.
    (k) If the charter school is approved by the State Board or Commission, then the charter school is its own local education agency.
(Source: P.A. 100-29, eff. 1-1-18; 100-156, eff. 1-1-18; 100-163, eff. 1-1-18; 100-413, eff. 1-1-18; 100-468, eff. 6-1-18; 100-726, eff. 1-1-19; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18; 101-50, eff. 7-1-20; 101-81, eff. 7-12-19; 101-291, eff. 1-1-20; 101-531, eff. 8-23-19; 101-543, eff. 8-23-19; 101-654, eff. 3-8-21.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27A-5.5)
    Sec. 27A-5.5. Charter school truancy.
    (a) A charter school shall comply with all applicable absenteeism and truancy policies and requirements applicable to public schools under the laws of the State of Illinois.
    (b) A charter school shall define a truant as a child who is subject to compulsory school attendance and who is absent without valid cause from such attendance for a school day or portion thereof.
    (c) A charter school shall define a chronic or habitual truant as a child who is subject to compulsory school attendance and who is absent without valid cause from such attendance for 5% or more of the previous 180 regular attendance days.
    (d) A charter school shall define a truant minor as a chronic truant to whom supportive services, including prevention, diagnostic, intervention, and remedial services, alternative programs, and other school and community resources have been provided and have failed to result in the cessation of chronic truancy or have been offered and refused.
    (e) A charter school shall define a dropout as any child enrolled in grades 9 through 12 whose name has been removed from the charter school enrollment roster for any reason other than the student's death, extended illness, removal for medical non-compliance, expulsion, aging out, graduation, or completion of a program of studies and who has not transferred to another public or private school and is not known to be home-schooled by his or her parents or guardians or continuing school in another country.
(Source: P.A. 99-596, eff. 6-22-16.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27A-6)
    Sec. 27A-6. Contract contents; applicability of laws and regulations.
    (a) A certified charter shall constitute a binding contract and agreement between the charter school and a local school board under the terms of which the local school board authorizes the governing body of the charter school to operate the charter school on the terms specified in the contract.
    (b) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article, the certified charter may not waive or release the charter school from the State goals, standards, and assessments established pursuant to Section 2-3.64a-5 of this Code. Beginning with the 2003-2004 school year, the certified charter for a charter school operating in a city having a population exceeding 500,000 shall require the charter school to administer any other nationally recognized standardized tests to its students that the chartering entity administers to other students, and the results on such tests shall be included in the chartering entity's assessment reports.
    (c) Subject to the provisions of subsection (e), a material revision to a previously certified contract or a renewal shall be made with the approval of both the local school board and the governing body of the charter school.
    (c-5) The proposed contract shall include a provision on how both parties will address minor violations of the contract.
    (d) The proposed contract between the governing body of a proposed charter school and the local school board as described in Section 27A-7 must be submitted to and certified by the State Board before it can take effect. If the State Board recommends that the proposed contract be modified for consistency with this Article before it can be certified, the modifications must be consented to by both the governing body of the charter school and the local school board, and resubmitted to the State Board for its certification. If the proposed contract is resubmitted in a form that is not consistent with this Article, the State Board may refuse to certify the charter.
    The State Board shall assign a number to each submission or resubmission in chronological order of receipt, and shall determine whether the proposed contract is consistent with the provisions of this Article. If the proposed contract complies, the State Board shall so certify.
    (e) No renewal of a previously certified contract is effective unless and until the State Board certifies that the renewal is consistent with the provisions of this Article. A material revision to a previously certified contract may go into effect immediately upon approval of both the local school board and the governing body of the charter school, unless either party requests in writing that the State Board certify that the material revision is consistent with the provisions of this Article. If such a request is made, the proposed material revision is not effective unless and until the State Board so certifies.
(Source: P.A. 98-972, eff. 8-15-14; 98-1048, eff. 8-25-14; 99-78, eff. 7-20-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27A-6.5)
    Sec. 27A-6.5. Charter school referendum.
    (a) No charter shall go into effect under this Section that would convert any existing private, parochial, or non-public school to a charter school or whose proposal has not been certified by the State Board.
    (b) A local school board shall, whenever petitioned to do so by 5% or more of the voters of a school district or districts identified in a charter school proposal, order submitted to the voters thereof at a regularly scheduled election the question of whether a new charter school shall be established, which proposal has been found by the State Board to be in compliance with the provisions of this Article, and the secretary shall certify the proposition to the proper election authorities for submission in accordance with the general election law. The proposition shall be in substantially the following form:
        "FOR the establishment of (name of proposed charter
    	
school) under charter school proposal (charter school proposal number).
        AGAINST the establishment of (name of proposed
    	
charter school) under charter school proposal (charter school proposal number)".
    (c) Before circulating a petition to submit the question of whether to establish a charter school to the voters under subsection (b) of this Section, the governing body of a proposed charter school that desires to establish a new charter school by referendum shall submit the charter school proposal to the State Board in the form of a proposed contract to be entered into between the State Board and the governing body of the proposed charter school, together with written notice of the intent to have a new charter school established by referendum. The contract shall comply with the provisions of this Article.
    If the State Board finds that the proposed contract complies with the provisions of this Article, it shall immediately direct the local school board to notify the proper election authorities that the question of whether to establish a new charter school shall be submitted for referendum.
    (d) If the State Board finds that the proposal fails to comply with the provisions of this Article, it shall provide written explanation, detailing its reasons for refusal, to the local school board and to the individuals or organizations submitting the proposal. The State Board shall also notify the local school board and the individuals or organizations submitting the proposal that the proposal may be amended and resubmitted under the same provisions required for an original submission.
    (e) If a majority of the votes cast upon the proposition in each school district designated in the charter school proposal is in favor of establishing a charter school, the local school board shall notify the State Board of the passage of the proposition in favor of establishing a charter school and the State Board shall approve the charter within 7 days after the State Board of Elections has certified that a majority of the votes cast upon the proposition is in favor of establishing a charter school. The State Board shall be the chartering entity for charter schools established by referendum under this Section.
    (f) (Blank).
(Source: P.A. 101-543, eff. 8-23-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27A-7)
    Sec. 27A-7. Charter submission.
    (a) A proposal to establish a charter school shall be submitted to the local school board and the State Board for certification under Section 27A-6 of this Code in the form of a proposed contract entered into between the local school board and the governing body of a proposed charter school. The charter school proposal shall include:
        (1) The name of the proposed charter school, which
    	
must include the words "Charter School".
        (2) The age or grade range, areas of focus, minimum
    	
and maximum numbers of pupils to be enrolled in the charter school, and any other admission criteria that would be legal if used by a school district.
        (3) A description of and address for the physical
    	
plant in which the charter school will be located; provided that nothing in the Article shall be deemed to justify delaying or withholding favorable action on or approval of a charter school proposal because the building or buildings in which the charter school is to be located have not been acquired or rented at the time a charter school proposal is submitted or approved or a charter school contract is entered into or submitted for certification or certified, so long as the proposal or submission identifies and names at least 2 sites that are potentially available as a charter school facility by the time the charter school is to open.
        (4) The mission statement of the charter school,
    	
which must be consistent with the General Assembly's declared purposes; provided that nothing in this Article shall be construed to require that, in order to receive favorable consideration and approval, a charter school proposal demonstrate unequivocally that the charter school will be able to meet each of those declared purposes, it being the intention of the Charter Schools Law that those purposes be recognized as goals that charter schools must aspire to attain.
        (5) The goals, objectives, and pupil performance
    	
standards to be achieved by the charter school.
        (6) In the case of a proposal to establish a charter
    	
school by converting an existing public school or attendance center to charter school status, evidence that the proposed formation of the charter school has received the approval of certified teachers, parents and guardians, and, if applicable, a local school council as provided in subsection (b) of Section 27A-8.
        (7) A description of the charter school's educational
    	
program, pupil performance standards, curriculum, school year, school days, and hours of operation.
        (8) A description of the charter school's plan for
    	
evaluating pupil performance, the types of assessments that will be used to measure pupil progress towards achievement of the school's pupil performance standards, the timeline for achievement of those standards, and the procedures for taking corrective action in the event that pupil performance at the charter school falls below those standards.
        (9) Evidence that the terms of the charter as
    	
proposed are economically sound for both the charter school and the school district, a proposed budget for the term of the charter, a description of the manner in which an annual audit of the financial and administrative operations of the charter school, including any services provided by the school district, are to be conducted, and a plan for the displacement of pupils, teachers, and other employees who will not attend or be employed in the charter school.
        (10) A description of the governance and operation of
    	
the charter school, including the nature and extent of parental, professional educator, and community involvement in the governance and operation of the charter school.
        (11) An explanation of the relationship that will
    	
exist between the charter school and its employees, including evidence that the terms and conditions of employment have been addressed with affected employees and their recognized representative, if any. However, a bargaining unit of charter school employees shall be separate and distinct from any bargaining units formed from employees of a school district in which the charter school is located.
        (12) An agreement between the parties regarding their
    	
respective legal liability and applicable insurance coverage.
        (13) A description of how the charter school plans to
    	
meet the transportation needs of its pupils, and a plan for addressing the transportation needs of low-income and at-risk pupils.
        (14) The proposed effective date and term of the
    	
charter; provided that the first day of the first academic year shall be no earlier than August 15 and no later than September 15 of a calendar year, and the first day of the fiscal year shall be July 1.
        (14.5) Disclosure of any known active civil or
    	
criminal investigation by a local, state, or federal law enforcement agency into an organization submitting the charter school proposal or a criminal investigation by a local, state, or federal law enforcement agency into any member of the governing body of that organization. For the purposes of this subdivision (14.5), a known investigation means a request for an interview by a law enforcement agency, a subpoena, an arrest, or an indictment. Such disclosure is required for a period from the initial application submission through 10 business days prior to the authorizer's scheduled decision date.
        (15) Any other information reasonably required by the
    	
State Board of Education.
    (b) A proposal to establish a charter school may be initiated by individuals or organizations that will have majority representation on the board of directors or other governing body of the corporation or other discrete legal entity that is to be established to operate the proposed charter school, by a board of education or an intergovernmental agreement between or among boards of education, or by the board of directors or other governing body of a discrete legal entity already existing or established to operate the proposed charter school. The individuals or organizations referred to in this subsection may be school teachers, school administrators, local school councils, colleges or universities or their faculty members, public community colleges or their instructors or other representatives, corporations, or other entities or their representatives. The proposal shall be submitted to the local school board for consideration and, if appropriate, for development of a proposed contract to be submitted to the State Board for certification under Section 27A-6.
    (c) The local school board may not without the consent of the governing body of the charter school condition its approval of a charter school proposal on acceptance of an agreement to operate under State laws and regulations and local school board policies from which the charter school is otherwise exempted under this Article.
(Source: P.A. 98-739, eff. 7-16-14; 98-1048, eff. 8-25-14; 99-78, eff. 7-20-15; 99-334, eff. 8-10-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27A-7.5)
    Sec. 27A-7.5. State Charter School Commission; abolition and transfer to State Board.
    (a) A State Charter School Commission is established as an independent commission with statewide chartering jurisdiction and authority. The Commission shall be under the State Board for administrative purposes only.
    (a-5) The State Board shall provide administrative support to the Commission as needed.
    (b) The Commission is responsible for authorizing high-quality charter schools throughout this State, particularly schools designed to expand opportunities for at-risk students, consistent with the purposes of this Article.
    (c) The Commission shall consist of 9 members, appointed by the State Board. The State Board shall make these appointments from a slate of candidates proposed by the Governor, within 60 days after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 97th General Assembly with respect to the initial Commission members. In making the appointments, the State Board shall ensure statewide geographic diversity among Commission members. The Governor shall propose a slate of candidates to the State Board within 60 days after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 97th General Assembly and 60 days prior to the expiration of the term of a member thereafter. If the Governor fails to timely propose a slate of candidates according to the provisions of this subsection (c), then the State Board may appoint the member or members of the Commission.
    (d) Members appointed to the Commission shall collectively possess strong experience and expertise in public and nonprofit governance, management and finance, public school leadership, higher education, assessments, curriculum and instruction, and public education law. All members of the Commission shall have demonstrated understanding of and a commitment to public education, including without limitation charter schooling. At least 3 members must have past experience with urban charter schools.
    (e) To establish staggered terms of office, the initial term of office for 3 Commission members shall be 4 years and thereafter shall be 4 years; the initial term of office for another 3 members shall be 3 years and thereafter shall be 4 years; and the initial term of office for the remaining 3 members shall be 2 years and thereafter shall be 4 years. The initial appointments must be made no later than October 1, 2011.
    (f) Whenever a vacancy on the Commission exists, the State Board shall appoint a member for the remaining portion of the term.
    (g) Subject to the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act, the Commission is authorized to receive and expend gifts, grants, and donations of any kind from any public or private entity to carry out the purposes of this Article, subject to the terms and conditions under which they are given, provided that all such terms and conditions are permissible under law. Funds received under this subsection (g) must be deposited into the State Charter School Commission Fund.
    The State Charter School Commission Fund is created as a special fund in the State treasury. Until July 1, 2020, all money in the Fund shall be used, subject to appropriation, by the State Board, acting on behalf and with the consent of the Commission, for operational and administrative costs of the Commission. Beginning on July 1, 2020 through August 31, 2020, all money in the Fund shall be used, subject to appropriation, by the State Board for operational and administrative costs. On September 1, 2020, or as soon thereafter as practicable, in consultation with the State Board, the State Comptroller shall order transferred and the State Treasurer shall transfer all money in the State Charter School Commission Fund to the State Board of Education Special Purpose Trust Fund.
    Subject to appropriation, any funds appropriated for use by the State Board, acting on behalf and with the consent of the Commission, may be used for the following purposes, without limitation: personal services, contractual services, and other operational and administrative costs. The State Board is further authorized to make expenditures with respect to any other amounts deposited in accordance with law into the State Charter School Commission Fund.
    (g-5) Funds or spending authority for the operation and administrative costs of the Commission shall be appropriated to the State Board in a separate line item. The State Superintendent of Education may not reduce or modify the budget of the Commission or use funds appropriated to the Commission without the approval of the Commission.
    (h) The Commission shall operate with dedicated resources and staff qualified to execute the day-to-day responsibilities of charter school authorizing in accordance with this Article. The Commission may employ and fix the compensation of such employees and technical assistants as it deems necessary to carry out its powers and duties under this Article, without regard to the requirements of any civil service or personnel statute; and may establish and administer standards of classification of all such persons with respect to their compensation, duties, performance, and tenure and enter into contracts of employment with such persons for such periods and on such terms as the Commission deems desirable.
    (i) (Blank).
    (j) Until July 1, 2020, the Commission may charge a charter school that it authorizes a fee, not to exceed 3% of the revenue provided to the school, to cover the cost of undertaking the ongoing administrative responsibilities of the eligible chartering authority with respect to the school. This fee must be deposited into the State Charter School Commission Fund.
    Beginning on July 1, 2020, the State Board of Education may charge a charter school that it authorizes a fee not to exceed 3% of the revenue provided to the school to be used exclusively for covering the cost of authorizing activities. Authorizing activities may include, but are not limited to: (i) soliciting, reviewing, and taking action on charter school proposals; (ii) hiring, training, and supervising staff engaged in authorizing activities; (iii) developing and conducting oversight, including regular monitoring, of authorized charter schools; (iv) reporting on best practices and performances of charter schools; (v) applying for, managing, and distributing grants and funds appropriated for charter schools and authorizing activities; (vi) training members of the State Board on their authorizing roles; and (vii) training other employees of the State Board on how to work with charter schools as their own local education agencies.
    (k) On July 1, 2020, the State Charter School Commission is abolished and the terms of all members end. On that date, all of the powers, duties, assets, liabilities, contracts, property, records, and pending business of the Commission are transferred to the State Board. For purposes of the Successor Agency Act and Section 9b of the State Finance Act, the State Board is declared to be the successor agency of the Commission. Beginning on July 1, 2020, references in statutes, rules, forms, and other documents to the Commission shall, in appropriate contexts, be deemed to refer to the State Board. Standards and procedures of the Commission in effect on July 1, 2020 shall be deemed standards and procedures of the State Board and shall remain in effect until amended or repealed by the State Board.
    Beginning on the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 101st General Assembly, the Commission may not enter into or renew a contract, other than a charter renewal, that expires after July 1, 2020.
    On July 1, 2020, any charter school authorized by the State Charter School Commission prior to July 1, 2020 shall have its authorization transferred to the State Board, which shall then become the school's authorizer for all purposes under this Article. On July 1, 2020, all of the powers, duties, assets, liabilities, contracts, property, records, and pending business of the State Charter School Commission as the school's authorizer must be transferred to the State Board. At the end of its charter term, a charter school may reapply to the board or boards for authorization.
    On July 1, 2020, all rules of the State Board applicable to matters falling within the responsibility of the State Charter School Commission shall be applicable to the actions of the State Board.
    (l) In any appeal filed with the Commission under this Article, both the applicant and the school district in which the charter school plans to locate shall have the right to request a hearing before the Commission. If more than one entity requests a hearing, then the Commission may hold only one hearing, wherein the applicant and the school district shall have an equal opportunity to present their respective positions.
(Source: P.A. 101-543, eff. 8-23-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27A-7.10)
    Sec. 27A-7.10. Authorizer powers and duties; immunity; principles and standards.
    (a) Authorizers are responsible for executing, in accordance with this Article, all of the following powers and duties:
        (1) Soliciting and evaluating charter applications.
        (2) Approving quality charter applications that meet
    	
identified educational needs and promote a diversity of educational choices.
        (3) Declining to approve weak or inadequate charter
    	
applications.
        (4) Negotiating and executing sound charter contracts
    	
with each approved charter school.
        (5) Monitoring, in accordance with charter contract
    	
terms, the performance and legal compliance of charter schools.
        (6) Determining whether each charter contract merits
    	
renewal, nonrenewal, or revocation.
    (b) An authorizing entity may delegate its duties to officers, employees, and contractors.
    (c) Regulation by authorizers is limited to the powers and duties set forth in subsection (a) of this Section and must be consistent with the spirit and intent of this Article.
    (d) An authorizing entity, members of the local school board, the State Board, and the Commission, in their official capacity, and employees of an authorizer are immune from civil and criminal liability with respect to all activities related to a charter school that they authorize, except for willful or wanton misconduct.
    (e) The State Board, the Commission, and all local school boards that have a charter school operating are required to develop and maintain chartering policies and practices consistent with recognized principles and standards for quality charter authorizing in all major areas of authorizing responsibility, including all of the following:
        (1) Organizational capacity and infrastructure.
        (2) Soliciting and evaluating charter applications
    	
if applicable.
        (3) Performance contracting.
        (4) Ongoing charter school oversight and evaluation.
        (5) Charter renewal decision-making.
    Authorizers shall carry out all their duties under this Article in a manner consistent with nationally recognized principles and standards and with the spirit and intent of this Article.
(Source: P.A. 101-543, eff. 8-23-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27A-8)
    Sec. 27A-8. Evaluation of charter proposals.
    (a) This Section does not apply to a charter school established by referendum under Section 27A-6.5. In evaluating any charter school proposal submitted to it, the local school board shall give preference to proposals that:
        (1) demonstrate a high level of local pupil,
    	
parental, community, business, and school personnel support;
        (2) set rigorous levels of expected pupil achievement
    	
and demonstrate feasible plans for attaining those levels of achievement; and
        (3) are designed to enroll and serve a substantial
    	
proportion of at-risk children; provided that nothing in the Charter Schools Law shall be construed as intended to limit the establishment of charter schools to those that serve a substantial portion of at-risk children or to in any manner restrict, limit, or discourage the establishment of charter schools that enroll and serve other pupil populations under a nonexclusive, nondiscriminatory admissions policy.
    (b) In the case of a proposal to establish a charter school by converting an existing public school or attendance center to charter school status, evidence that the proposed formation of the charter school has received majority support from certified teachers and from parents and guardians in the school or attendance center affected by the proposed charter, and, if applicable, from a local school council, shall be demonstrated by a petition in support of the charter school signed by certified teachers and a petition in support of the charter school signed by parents and guardians and, if applicable, by a vote of the local school council held at a public meeting. In the case of all other proposals to establish a charter school, evidence of sufficient support to fill the number of pupil seats set forth in the proposal may be demonstrated by a petition in support of the charter school signed by parents and guardians of students eligible to attend the charter school. In all cases, the individuals, organizations, or entities who initiate the proposal to establish a charter school may elect, in lieu of including any petition referred to in this subsection as a part of the proposal submitted to the local school board, to demonstrate that the charter school has received the support referred to in this subsection by other evidence and information presented at the public meeting that the local school board is required to convene under this Section.
    (c) Within 45 days of receipt of a charter school proposal, the local school board shall convene a public meeting to obtain information to assist the board in its decision to grant or deny the charter school proposal. A local school board may develop its own process for receiving charter school proposals on an annual basis that follows the same timeframes as set forth in this Article. Final decisions of a local school board are subject to judicial review under the Administrative Review Law.
    (d) Notice of the public meeting required by this Section shall be published in a community newspaper published in the school district in which the proposed charter is located and, if there is no such newspaper, then in a newspaper published in the county and having circulation in the school district. The notices shall be published not more than 10 days nor less than 5 days before the meeting and shall state that information regarding a charter school proposal will be heard at the meeting. Copies of the notice shall also be posted at appropriate locations in the school or attendance center proposed to be established as a charter school, the public schools in the school district, and the local school board office.
    (e) Within 30 days of the public meeting, the local school board shall vote, in a public meeting, to either grant or deny the charter school proposal.
    (f) Within 7 days of the public meeting required under subsection (e) of this Section, the local school board shall file a report with the State Board granting or denying the proposal. If the local school board has approved the proposal, within 30 days of receipt of the local school board's report, the State Board shall determine whether the approved charter proposal is consistent with the provisions of this Article and, if the approved proposal complies, certify the proposal pursuant to Section 27A-6.
    (g) (Blank).
    (h) (Blank).
    (i) (Blank).
(Source: P.A. 101-543, eff. 8-23-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27A-9)
    Sec. 27A-9. Term of charter; renewal.
    (a) For charters granted before January 1, 2017 (the effective date of Public Act 99-840), a charter may be granted for a period not less than 5 and not more than 10 school years. For charters granted on or after January 1, 2017 (the effective date of Public Act 99-840), a charter shall be granted for a period of 5 school years. For charters renewed before January 1, 2017 (the effective date of Public Act 99-840), a charter may be renewed in incremental periods not to exceed 5 school years. For charters renewed on or after January 1, 2017 (the effective date of Public Act 99-840), a charter may be renewed in incremental periods not to exceed 10 school years; however, the State Board or Commission may renew a charter only in incremental periods not to exceed 5 years. Authorizers shall ensure that every charter granted on or after January 1, 2017 (the effective date of Public Act 99-840) includes standards and goals for academic, organizational, and financial performance. A charter must meet all standards and goals for academic, organizational, and financial performance set forth by the authorizer in order to be renewed for a term in excess of 5 years but not more than 10 years. If an authorizer fails to establish standards and goals, a charter shall not be renewed for a term in excess of 5 years. Nothing contained in this Section shall require an authorizer to grant a full 10-year renewal term to any particular charter school, but an authorizer may award a full 10-year renewal term to charter schools that have a demonstrated track record of improving student performance.
    (b) A charter school renewal proposal submitted to the local school board or the State Board or Commission, as the chartering entity, shall contain:
        (1) a report on the progress of the charter school in
    	
achieving the goals, objectives, pupil performance standards, content standards, and other terms of the initial approved charter proposal; and
        (2) a financial statement that discloses the costs of
    	
administration, instruction, and other spending categories for the charter school that is understandable to the general public and that will allow comparison of those costs to other schools or other comparable organizations, in a format required by the State Board.
    (c) A charter may be revoked or not renewed if the local school board or the State Board or Commission, as the chartering entity, clearly demonstrates that the charter school did any of the following, or otherwise failed to comply with the requirements of this law:
        (1) Committed a material violation of any of the
    	
conditions, standards, or procedures set forth in the charter.
        (2) Failed to meet or make reasonable progress toward
    	
achievement of the content standards or pupil performance standards identified in the charter.
        (3) Failed to meet generally accepted standards of
    	
fiscal management.
        (4) Violated any provision of law from which the
    	
charter school was not exempted.
    In the case of revocation, the local school board or the State Board or Commission, as the chartering entity, shall notify the charter school in writing of the reason why the charter is subject to revocation. The charter school shall submit a written plan to the local school board, the State Board, or the Commission, whichever is applicable, to rectify the problem. The plan shall include a timeline for implementation, which shall not exceed 2 years or the date of the charter's expiration, whichever is earlier. If the local school board or the State Board or Commission, as the chartering entity, finds that the charter school has failed to implement the plan of remediation and adhere to the timeline, then the chartering entity shall revoke the charter. Except in situations of an emergency where the health, safety, or education of the charter school's students is at risk, the revocation shall take place at the end of a school year. Nothing in Public Act 96-105 shall be construed to prohibit an implementation timetable that is less than 2 years in duration. No local school board may arbitrarily or capriciously revoke or not renew a charter. Except for extenuating circumstances outlined in this Section, if a local school board revokes or does not renew a charter, it must ensure that all students currently enrolled in the charter school are placed in schools that are higher performing than that charter school, as defined in the State's federal Every Student Succeeds Act accountability plan. In determining whether extenuating circumstances exist, a local school board must detail, by clear and convincing evidence, that factors unrelated to the charter school's accountability designation outweigh the charter school's academic performance.
    (d) (Blank).
    (e) Notice of a local school board's decision to deny, revoke, or not renew a charter shall be provided to the Commission and the State Board. Until July 1, 2020, the Commission may reverse a local board's decision to not renew a charter if the Commission finds that the charter school or charter school proposal (i) is in compliance with this Article, and (ii) is in the best interests of the students it is designed to serve. The Commission may condition the granting of an appeal on the acceptance by the charter school of funding in an amount less than that requested in the proposal submitted to the local school board. Final decisions of the Commission shall be subject to judicial review under the Administrative Review Law.
    The State Board may reverse a local board's decision to revoke or, beginning on July 1, 2020, not renew a charter if the State Board finds that the charter school or charter school proposal (i) is in compliance with this Article and (ii) is in the best interests of the students it is designed to serve. The State Board may condition the granting of an appeal on the acceptance by the charter school of funding in an amount less than that requested in the proposal submitted to the local school board. The State Board must appoint and utilize a hearing officer for any appeals conducted under this subsection. Final decisions of the State Board are subject to judicial review under the Administrative Review Law.
    (f) Notwithstanding other provisions of this Article, if the Commission on appeal reverses a local board's decision or if a charter school is approved by referendum, the Commission shall act as the authorized chartering entity for the charter school. The Commission shall approve the charter and shall perform all functions under this Article otherwise performed by the local school board. The State Board shall determine whether the charter proposal approved by the Commission is consistent with the provisions of this Article and, if the approved proposal complies, certify the proposal pursuant to this Article. The State Board shall report the aggregate number of charter school pupils resident in a school district to that district and shall notify the district of the amount of funding to be paid by the State Board to the charter school enrolling such students. The Commission shall require the charter school to maintain accurate records of daily attendance that shall be deemed sufficient to file claims under Section 18-8.15 notwithstanding any other requirements of that Section. The State Board shall withhold from funds otherwise due the district the funds authorized by this Article to be paid to the charter school and shall pay such amounts to the charter school.
    (g) For charter schools authorized by the Commission, the Commission shall quarterly certify to the State Board the student enrollment for each of its charter schools.
    (h) For charter schools authorized by the Commission, the State Board shall pay directly to a charter school any federal or State aid attributable to a student with a disability attending the school.
(Source: P.A. 100-201, eff. 8-18-17; 100-465, eff. 8-31-17; 101-543, eff. 8-23-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27A-10)
    Sec. 27A-10. Employees.
    (a) A person shall be deemed to be employed by a charter school unless a collective bargaining agreement or the charter school contract otherwise provides.
    (b) In all school districts, including special charter districts and districts located in cities having a population exceeding 500,000, the local school board shall determine by policy or by negotiated agreement, if one exists, the employment status of any school district employees who are employed by a charter school and who seek to return to employment in the public schools of the district. Each local school board shall grant, for a period of up to 5 years, a leave of absence to those of its teachers who accept employment with a charter school. At the end of the authorized leave of absence, the teacher must return to the school district or resign; provided that if the teacher chooses to return to the school district, the teacher must be assigned to a position that requires the teacher's licensure and legal qualifications. The contractual continued service status and retirement benefits of a teacher of the district who is granted a leave of absence to accept employment with a charter school shall not be affected by that leave of absence.
    (c) Charter schools shall employ in instructional positions, as defined in the charter, individuals who are licensed under Article 21B of this Code or who possess the following qualifications:
        (i) graduated with a bachelor's degree from an
    	
accredited institution of higher learning;
        (ii) been employed for a period of at least 5 years
    	
in an area requiring application of the individual's education;
        (iii) passed a content area knowledge test required
    	
under Section 21B-30 of this Code; and
        (iv) demonstrate continuing evidence of professional
    	
growth, which shall include, but not be limited to, successful teaching experience, attendance at professional meetings, membership in professional organizations, additional credits earned at institutions of higher learning, travel specifically for educational purposes, and reading of professional books and periodicals.
    (c-5) Charter schools employing individuals without licensure in instructional positions shall provide such mentoring, training, and staff development for those individuals as the charter schools determine necessary for satisfactory performance in the classroom.
    At least 50% of the individuals employed in instructional positions by a charter school that is operating in a city having a population exceeding 500,000 and that is established on or after April 16, 2003 shall hold teaching licenses issued under Article 21B of this Code.
    At least 75% of the individuals employed in instructional positions by a charter school that is operating in a city having a population exceeding 500,000 and that was established before April 16, 2003 shall hold teaching licenses issued under Article 21B of this Code.
    (c-10) Notwithstanding any provision in subsection (c-5) to the contrary, in any charter school established before, on, or after July 30, 2009 (the effective date of Public Act 96-105), at least 75% of the individuals employed in instructional positions by the charter school shall hold teaching licenses issued under Article 21B of this Code. Charter schools may employ non-licensed staff in all other positions.
    (c-15) Charter schools are exempt from any annual cap on new participants in an alternative educator licensure program. The second and third phases of the program may be conducted and completed at the charter school, and the alternative provisional educator endorsement is valid for 4 years or the length of the charter (or any extension of the charter), whichever is longer.
    (d) A teacher at a charter school may resign his or her position only if the teacher gives notice of resignation to the charter school's governing body at least 60 days before the end of the school term, and the resignation must take effect immediately upon the end of the school term.
(Source: P.A. 101-220, eff. 8-7-19; 101-594, eff. 12-5-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27A-10.5)
    Sec. 27A-10.5. Educational or charter management organization.
    (a) In this Section:
    "CMO" means a charter management organization.
    "EMO" means an educational management organization.
    (b) All authorizers shall ensure that any charter school established on or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 98th General Assembly has a governing body that is separate and distinct from the governing body of any CMO or EMO. In reviewing charter applications and charter renewal applications, authorizers shall review the governance model proposed by the applicant to ensure that there are no conflicts of interest.
    (c) No charter school may employ a staff person who is simultaneously employed by an EMO or CMO.
(Source: P.A. 98-783, eff. 1-1-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27A-10.10)
    Sec. 27A-10.10. Closure of charter school; unspent public funds; procedures for the disposition of property and assets.
    (a) Upon the closing of a charter school authorized by one or more local school boards, the governing body of the charter school or its designee shall refund to the chartering entity or entities all unspent public funds. The charter school's other property and assets shall be disposed of under the provisions of the charter application and contract. If the application and contract are silent or ambiguous as to the disposition of any of the school's property or assets, any property or assets of the charter school purchased with public funds shall be returned to the school district or districts from which the charter school draws enrollment, at no cost to the receiving district or districts, subject to each district's acceptance of the property or asset. Any unspent public funds or other property or assets received by the charter school directly from any State or federal agency shall be refunded to or revert back to that State or federal agency, respectively.
    (b) Upon the closing of a charter school authorized by the Commission, the governing body of the charter school or its designee shall refund all unspent public funds to the State Board of Education. The charter school's other property and assets shall be disposed of under the provisions of the charter application and contract. If the application and contract are silent or ambiguous as to the disposition of any of the school's property or assets, any property or assets of the charter school purchased with public funds shall be returned to the school district or districts from which the charter school draws its enrollment, at no cost to the receiving district or districts, subject to each district's acceptance of the property or asset. Any unspent public funds or other property or assets provided by a State agency other than the State Board of Education or by a federal agency shall be refunded to or revert back to that State or federal agency, respectively.
    (c) If a determination is made to close a charter school located within the boundaries of a school district organized under Article 34 of this Code for at least one school year, the charter school shall give at least 60 days' notice of the closure to all affected students and parents or legal guardians.
(Source: P.A. 100-179, eff. 8-18-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27A-11)
    Sec. 27A-11. Local financing.
    (a) For purposes of the School Code, pupils enrolled in a charter school shall be included in the pupil enrollment of the school district within which the pupil resides. Each charter school (i) shall determine the school district in which each pupil who is enrolled in the charter school resides, (ii) shall report the aggregate number of pupils resident of a school district who are enrolled in the charter school to the school district in which those pupils reside, and (iii) shall maintain accurate records of daily attendance that shall be deemed sufficient to file claims under Section 18-8 or 18-8.15 notwithstanding any other requirements of that Section regarding hours of instruction and teacher certification.
    (b) Except for a charter school established by referendum under Section 27A-6.5, as part of a charter school contract, the charter school and the local school board shall agree on funding and any services to be provided by the school district to the charter school. Agreed funding that a charter school is to receive from the local school board for a school year shall be paid in equal quarterly installments with the payment of the installment for the first quarter being made not later than July 1, unless the charter establishes a different payment schedule. However, if a charter school dismisses a pupil from the charter school after receiving a quarterly payment, the charter school shall return to the school district, on a quarterly basis, the prorated portion of public funding provided for the education of that pupil for the time the student is not enrolled at the charter school. Likewise, if a pupil transfers to a charter school between quarterly payments, the school district shall provide, on a quarterly basis, a prorated portion of the public funding to the charter school to provide for the education of that pupil.
    All services centrally or otherwise provided by the school district including, but not limited to, rent, food services, custodial services, maintenance, curriculum, media services, libraries, transportation, and warehousing shall be subject to negotiation between a charter school and the local school board and paid for out of the revenues negotiated pursuant to this subsection (b); provided that the local school board shall not attempt, by negotiation or otherwise, to obligate a charter school to provide pupil transportation for pupils for whom a district is not required to provide transportation under the criteria set forth in subsection (a)(13) of Section 27A-7.
    In no event shall the funding be less than 97% or more than 103% of the school district's per capita student tuition multiplied by the number of students residing in the district who are enrolled in the charter school.
    It is the intent of the General Assembly that funding and service agreements under this subsection (b) shall be neither a financial incentive nor a financial disincentive to the establishment of a charter school.
    The charter school may set and collect reasonable fees. Fees collected from students enrolled at a charter school shall be retained by the charter school.
    (c) Notwithstanding subsection (b) of this Section, the proportionate share of State and federal resources generated by students with disabilities or staff serving them shall be directed to charter schools enrolling those students by their school districts or administrative units. The proportionate share of moneys generated under other federal or State categorical aid programs shall be directed to charter schools serving students eligible for that aid.
    (d) The governing body of a charter school is authorized to accept gifts, donations, or grants of any kind made to the charter school and to expend or use gifts, donations, or grants in accordance with the conditions prescribed by the donor; however, a gift, donation, or grant may not be accepted by the governing body if it is subject to any condition contrary to applicable law or contrary to the terms of the contract between the charter school and the local school board. Charter schools shall be encouraged to solicit and utilize community volunteer speakers and other instructional resources when providing instruction on the Holocaust and other historical events.
    (e) (Blank).
    (f) The Commission shall provide technical assistance to persons and groups preparing or revising charter applications.
    (g) At the non-renewal or revocation of its charter, each charter school shall refund to the local board of education all unspent funds.
    (h) A charter school is authorized to incur temporary, short term debt to pay operating expenses in anticipation of receipt of funds from the local school board.
(Source: P.A. 99-78, eff. 7-20-15; 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27A-11.5)
    Sec. 27A-11.5. State financing. The State Board of Education shall make the following funds available to school districts and charter schools:
        (1) From a separate appropriation made to the State
    	
Board for purposes of this subdivision (1), the State Board shall make transition impact aid available to school districts that approve a new charter school or that have funds withheld by the State Board to fund a new charter school that is chartered by the Commission. The amount of the aid shall equal 90% of the per capita funding paid to the charter school during the first year of its initial charter term, 65% of the per capita funding paid to the charter school during the second year of its initial term, and 35% of the per capita funding paid to the charter school during the third year of its initial term. This transition impact aid shall be paid to the local school board in equal quarterly installments, with the payment of the installment for the first quarter being made by August 1st immediately preceding the first, second, and third years of the initial term. The district shall file an application for this aid with the State Board in a format designated by the State Board. If the appropriation is insufficient in any year to pay all approved claims, the impact aid shall be prorated. However, for fiscal year 2004, the State Board of Education shall pay approved claims only for charter schools with a valid charter granted prior to June 1, 2003. If any funds remain after these claims have been paid, then the State Board of Education may pay all other approved claims on a pro rata basis. Transition impact aid shall be paid beginning in the 1999-2000 school year for charter schools that are in the first, second, or third year of their initial term. Transition impact aid shall not be paid for any charter school that is proposed and created by one or more boards of education, as authorized under the provisions of Public Act 91-405.
        (2) From a separate appropriation made for the
    	
purpose of this subdivision (2), the State Board shall make grants to charter schools to pay their start-up costs of acquiring educational materials and supplies, textbooks, electronic textbooks and the technological equipment necessary to gain access to and use electronic textbooks, furniture, and other equipment or materials needed during their initial term. The State Board shall annually establish the time and manner of application for these grants, which shall not exceed $250 per student enrolled in the charter school.
        (3) The Charter Schools Revolving Loan Fund is
    	
created as a special fund in the State treasury. Federal funds, such other funds as may be made available for costs associated with the establishment of charter schools in Illinois, and amounts repaid by charter schools that have received a loan from the Charter Schools Revolving Loan Fund shall be deposited into the Charter Schools Revolving Loan Fund, and the moneys in the Charter Schools Revolving Loan Fund shall be appropriated to the State Board and used to provide interest-free loans to charter schools. These funds shall be used to pay start-up costs of acquiring educational materials and supplies, textbooks, electronic textbooks and the technological equipment necessary to gain access to and use electronic textbooks, furniture, and other equipment or materials needed in the initial term of the charter school and for acquiring and remodeling a suitable physical plant, within the initial term of the charter school. Loans shall be limited to one loan per charter school and shall not exceed $750 per student enrolled in the charter school. A loan shall be repaid by the end of the initial term of the charter school. The State Board may deduct amounts necessary to repay the loan from funds due to the charter school or may require that the local school board that authorized the charter school deduct such amounts from funds due the charter school and remit these amounts to the State Board, provided that the local school board shall not be responsible for repayment of the loan. The State Board may use up to 3% of the appropriation to contract with a non-profit entity to administer the loan program.
        (4) A charter school may apply for and receive,
    	
subject to the same restrictions applicable to school districts, any grant administered by the State Board that is available for school districts.
    If a charter school fails to make payments toward administrative costs, the State Board may withhold State funds from that school until it has made all payments for those costs.
(Source: P.A. 101-543, eff. 8-23-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27A-12)
    Sec. 27A-12. Evaluation; report. On or before September 30 of every odd-numbered year, all local school boards with at least one charter school, as well as the Commission, shall submit to the State Board any information required by the State Board pursuant to applicable rule. On or before the second Wednesday in January of every even-numbered year, the State Board shall issue a report to the General Assembly and the Governor on its findings for the previous 2 school years. The State Board's report shall summarize all of the following:
        (1) The authorizer's strategic vision for chartering
    	
and progress toward achieving that vision.
        (2) The academic and financial performance of all
    	
operating charter schools overseen by the authorizer, according to the performance expectations for charter schools set forth in this Article.
        (3) The status of the authorizer's charter school
    	
portfolio, identifying all charter schools in each of the following categories: approved (but not yet open), operating, renewed, transferred, revoked, not renewed, voluntarily closed, or never opened.
        (4) The authorizing functions provided by the
    	
authorizer to the charter schools under its purview, including the authorizer's operating costs and expenses detailed in annual audited financial statements, which must conform with generally accepted accounting principles.
    Further, in the report required by this Section, the State Board (i) shall compare the performance of charter school pupils with the performance of ethnically and economically comparable groups of pupils in other public schools who are enrolled in academically comparable courses, (ii) shall review information regarding the regulations and policies from which charter schools were released to determine if the exemptions assisted or impeded the charter schools in meeting their stated goals and objectives, and (iii) shall include suggested changes in State law necessary to strengthen charter schools.
    In addition, the State Board shall undertake and report on periodic evaluations of charter schools that include evaluations of student academic achievement, the extent to which charter schools are accomplishing their missions and goals, the sufficiency of funding for charter schools, and the need for changes in the approval process for charter schools.
    Based on the information that the State Board receives from authorizers and the State Board's ongoing monitoring of both charter schools and authorizers, the State Board has the power to remove the power to authorize from any authorizer in this State if the authorizer does not demonstrate a commitment to high-quality authorization practices and, if necessary, revoke the chronically low-performing charters authorized by the authorizer at the time of the removal. The State Board shall adopt rules as needed to carry out this power, including provisions to determine the status of schools authorized by an authorizer whose authorizing power is revoked.
(Source: P.A. 96-105, eff. 7-30-09; 97-152, eff. 7-20-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27A-13)
    Sec. 27A-13. Rules. The State Board of Education is authorized to adopt any rules not inconsistent with this Article that it deems necessary to implement and accomplish the purposes and provisions of this Article.
(Source: P.A. 89-450, eff. 4-10-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/27A-14)
    Sec. 27A-14. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 96-105, eff. 7-30-09. Repealed internally, eff. 1-10-10.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 28 heading)
ARTICLE 28. INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS

    (105 ILCS 5/28-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 28-1)
    Sec. 28-1. Copies and prices filed - Bond. No publisher or retail dealer shall offer any school instructional materials for adoption, sale, or exchange in the State until it has complied with the following conditions:
        1. The publisher or retail dealer shall publish on
    	
its website by July 15 each year a sworn statement of the usual list price, the lowest net wholesale price, and the lowest net exchange price at which the material is sold or exchanged for old material on the same subject of like grade and kind but of a different series taken in part payment thereof.
        2. The publisher or retail dealer shall obtain a
    	
bond payable to the People of the State of Illinois with a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Illinois as surety thereon of not less than $2,000 nor more than $10,000 conditioned as follows:
            (a) That the publisher or retail dealer will
        	
furnish annually any of the materials listed on the sworn statement on its website to any school district and any school corporation in this State at the lowest net prices contained in the statements and that it will maintain said prices uniformly throughout the State.
            (b) That the publisher or retail dealer will
        	
reduce such net prices in Illinois whenever they are reduced elsewhere in the United States, and shall publish on its website a sworn statement of reductions made elsewhere, so that at no time shall any instructional material so filed and listed by the publisher or retail dealer be sold in this State at a higher net price than is received for such material elsewhere in the United States.
            (c) The publisher or retail dealer shall not
        	
enter into any understanding, agreement or combination to control the prices or to restrict competition in the sale of instructional materials.
(Source: P.A. 101-17, eff. 6-14-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/28-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 28-2)
    Sec. 28-2. Approval of bond-Duration. The bond required by Section 28-1 shall be approved by the Attorney General and shall continue in force for 5 years after its filing, at or before the expiration of which period a new bond shall be given or the right to continue business within the State shall be forfeited.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/28-3)
    Sec. 28-3. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 81-1508. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/28-4) (from Ch. 122, par. 28-4)
    Sec. 28-4. Notice of violations - Proceedings for forfeiture of bond. The school board of each district wherein the instructional materials listed under the provisions of this Article have been adopted shall notify the State Board of Education of any violation of any of the conditions contained in said bond. The State Board of Education may thereupon notify the person guilty of the violation and if such person disregards the notification and fails to comply with the requirements of the contract, the State Board of Education may institute legal proceedings for the forfeiture of the bond.
(Source: P.A. 101-17, eff. 6-14-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/28-5) (from Ch. 122, par. 28-5)
    Sec. 28-5. Inducement to teacher or officer forbidden.
    No person shall secure or attempt to secure the sale of any school instructional materials in any school district by rewarding or promising to reward any teacher or by securing for him any position in any other school. No person shall offer to give any emolument, money or other valuable thing, promise of work or any other inducement to any teacher or school officer for any vote or promise of vote or for the use of his influence for any school instructional materials to be used in this State.
    This section does not prevent any person from submitting, or any school officer or teacher from receiving, a reasonable number of copies of printed instructional materials for examination with a view to obtaining information as to the book or series of books for which such officer shall give his vote.
(Source: P.A. 77-2180.)

    (105 ILCS 5/28-6)
    Sec. 28-6. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 96-1403, eff. 7-29-10. Repealed by P.A. 97-570, eff. 8-25-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/28-7) (from Ch. 122, par. 28-7)
    Sec. 28-7. Retail prices of books. It is unlawful for any retail dealer in textbooks to sell any books listed on the sworn statement published on the retail dealer's website at a price to exceed a 15% advance on the net prices as so listed.
(Source: P.A. 101-17, eff. 6-14-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/28-8) (from Ch. 122, par. 28-8)
    Sec. 28-8. Purchase by districts for resale at cost. School districts may purchase textbooks and electronic textbooks and the technological equipment necessary to gain access to and use electronic textbooks from the publishers and manufacturers at the prices listed on the sworn statement published on the retail dealer's website and sell them to the pupils at the listed prices or at such prices as will include the cost of transportation and handling.
(Source: P.A. 101-17, eff. 6-14-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/28-9) (from Ch. 122, par. 28-9)
    Sec. 28-9. Purchase by districts - Designation of agent for sale. School districts may purchase out of contingent funds school textbooks or electronic textbooks, instructional materials, and the technological equipment necessary to gain access to and use electronic textbooks from the publishers and manufacturers at the prices listed on the sworn statement published on the retail dealer's website and may designate a retail dealer or dealers to act as the agent of the district in selling them to pupils. Such dealers shall at stated times make settlement with the district for books sold. Such dealers shall not sell textbooks at prices which exceed a 10% advance on the net prices as listed on the sworn statement.
(Source: P.A. 101-17, eff. 6-14-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/28-10)
    Sec. 28-10. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31. Repealed by P.A. 97-570, eff. 8-25-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/28-11) (from Ch. 122, par. 28-11)
    Sec. 28-11. Penalties.
    Any dealer who violates the provisions of Sections 28--7 or 28--9 shall be guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $100.
    Whoever violates any of the provisions of the foregoing sections of this Article, except those of Sections 28--7 and 28--9, shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
(Source: P.A. 77-2267.)

    (105 ILCS 5/28-12)
    Sec. 28-12. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31. Repealed by P.A. 97-570, eff. 8-25-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/28-13) (from Ch. 122, par. 28-13)
    Sec. 28-13. Districts adopting provisions for free textbooks.
    The foregoing sections of this Article do not apply to school boards and school districts that have adopted the subsequent provisions of this Article.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/28-14) (from Ch. 122, par. 28-14)
    Sec. 28-14. Free textbooks - Referendum - Ballot. Any school board may, and whenever petitioned so to do by 5% or more of the voters of such district shall order submitted to the voters thereof at a regular scheduled election the question of furnishing free school textbooks or electronic textbooks for the use of pupils attending the public schools of the district, and the secretary shall certify the proposition to the proper election authorities for submission in accordance with the general election law. The proposition shall be in substantially the following form:
--------------------------------------------------------------
    FOR furnishing free textbooks or electronic textbooks in 
the public schools.
--------------------------------------------------------------
    AGAINST furnishing free textbooks or electronic textbooks
in the public schools.
--------------------------------------------------------------
    If a majority of the votes cast upon the proposition is in favor of furnishing free textbooks or electronic textbooks, the governing body shall provide, furnish and sell them as provided in Section 28-15, but no such books shall be sold until at least 1 year after the election. The furnishing of free textbooks or electronic textbooks when so adopted shall not be discontinued within 4 years, and thereafter only by a vote of the voters of the district upon the same conditions and in substantially the same manner as the vote for the adoption of free textbooks or electronic textbooks. No textbook or electronic textbook furnished under the provisions of this Article shall contain any denominational or sectarian matter.
(Source: P.A. 96-1403, eff. 7-29-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/28-15) (from Ch. 122, par. 28-15)
    Sec. 28-15. Textbooks provided and loaned to pupils-Sale to pupils. The governing body of every school district having voted in favor of furnishing free textbooks or electronic textbooks under the provisions of Sections 28-14 through 28-19 shall provide, at the expense of the district, textbooks or electronic textbooks for use in the public schools and loan them free to the pupils. Textbooks so furnished shall remain the property of the school district. The governing body shall also provide for the sale of such textbooks or electronic textbooks at cost to pupils of the schools in the district wishing to purchase them for their own use.
(Source: P.A. 96-1403, eff. 7-29-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/28-16)
    Sec. 28-16. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31. Repealed by P.A. 97-570, eff. 8-25-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/28-17)
    Sec. 28-17. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 96-1403, eff. 7-29-10. Repealed by P.A. 97-570, eff. 8-25-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/28-18) (from Ch. 122, par. 28-18)
    Sec. 28-18. Boards may jointly carry out law. School boards of two or more districts may jointly carry out the provisions of Sections 28-14 through 28-19.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/28-19) (from Ch. 122, par. 28-19)
    Sec. 28-19. Penalty for demanding or receiving money, promise or thing of value. Whoever directly or indirectly, demands or receives any money, promise or thing of value from any pupil, parent, guardian or caretaker of a pupil for any book provided in this Article, except as provided in Section 28-15 shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
(Source: P.A. 77-2267.)

    (105 ILCS 5/28-19.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 28-19.1)
    Sec. 28-19.1. Any member of the public may inspect all text and instructional material used in the public schools.
(Source: P.A. 81-625.)

    (105 ILCS 5/28-19.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 28-19.2)
    Sec. 28-19.2. (a) No discrimination or punishment of any kind, including the lowering of grades or exclusion from classes, may be exercised against a student whose parents or guardians are unable to purchase required textbooks or instructional materials or to pay required fees.
    (b) Any person who violates this Section is guilty of a petty offense.
(Source: P.A. 83-573.)

    (105 ILCS 5/28-19.5)
    Sec. 28-19.5. Funding for electronic format of textbooks. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a school district may use funding received pursuant to this Code to purchase textbooks or instructional materials in an electronic format or hard-bound format and the technological equipment necessary to gain access to and use electronic textbooks or instructional materials if both of the following conditions are met:
        (1) It can ensure that each pupil will be provided
    	
with a copy of the instructional materials to use at school and at home.
        (2) It will assist the pupil in comprehending the
    	
material.
Providing access to the materials at school and at home does not require the school district to purchase 2 sets of materials.
(Source: P.A. 96-1403, eff. 7-29-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/28-20) (from Ch. 122, par. 28-20)
    Sec. 28-20. Definitions.
    (a) For purposes of this Act the term instructional materials shall mean both print and non-print materials, including electronic textbooks, that are used in the educational process.
    (b) For purposes of this Article, "textbook" includes electronic or digital textbooks that are used for educational purposes.
(Source: P.A. 96-1403, eff. 7-29-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/28-21) (from Ch. 122, par. 28-21)
    Sec. 28-21. The State Board of Education shall require each publisher of any printed textbook or electronic textbook that is furnished at public expense under Sections 28-14 through 28-19 and is first published after July 19, 2006 to furnish, as provided in this Section, an accessible electronic file set of contracted print material to the National Instructional Materials Access Center, which shall then be available to the State Board of Education or its authorized user for the purpose of conversion to an accessible format for use by a child with a print disability and for distribution to local education agencies. An "accessible electronic file" means a file that conforms to specifications of the national file format adopted by the United States Department of Education. Other terms used in this Section shall be construed in compliance with the federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Act and related regulations.
(Source: P.A. 101-17, eff. 6-14-19.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 28A heading)
ARTICLE 28A. Education Purchasing Program.
(Source: P.A. 93-1036, eff. 9-14-04.)

    (105 ILCS 5/28A-5)
    Sec. 28A-5. Definitions. In this Article:
    "State Board" means the State Board of Education.
    "Education purchasing contract" means a contract negotiated by the State Board, a local, State, or federal governmental entity, or a not-for-profit, for-profit, or cooperative entity that is certified under Section 28A-15 of this Code and made available to school districts.
    "Master contract" means a contract designated as a statewide education master contract under Section 28A-15 of this Code.
    "Program" means the education purchasing program created under this Article.
(Source: P.A. 93-1036, eff. 9-14-04.)

    (105 ILCS 5/28A-10)
    Sec. 28A-10. Program created. The State Board shall create an education purchasing program. Under the program, the State Board shall designate itself or another entity to act as a State education purchasing entity to form and designate statewide education master contracts and to certify education purchasing contracts for key categories identified and defined by the State Board. The State education purchasing entity shall provide master contract and education purchasing contract information and pricing to school districts.
(Source: P.A. 93-1036, eff. 9-14-04.)

    (105 ILCS 5/28A-15)
    Sec. 28A-15. Powers of State education purchasing entity. The State education purchasing entity shall have all of the following powers:
        (1) To select vendors and form contracts in
    	
accordance with the State's purchasing laws.
        (2) To designate a contract as a statewide education
    	
master contract for purposes of subsection (c) of Section 10-20.21 of this Code.
        (3) To certify an education purchasing contract,
    	
provided that the contract was entered into according to procedures and conditions that conform to applicable State purchasing laws, for purposes of subsection (d) of Section 10-20.21 of this Code.
        (4) To facilitate the inter-district sale or
    	
transfer of excess inventory or equipment.
        (5) To select and subsidize e-procurement tools to
    	
be implemented within school districts.
(Source: P.A. 93-1036, eff. 9-14-04.)

    (105 ILCS 5/28A-20)
    Sec. 28A-20. Rules. The State Board or other State agency designated by the State Board may adopt rules to implement the program.
(Source: P.A. 93-1036, eff. 9-14-04.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 29 heading)
ARTICLE 29. TRANSPORTATION

    (105 ILCS 5/29-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 29-1)
    Sec. 29-1. Free transportation of pupils. School boards may provide free transportation for pupils, as prescribed in Section 10-22.22.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/29-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 29-2)
    Sec. 29-2. Transportation of pupils less than one and one-half miles from school. School boards may provide transportation for pupils living less than one and one-half miles as measured by the customary route of travel from the school attended and may make a charge for such transportation in an amount of not to exceed the cost thereof, which shall include a reasonable allowance for depreciation of the vehicles so used.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/29-3) (from Ch. 122, par. 29-3)
    Sec. 29-3. Transportation in school districts. School boards of community consolidated districts, community unit districts, consolidated districts, consolidated high school districts, optional elementary unit districts, combined high school - unit districts, combined school districts if the combined district includes any district which was previously required to provide transportation, and any newly created elementary or high school districts resulting from a high school - unit conversion, a unit to dual conversion, or a multi-unit conversion if the newly created district includes any area that was previously required to provide transportation shall provide free transportation for pupils residing at a distance of one and one-half miles or more from any school to which they are assigned for attendance maintained within the district, except for those pupils for whom the school board shall certify to the State Board of Education that adequate transportation for the public is available.
    For the purpose of this Act 1 1/2 miles distance shall be from the exit of the property where the pupil resides to the point where pupils are normally unloaded at the school attended; such distance shall be measured by determining the shortest distance on normally traveled roads or streets.
    Such school board may comply with the provisions of this Section by providing free transportation for pupils to and from an assigned school and a pick-up point located not more than one and one-half miles from the home of each pupil assigned to such point.
    For the purposes of this Act "adequate transportation for the public" shall be assumed to exist for such pupils as can reach school by walking, one way, along normally traveled roads or streets less than 1 1/2 miles irrespective of the distance the pupil is transported by public transportation.
    In addition to the other requirements of this Section, each school board may provide free transportation for any pupil residing within 1 1/2 miles from the school attended where conditions are such that walking, either to or from the school to which a pupil is assigned for attendance or to or from a pick-up point or bus stop, constitutes a serious hazard to the safety of the pupil due to either (i) vehicular traffic or rail crossings or (ii) a course or pattern of criminal activity, as defined in Section 10 of the Illinois Streetgang Terrorism Omnibus Prevention Act. Such transportation shall not be provided if adequate transportation for the public is available.
    The determination as to what constitutes a serious safety hazard shall be made by the school board, in accordance with guidelines promulgated by the Illinois Department of Transportation regarding vehicular traffic or rail crossings or in accordance with guidelines regarding a course or pattern of criminal activity, as determined by the local law enforcement agency, in consultation with the State Superintendent of Education. A school board, on written petition of the parent or guardian of a pupil for whom adequate transportation for the public is alleged not to exist because the pupil is required to walk along normally traveled roads or streets where walking is alleged to constitute a serious safety hazard due to either (i) vehicular traffic or rail crossings or (ii) a course or pattern of criminal activity, or who is required to walk between the pupil's home and assigned school or between the pupil's home or assigned school and a pick-up point or bus stop along roads or streets where walking is alleged to constitute a serious safety hazard due to either (i) vehicular traffic or rail crossings or (ii) a course or pattern of criminal activity, shall conduct a study and make findings, which the Department of Transportation, with respect to vehicular traffic or rail crossings, or the State Board of Education, in consultation with the local law enforcement agency, with respect to a course or pattern of criminal activity, shall review and approve or disapprove as provided in this Section, to determine whether a serious safety hazard exists as alleged in the petition. The Department of Transportation shall review the findings of the school board concerning vehicular traffic or rail crossings and shall approve or disapprove the school board's determination that a serious safety hazard exists within 30 days after the school board submits its findings to the Department of Transportation. The State Board of Education, in consultation with the local law enforcement agency, shall review the findings of the school board concerning a course or pattern of criminal activity and shall approve or disapprove the school board's determination that a serious safety hazard exists within 30 days after the school board submits its findings to the State Board. The school board shall annually review the conditions and determine whether or not the hazardous conditions remain unchanged. The State Superintendent of Education may request that the Illinois Department of Transportation or the local law enforcement agency verify that the conditions have not changed. No action shall lie against the school board, the State Superintendent of Education, the Illinois Department of Transportation, the State Board of Education, or a local law enforcement agency for decisions made in accordance with this Section. The provisions of the Administrative Review Law and all amendments and modifications thereof and the rules adopted pursuant thereto shall apply to and govern all proceedings instituted for the judicial review of final administrative decisions of the Department of Transportation, the State Board of Education, or a local law enforcement agency under this Section. At all points, except when otherwise mentioned in this Section, the local enforcement agency is authorized to determine what constitutes a course or pattern of criminal activity.
    The changes made to this Section by this amendatory Act of the 100th General Assembly do not apply to a school district organized under Article 34 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 100-1142, eff. 11-28-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/29-3.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 29-3.1)
    Sec. 29-3.1. Transportation to and from school sponsored activities.
    The school board of any school district that provides transportation for pupils to and from the school attended may provide transportation for pupils to and from any school sponsored activities in which pupils of the district participate, whether during the school year or not, and may make a charge for such transportation in an amount not to exceed the cost thereof, which may include a reasonable allowance for depreciation of the vehicles so used. The school board may provide transportation for pupils on bona fide field trips in Illinois or adjacent states.
(Source: P.A. 85-1148; 85-1389; 85-1440.)

    (105 ILCS 5/29-3.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 29-3.2)
    Sec. 29-3.2. Transportation to and from activities of private schools.
    The school board of any school district that provides transportation for pupils to and from the public schools may, by agreement with the officials of a non-public school, provide transportation, at times when the buses or other conveyances are not needed for public school student transportation, for students attending the non-public school to and from activities sponsored by that school. Such a school board providing transportation under this Section shall make a charge for furnishing that transportation in an amount not less than the cost thereof, including a reasonable allowance for the depreciation of each vehicle used in that transportation.
(Source: Laws 1967, p. 1228.)

    (105 ILCS 5/29-3.2a) (from Ch. 122, par. 29-3.2a)
    Sec. 29-3.2a. Transportation to and from summer school sessions.) The school board of any school district that provides transportation for pupils to and from the school attended may provide transportation for pupils to and from school during that period of the calendar year not embraced with the regular school term in which courses are taught for any pupils of the district who might participate, and may make a charge for such transportation in an amount not to exceed the cost thereof, which may include a reasonable allowance for depreciation of the vehicles so used; provided no charge shall be made for transportation of the types of children defined in Sections 14-1.02 through 14-1.07 of this Act and school boards providing such transportation shall be reimbursed pursuant to Section 14-13.01 of this Act.
(Source: P.A. 79-203.)

    (105 ILCS 5/29-3.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 29-3.3)
    Sec. 29-3.3. Transportation for pupils of other districts.
    The school board of any school district that provides transportation for pupils to and from the public schools may, pursuant to agreement with the school board of any other school district, provide transportation for pupils of that district to and from activities sponsored by any public school in that district, at times when buses or other conveyances used in such transportation are not needed for transporting pupils of the school district so providing that transportation. In providing such transportation for pupils of another district, the school board shall charge an amount not less than the cost of furnishing that transportation, including a reasonable allowance for depreciation on each vehicle so used.
(Source: Laws 1967, p. 3480.)

    (105 ILCS 5/29-3.4) (from Ch. 122, par. 29-3.4)
    Sec. 29-3.4. The school board of any school district may provide transportation services to children participating in or adults who are attending organized recreational, cultural, educational, and public service programs. The school board shall make a charge for such transportation in an amount equal to the cost thereof, which shall include a reasonable allowance for insurance premiums and depreciation of the vehicles so used. This Section shall not apply if such transportation services are offered by any public or private mass transit system engaged in the business of transporting people within the county or counties in which the school district is located in whole or in part and if such transit system has received or will receive funds provided by the "Mass Transportation Emergency Operating Assistance Act of 1973", adopted by the 78th General Assembly, or which receives or will receive funds from any other enactment of the General Assembly or from any unit of local government.
(Source: P.A. 79-506.)

    (105 ILCS 5/29-3.5) (from Ch. 122, par. 29-3.5)
    Sec. 29-3.5. Other use of school buses. The school board of any school district may provide transportation services to any non-profit organization for recreational, cultural, educational, and public service programs operated by the organization for the benefit of its members. Transportation shall be provided to non-profit organizations during times when the vehicles used are not needed for the transportation of students between school and their homes. The school board shall make a charge for such transportation in an amount equal to the cost thereof, which shall include a reasonable allowance for depreciation of the vehicles used. The school board is authorized to enter into contracts, leases, or agreements covering the use of transportation by non-profit organizations. The school board shall add to the charges made for the use of transportation a reasonable amount to cover any increase in insurance premiums incident to the use of transportation by the organization. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to terminate, either permanently or temporarily, the status of the vehicles used by the organization as school buses.
    Nothing in this Section shall be construed to permit any school district to provide transportation services in competition with any mass transit carrier.
(Source: P.A. 79-656.)

    (105 ILCS 5/29-4) (from Ch. 122, par. 29-4)
    Sec. 29-4. Pupils attending a charter school or nonpublic school. The school board of any school district that provides any school bus or conveyance for transporting pupils to and from the public schools shall afford transportation, without cost, for children who attend a charter school or any school other than a public school, who reside at least 1 1/2 miles from the school attended, and who reside on or along the highway constituting the regular route of such public school bus or conveyance, such transportation to extend from some point on the regular route nearest or most easily accessible to their homes to and from the school attended, or to or from a point on such regular route which is nearest or most easily accessible to the school attended by such children. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent high school districts from transporting public or non-public elementary school pupils on a regular route where deemed appropriate. The elementary district in which such pupils reside shall enter into a contractual agreement with the high school district providing the service, make payments accordingly, and make claims to the State in the amount of such contractual payments. The person in charge of any charter school or school other than a public school shall certify on a form to be provided by the State Superintendent of Education, the names and addresses of pupils transported and when such pupils were in attendance at the school. If any such children reside within 1 1/2 miles from the school attended, the school board shall afford such transportation to such children on the same basis as it provides transportation for its own pupils residing within that distance from the school attended.
    Nothing herein shall be construed to preclude a school district from operating separate regular bus routes, subject to the limitations of this Section, for the benefit of children who attend a charter school or any school other than a public school where the operation of such routes is safer, more economical and more efficient than if such school district were precluded from operating separate regular bus routes.
    If a school district is required by this Section to afford transportation without cost for any child who is not a resident of the district, the school district providing such transportation is entitled to reimbursement from the school district in which the child resides for the cost of furnishing that transportation, including a reasonable allowance for depreciation on each vehicle so used. The school district where the child resides shall reimburse the district providing the transportation for such costs, by the 10th of each month or on such less frequent schedule as may be agreed to by the 2 school districts.
(Source: P.A. 91-407, eff. 8-3-99.)

    (105 ILCS 5/29-5) (from Ch. 122, par. 29-5)
    Sec. 29-5. Reimbursement by State for transportation. Any school district, maintaining a school, transporting resident pupils to another school district's vocational program, offered through a joint agreement approved by the State Board of Education, as provided in Section 10-22.22 or transporting its resident pupils to a school which meets the standards for recognition as established by the State Board of Education which provides transportation meeting the standards of safety, comfort, convenience, efficiency and operation prescribed by the State Board of Education for resident pupils in kindergarten or any of grades 1 through 12 who: (a) reside at least 1 1/2 miles as measured by the customary route of travel, from the school attended; or (b) reside in areas where conditions are such that walking constitutes a hazard to the safety of the child when determined under Section 29-3; and (c) are transported to the school attended from pick-up points at the beginning of the school day and back again at the close of the school day or transported to and from their assigned attendance centers during the school day, shall be reimbursed by the State as hereinafter provided in this Section.
    The State will pay the cost of transporting eligible pupils less the prior year assessed valuation in a dual school district maintaining secondary grades 9 to 12 inclusive times a qualifying rate of .05%; in elementary school districts maintaining grades K to 8 times a qualifying rate of .06%; and in unit districts maintaining grades K to 12, including optional elementary unit districts and combined high school - unit districts, times a qualifying rate of .07%; provided that for optional elementary unit districts and combined high school - unit districts, prior year assessed valuation for high school purposes, as defined in Article 11E of this Code, must be used. To be eligible to receive reimbursement in excess of 4/5 of the cost to transport eligible pupils, a school district shall have a Transportation Fund tax rate of at least .12%. If a school district does not have a .12% Transportation Fund tax rate, the amount of its claim in excess of 4/5 of the cost of transporting pupils shall be reduced by the sum arrived at by subtracting the Transportation Fund tax rate from .12% and multiplying that amount by the district's prior year equalized or assessed valuation, provided, that in no case shall said reduction result in reimbursement of less than 4/5 of the cost to transport eligible pupils.
    The minimum amount to be received by a district is $16 times the number of eligible pupils transported.
    When calculating the reimbursement for transportation costs, the State Board of Education may not deduct the number of pupils enrolled in early education programs from the number of pupils eligible for reimbursement if the pupils enrolled in the early education programs are transported at the same time as other eligible pupils.
    Any such district transporting resident pupils during the school day to an area vocational school or another school district's vocational program more than 1 1/2 miles from the school attended, as provided in Sections 10-22.20a and 10-22.22, shall be reimbursed by the State for 4/5 of the cost of transporting eligible pupils.
    School day means that period of time during which the pupil is required to be in attendance for instructional purposes.
    If a pupil is at a location within the school district other than his residence for child care purposes at the time for transportation to school, that location may be considered for purposes of determining the 1 1/2 miles from the school attended.
    Claims for reimbursement that include children who attend any school other than a public school shall show the number of such children transported.
    Claims for reimbursement under this Section shall not be paid for the transportation of pupils for whom transportation costs are claimed for payment under other Sections of this Act.
    The allowable direct cost of transporting pupils for regular, vocational, and special education pupil transportation shall be limited to the sum of the cost of physical examinations required for employment as a school bus driver; the salaries of full-time or part-time drivers and school bus maintenance personnel; employee benefits excluding Illinois municipal retirement payments, social security payments, unemployment insurance payments and workers' compensation insurance premiums; expenditures to independent carriers who operate school buses; payments to other school districts for pupil transportation services; pre-approved contractual expenditures for computerized bus scheduling; expenditures for housing assistance and homeless prevention under Sections 1-17 and 1-18 of the Education for Homeless Children Act that are not in excess of the school district's actual costs for providing transportation services and are not otherwise claimed in another State or federal grant that permits those costs to a parent, a legal guardian, any other person who enrolled a pupil, or a homeless assistance agency that is part of the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act's continuum of care for the area in which the district is located; the cost of gasoline, oil, tires, and other supplies necessary for the operation of school buses; the cost of converting buses' gasoline engines to more fuel efficient engines or to engines which use alternative energy sources; the cost of travel to meetings and workshops conducted by the regional superintendent or the State Superintendent of Education pursuant to the standards established by the Secretary of State under Section 6-106 of the Illinois Vehicle Code to improve the driving skills of school bus drivers; the cost of maintenance of school buses including parts and materials used; expenditures for leasing transportation vehicles, except interest and service charges; the cost of insurance and licenses for transportation vehicles; expenditures for the rental of transportation equipment; plus a depreciation allowance of 20% for 5 years for school buses and vehicles approved for transporting pupils to and from school and a depreciation allowance of 10% for 10 years for other transportation equipment so used. Each school year, if a school district has made expenditures to the Regional Transportation Authority or any of its service boards, a mass transit district, or an urban transportation district under an intergovernmental agreement with the district to provide for the transportation of pupils and if the public transit carrier received direct payment for services or passes from a school district within its service area during the 2000-2001 school year, then the allowable direct cost of transporting pupils for regular, vocational, and special education pupil transportation shall also include the expenditures that the district has made to the public transit carrier. In addition to the above allowable costs school districts shall also claim all transportation supervisory salary costs, including Illinois municipal retirement payments, and all transportation related building and building maintenance costs without limitation.
    Special education allowable costs shall also include expenditures for the salaries of attendants or aides for that portion of the time they assist special education pupils while in transit and expenditures for parents and public carriers for transporting special education pupils when pre-approved by the State Superintendent of Education.
    Indirect costs shall be included in the reimbursement claim for districts which own and operate their own school buses. Such indirect costs shall include administrative costs, or any costs attributable to transporting pupils from their attendance centers to another school building for instructional purposes. No school district which owns and operates its own school buses may claim reimbursement for indirect costs which exceed 5% of the total allowable direct costs for pupil transportation.
    The State Board of Education shall prescribe uniform regulations for determining the above standards and shall prescribe forms of cost accounting and standards of determining reasonable depreciation. Such depreciation shall include the cost of equipping school buses with the safety features required by law or by the rules, regulations and standards promulgated by the State Board of Education, and the Department of Transportation for the safety and construction of school buses provided, however, any equipment cost reimbursed by the Department of Transportation for equipping school buses with such safety equipment shall be deducted from the allowable cost in the computation of reimbursement under this Section in the same percentage as the cost of the equipment is depreciated.
    On or before August 15, annually, the chief school administrator for the district shall certify to the State Superintendent of Education the district's claim for reimbursement for the school year ending on June 30 next preceding. The State Superintendent of Education shall check and approve the claims and prepare the vouchers showing the amounts due for district reimbursement claims. Each fiscal year, the State Superintendent of Education shall prepare and transmit the first 3 vouchers to the Comptroller on the 30th day of September, December and March, respectively, and the final voucher, no later than June 20.
    If the amount appropriated for transportation reimbursement is insufficient to fund total claims for any fiscal year, the State Board of Education shall reduce each school district's allowable costs and flat grant amount proportionately to make total adjusted claims equal the total amount appropriated.
    For purposes of calculating claims for reimbursement under this Section for any school year beginning July 1, 1998, or thereafter, the equalized assessed valuation for a school district used to compute reimbursement shall be computed in the same manner as it is computed under paragraph (2) of subsection (G) of Section 18-8.05.
    All reimbursements received from the State shall be deposited into the district's transportation fund or into the fund from which the allowable expenditures were made.
    Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any school district receiving a payment under this Section or under Section 14-7.02, 14-7.02b, or 14-13.01 of this Code may classify all or a portion of the funds that it receives in a particular fiscal year or from general State aid pursuant to Section 18-8.05 of this Code as funds received in connection with any funding program for which it is entitled to receive funds from the State in that fiscal year (including, without limitation, any funding program referenced in this Section), regardless of the source or timing of the receipt. The district may not classify more funds as funds received in connection with the funding program than the district is entitled to receive in that fiscal year for that program. Any classification by a district must be made by a resolution of its board of education. The resolution must identify the amount of any payments or general State aid to be classified under this paragraph and must specify the funding program to which the funds are to be treated as received in connection therewith. This resolution is controlling as to the classification of funds referenced therein. A certified copy of the resolution must be sent to the State Superintendent of Education. The resolution shall still take effect even though a copy of the resolution has not been sent to the State Superintendent of Education in a timely manner. No classification under this paragraph by a district shall affect the total amount or timing of money the district is entitled to receive under this Code. No classification under this paragraph by a district shall in any way relieve the district from or affect any requirements that otherwise would apply with respect to that funding program, including any accounting of funds by source, reporting expenditures by original source and purpose, reporting requirements, or requirements of providing services.
    Any school district with a population of not more than 500,000 must deposit all funds received under this Article into the transportation fund and use those funds for the provision of transportation services.
(Source: P.A. 100-332, eff. 8-25-17; 100-465, eff. 8-31-17; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/29-5.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 29-5.2)
    Sec. 29-5.2. Reimbursement of transportation.
    (a) Reimbursement. A custodian of a qualifying pupil shall be entitled to reimbursement in accordance with procedures established by the State Board of Education for qualified transportation expenses paid by such custodian during the school year.
    (b) Definitions. As used in this Section:
        (1) "Qualifying pupil" means an individual referred
    	
to in subsection (c), as well as an individual who:
            (A) is a resident of the State of Illinois; and
            (B) is under the age of 21 at the close of the
        	
school year for which reimbursement is sought; and
            (C) during the school year for which
        	
reimbursement is sought was a full-time pupil enrolled in a kindergarten through 12th grade educational program at a school which was a distance of 1 1/2 miles or more from the residence of such pupil; and
            (D) did not live within 1 1/2 miles from the
        	
school in which the pupil was enrolled or have access to transportation provided entirely at public expense to and from that school and a point within 1 1/2 miles of the pupil's residence, measured in a manner consistent with Section 29-3.
        (2) "Qualified transportation expenses" means costs
    	
reasonably incurred by the custodian to transport, for the purposes of attending regularly scheduled day-time classes, a qualifying pupil between such qualifying pupil's residence and the school at which such qualifying pupil is enrolled, as limited in subsection (e) of this Section, and shall include automobile expenses at the standard mileage rate allowed by the United States Internal Revenue Service as reimbursement for business transportation expense, as well as payments to mass transit carriers, private carriers, and contractual fees for transportation.
        (3) "School" means a public or nonpublic elementary
    	
or secondary school in Illinois, attendance at which satisfies the requirements of Section 26-1.
        (4) One and one-half miles distance. For the purposes
    	
of this Section, 1 1/2 miles distance shall be measured in a manner consistent with Section 29-3.
        (5) Custodian. The term "custodian" shall mean, with
    	
respect to a qualifying pupil, an Illinois resident who is the parent, or parents, or legal guardian of such qualifying pupil.
    (c) An individual, resident of the State of Illinois, who is under the age of 21 at the close of the school year for which reimbursement is sought and who, during that school year, was a full time pupil enrolled in a kindergarten through 12th grade educational program at a school which was within 1 1/2 miles of the pupil's residence, measured in a manner consistent with Section 29-3, is a "qualifying pupil" within the meaning of this Section if (i) such pupil attends public school in a school district organized under Article 34 of this Code and must walk or otherwise travel along a safe passage route, as designated by the school board, to reach school or return home or (ii) such pupil did not have access to transportation provided entirely at public expense to and from that school and the pupil's residence and conditions were such that walking would have constituted a serious hazard to the safety of the pupil due to vehicular traffic. The determination of what constitutes a serious safety hazard within the meaning of this subsection shall in each case be made by the Department of Transportation in accordance with guidelines which the Department, in consultation with the State Superintendent of Education, shall promulgate. Each custodian intending to file an application for reimbursement under subsection (d) for expenditures incurred or to be incurred with respect to a pupil asserted to be a qualified pupil as an individual referred to in this subsection shall first file with the appropriate regional superintendent, on forms provided by the State Board of Education, a request for a determination that a serious safety hazard within the meaning of this subsection (c) exists with respect to such pupil. Custodians shall file such forms with the appropriate regional superintendents not later than February 1 of the school year for which reimbursement will be sought for transmittal by the regional superintendents to the Department of Transportation not later than February 15; except that any custodian who previously received a determination that a serious safety hazard exists need not resubmit such a request for 4 years but instead may certify on their application for reimbursement to the State Board of Education referred to in subsection (d), that the conditions found to be hazardous, as previously determined by the Department, remain unchanged. The Department shall make its determination on all requests so transmitted to it within 30 days, and shall thereupon forward notice of each determination which it has made to the appropriate regional superintendent for immediate transmittal to the custodian affected thereby. The determination of the Department relative to what constitutes a serious safety hazard within the meaning of subsection (c) with respect to any pupil shall be deemed an "administrative decision" as defined in Section 3-101 of the Administrative Review Law; and the Administrative Review Law and all amendments and modifications thereof and rules adopted pursuant thereto shall apply to and govern all proceedings instituted for the judicial review of final administrative decisions of the Department of Transportation under this subsection.
    (d) Request for reimbursement. A custodian, including a custodian for a pupil asserted to be a qualified pupil as an individual referred to in subsection (c), who applies in accordance with procedures established by the State Board of Education shall be reimbursed in accordance with the dollar limits set out in this Section. Such procedures shall require application no later than June 30 of each year, documentation as to eligibility, and adequate evidence of expenditures; except that for reimbursement sought pursuant to subsection (c) for the 1985-1986 school year, such procedures shall require application within 21 days after the determination of the Department of Transportation with respect to that school year is transmitted by the regional superintendent to the affected custodian. In the absence of contemporaneous records, an affidavit by the custodian may be accepted as evidence of an expenditure. If the amount appropriated for such reimbursement for any year is less than the amount due each custodian, it shall be apportioned on the basis of the requests approved. Regional Superintendents shall be reimbursed for such costs of administering the program, including costs incurred in administering the provisions of subsection (c), as the State Board of Education determines are reasonable and necessary.
    (e) Dollar limit on amount of reimbursement. Reimbursement to custodians for transportation expenses incurred during the 1985-1986 school year, payable in fiscal year 1987, shall be equal to the lesser of (1) the actual qualified transportation expenses, or (2) $50 per pupil. Reimbursement to custodians for transportation expenses incurred during the 1986-1987 school year, payable in fiscal year 1988, shall be equal to the lesser of (1) the actual qualified transportation expenses, or (2) $100 per pupil. For reimbursements of qualified transportation expenses incurred in 1987-1988 and thereafter, the amount of reimbursement shall not exceed the prior year's State reimbursement per pupil for transporting pupils as required by Section 29-3 and other provisions of this Article.
    (f) Rules and regulations. The State Board of Education shall adopt rules to implement this Section.
    (g) The provisions of this amendatory Act of 1986 shall apply according to their terms to the entire 1985-1986 school year, including any portion of that school year which elapses prior to the effective date of this amendatory Act, and to each subsequent school year.
    (h) The chief administrative officer of each school shall notify custodians of qualifying pupils that reimbursements are available. Notification shall occur by the first Monday in November of the school year for which reimbursement is available.
(Source: P.A. 98-1057, eff. 1-1-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/29-6) (from Ch. 122, par. 29-6)
    Sec. 29-6. Inter-district contracts for transportation.
    Any school district, including any non-high school district, may contract at actual cost with 1 or more school districts for the transportation of pupils to and from the school attended.
(Source: P.A. 78-1245.)

    (105 ILCS 5/29-6.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 29-6.1)
    Sec. 29-6.1. Contracts for transportation. Subject to Section 6-106.11 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, school boards may enter into contracts for up to 3 years for transportation of pupils to and from school. Such contracts may be extended for up to 2 additional years by mutual agreement of the parties, and thereafter may be extended on a year-to-year basis by mutual agreement of the parties, however no such contract may be extended on a year-to-year basis if a school board receives a timely request from another interested contractor that a contract be let by bid.
(Source: P.A. 84-768.)

    (105 ILCS 5/29-6.3)
    Sec. 29-6.3. Transportation to and from specified interscholastic or school-sponsored activities.
    (a) Any school district transporting students in grade 12 or below for an interscholastic, interscholastic athletic, or school-sponsored, noncurriculum-related activity that (i) does not require student participation as part of the educational services of the district and (ii) is not associated with the students' regular class-for-credit schedule or required 5 clock hours of instruction under Section 10-19.05 shall transport the students only in a school bus, a vehicle manufactured to transport not more than 10 persons, including the driver, or a multifunction school-activity bus manufactured to transport not more than 15 persons, including the driver.
    (a-5) A student in any of grades 9 through 12 may be transported in a multi-function school activity bus (MFSAB) as defined in Section 1-148.3a-5 of the Illinois Vehicle Code for any curriculum-related activity except for transportation on regular bus routes from home to school or from school to home, subject to the following conditions:
        (i) A MFSAB may not be used to transport students
    	
under this Section unless the driver holds a valid school bus driver permit.
        (ii) The use of a MFSAB under this Section is subject
    	
to the requirements of Sections 6-106.11, 6-106.12, 12-707.01, 13-101, and 13-109 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
    (b) Any school district furnishing transportation for students under the authority of this Section shall insure against any loss or liability of the district resulting from the maintenance, operation, or use of the vehicle.
    (c) Vehicles used to transport students under this Section may claim a depreciation allowance of 20% over 5 years as provided in Section 29-5 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 101-12, eff. 7-1-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/29-6.4)
    Sec. 29-6.4. Non-contract transportation; bids; reimbursement. A school board of a school district that provides transportation of its pupils to and from school on buses that are owned by the district that are operated by drivers who are employed by the district shall, if it receives a timely request from an interested private school bus contractor that the district provide that transportation under contract, solicit sealed bids for that purpose. A district or special education cooperative is not required to respond to such a request more than once every 2 years. A request shall not be considered timely if it is made more than 24 months or less than 3 months before the expiration of the collective bargaining or other agreement that is in effect at the time the request is made and that governs the terms and conditions of employment of the school bus drivers employed by the district. All requests shall be made in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the school board of the district at the administrative offices or any school of the district. At the conclusion of the bidding process, the school board shall publicly announce the district's fully allocated costs of providing transportation of its pupils to and from school under its present system and thereupon may (i) elect to enter into a contract as provided in Section 29-6.1 with the lowest responsible bidder for transportation of the district's pupils to and from school or (ii) elect to continue providing transportation of its pupils to and from school under its present system. In the event the school board elects to continue providing transportation of the district's pupils to and from school under its present system even though the district's fully allocated costs of doing so exceed the amount of the lowest responsible bid received by the school board for transportation of the district's pupils to and from school, the school board shall publicly announce at a regularly scheduled meeting of the board held within 30 days after making its election to continue providing pupil transportation under its present system (i) the fully allocated costs of providing transportation of the district's pupils to and from school under its present system, and (ii) the amount of each of the sealed bids submitted to the school board, identifying which of the sealed bid amounts was the lowest responsible bid.
    As used in this Section the term "fully allocated costs" includes both the fixed and variable direct costs of the labor, capital, and material resources that are used by the school district exclusively for purposes of providing transportation of the district's pupils to and from school plus that portion of the district's shared costs as is fairly allocable to the products, services, and facilities necessary to provide transportation of the district's pupils to and from school. Direct costs of labor, capital, and material resources used exclusively to provide pupil transportation include the wages, payroll costs, and associated fringe benefits of school bus drivers, mechanics, and any supervisory or administrative personnel whose services relate exclusively to pupil transportation personnel or services, fuel, lubricants, tires, tubes, related material costs incurred in providing pupil transportation, depreciation costs associated with school buses and other vehicles, including spare vehicles, used to provide pupil transportation, and costs of facilities and equipment maintained exclusively to service, garage, or park vehicles used for pupil transportation purposes. "Shared costs" means the aggregate cost of the labor, capital, and material resources that are used in common by the district for a multiplicity of purposes, including the purpose of providing transportation of the district's pupils to and from school. The costs of the management, administration, and underlying infrastructure that support a multiplicity of services provided by the school district (including pupil transportation services) constitute shared costs within the meaning of this Section, and to the extent they are fairly allocable to pupil transportation services they are included within the term fully allocated costs as used in this Section. The State Board of Education shall promulgate rules setting forth the manner in which a district's fully allocated costs of providing transportation of its pupils to and from school under a non-contractual system shall be determined and computed for purposes of this Section. However, those rules shall be consistent with the provisions of this paragraph and shall follow recognized principles of fully allocated costing analysis in the transit industry, including generally accepted methods of identifying and estimating the principal cost elements of maintaining and operating a pupil transportation system.
(Source: P.A. 93-953, eff. 1-1-05.)

    (105 ILCS 5/29-9) (from Ch. 122, par. 29-9)
    Sec. 29-9. Liability insurance.
    Any school district, including any non-high school district, which provides transportation for pupils shall insure against any loss or liability of such district, its agents or employees, resulting from or incident to the ownership, maintenance or use of any school bus. Such insurance shall be carried only in companies duly licensed and authorized to write such coverage in this State and in compliance with the provisions of Section 12-707 of "The Illinois Vehicle Code", approved September 29, 1969, as now or hereafter amended.
(Source: P.A. 78-310.)

    (105 ILCS 5/29-15) (from Ch. 122, par. 29-15)
    Sec. 29-15. Subject to the provisions of Section 10-22.8 of this Act, school districts, which own buses or other vehicular equipment for the transportation of pupils to or from school within such district, may sell or lease such buses or equipment to a Mass Transit District organized under the Local Mass Transit District Act or to an Urban Transportation District organized under the Urban Transportation District Act. Such districts may contract with a Mass Transit District or an Urban Transportation District for the transportation of pupils to and from the schools of such districts at a consideration to be determined by negotiation between the parties. Such contracts shall otherwise be subject to the provisions of this Article.
(Source: P.A. 77-1492.)

    (105 ILCS 5/29-16) (from Ch. 122, par. 29-16)
    Sec. 29-16. The school board of any school district which owns buses or other vehicular equipment for the transportation of pupils may rent such buses or equipment to the county board of any county in which it is situated to provide public transportation services pursuant to the "Downstate Public Transportation Act". The school board may rent such buses and equipment to the county board only for use during times when such buses or equipment are not needed for transporting pupils of the school district. A school board renting school buses or other vehicular equipment under this Section shall make a charge for furnishing such buses or other vehicular equipment in an amount not less than the cost thereof, including a reasonable allowance for the depreciation of each vehicle used.
    This amendatory Act is not a limitation upon the contractual and associational powers granted by Section 10 of Article VII of the Constitution.
(Source: P.A. 78-1109.)

    (105 ILCS 5/29-17)
    Sec. 29-17. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 85-1010. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07; 95-496, eff. 8-28-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/29-18)
    Sec. 29-18. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 90-756, eff. 8-14-98. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/29-20)
    Sec. 29-20. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 98-907, eff. 8-15-14. Repealed internally, eff. 1-1-16.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 30 heading)
ARTICLE 30. SCHOLARSHIPS

    (105 ILCS 5/30-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 30-1)
    Sec. 30-1. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 88-228, eff. 7-1-94.)

    (105 ILCS 5/30-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 30-2)
    Sec. 30-2. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 88-228, eff. 7-1-94.)

    (105 ILCS 5/30-3) (from Ch. 122, par. 30-3)
    Sec. 30-3. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 88-228, eff. 7-1-94.)

    (105 ILCS 5/30-4)
    Sec. 30-4. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 77-1311.)

    (105 ILCS 5/30-4a) (from Ch. 122, par. 30-4a)
    Sec. 30-4a. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 88-228, eff. 7-1-94.)

    (105 ILCS 5/30-4b) (from Ch. 122, par. 30-4b)
    Sec. 30-4b. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 88-228, eff. 7-1-94.)

    (105 ILCS 5/30-4c) (from Ch. 122, par. 30-4c)
    Sec. 30-4c. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 88-228, eff. 7-1-94.)

    (105 ILCS 5/30-4d) (from Ch. 122, par. 30-4d)
    Sec. 30-4d. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 88-228, eff. 7-1-94.)

    (105 ILCS 5/30-4e) (from Ch. 122, par. 30-4e)
    Sec. 30-4e. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 88-228, eff. 7-1-94.)

    (105 ILCS 5/30-6)
    Sec. 30-6. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 77-1311. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/30-7)
    Sec. 30-7. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 77-1311.)

    (105 ILCS 5/30-8)
    Sec. 30-8. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 77-1311.)

    (105 ILCS 5/30-9) (from Ch. 122, par. 30-9)
    Sec. 30-9. General Assembly scholarship; conditions of admission; award by competitive examination.
(Source: P.A. 97-772, eff. 7-11-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/30-10) (from Ch. 122, par. 30-10)
    Sec. 30-10. Filing nominations-Failure to accept or pass-Second nomination.
(Source: P.A. 97-772, eff. 7-11-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/30-11) (from Ch. 122, par. 30-11)
    Sec. 30-11. Failure to use scholarship - Further nominations.
(Source: P.A. 97-772, eff. 7-11-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/30-12) (from Ch. 122, par. 30-12)
    Sec. 30-12. Failure to begin or discontinuance of course because of military service.
(Source: P.A. 97-772, eff. 7-11-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/30-12.5)
    Sec. 30-12.5. Waiver of confidentiality.
(Source: P.A. 97-772, eff. 7-11-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/30-13) (from Ch. 122, par. 30-13)
    Sec. 30-13. Use of scholarship at public university.
(Source: P.A. 97-772, eff. 7-11-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/30-13.5)
    Sec. 30-13.5. General Assembly scholarship program abolished. Before September 1, 2012, each member of the General Assembly may nominate persons to receive a scholarship or certificate of scholarship under Sections 30-9, 30-10, 30-11, 30-12, 30-12.5, and 30-13 of this Code as they existed before the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 97th General Assembly. A person nominated to receive or awarded such a scholarship or certificate before September 1, 2012 is entitled to the scholarship under the terms of Sections 30-9, 30-10, 30-11, 30-12, 30-12.5, and 30-13 of this Code as they existed before the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 97th General Assembly and Section 30-14 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 97-772, eff. 7-11-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/30-14) (from Ch. 122, par. 30-14)
    Sec. 30-14. Leaves of absence to holders of scholarships.
    Any student enrolled in a university to which he is holding a scholarship issued under this Article who satisfies the president of the university or someone designated by him, that he requires leave of absence for the purpose of earning funds to defray his expenses while in attendance or on account of illness or military service may be granted such leave and allowed a period of not to exceed 6 years in which to complete his course at the university. The university shall notify the county superintendent of the county from which the scholarship was issued of the granting of the leave. Time spent in the armed forces shall not be part of the 6 years.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/30-14.1)
    Sec. 30-14.1. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 77-1311. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/30-14.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 30-14.2)
    Sec. 30-14.2. MIA/POW scholarships.
    (a) Any spouse, natural child, legally adopted child, or step-child of an eligible veteran or serviceperson who possesses all necessary entrance requirements shall, upon application and proper proof, be awarded a MIA/POW Scholarship consisting of the equivalent of 4 calendar years of full-time enrollment including summer terms, to the state supported Illinois institution of higher learning of his choice, subject to the restrictions listed below.
    "Eligible veteran or serviceperson" means any veteran or serviceperson, including an Illinois National Guard member who is on active duty or is active on a training assignment, who has been declared by the U.S. Department of Defense or the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs to be a prisoner of war, be missing in action, have died as the result of a service-connected disability or have become a person with a permanent disability from service-connected causes with 100% disability and who (i) at the time of entering service was an Illinois resident, (ii) was an Illinois resident within 6 months after entering such service, or (iii) is a resident of Illinois at the time of application for the Scholarship and, at some point after leaving such service, was a resident of Illinois for at least 15 consecutive years.
    Full-time enrollment means 12 or more semester hours of courses per semester, or 12 or more quarter hours of courses per quarter, or the equivalent thereof per term. Scholarships utilized by dependents enrolled in less than full-time study shall be computed in the proportion which the number of hours so carried bears to full-time enrollment.
    Scholarships awarded under this Section may be used by a spouse or child without regard to his or her age. The holder of a Scholarship awarded under this Section shall be subject to all examinations and academic standards, including the maintenance of minimum grade levels, that are applicable generally to other enrolled students at the Illinois institution of higher learning where the Scholarship is being used. If the surviving spouse remarries or if there is a divorce between the veteran or serviceperson and his or her spouse while the dependent is pursuing his or her course of study, Scholarship benefits will be terminated at the end of the term for which he or she is presently enrolled. Such dependents shall also be entitled, upon proper proof and application, to enroll in any extension course offered by a State supported Illinois institution of higher learning without payment of tuition and approved fees.
    The holder of a MIA/POW Scholarship authorized under this Section shall not be required to pay any matriculation or application fees, tuition, activities fees, graduation fees or other fees, except multipurpose building fees or similar fees for supplies and materials.
    Any dependent who has been or shall be awarded a MIA/POW Scholarship shall be reimbursed by the appropriate institution of higher learning for any fees which he or she has paid and for which exemption is granted under this Section if application for reimbursement is made within 2 months following the end of the school term for which the fees were paid.
    (b) In lieu of the benefit provided in subsection (a), any spouse, natural child, legally adopted child, or step-child of an eligible veteran or serviceperson, which spouse or child has a physical, mental or developmental disability, shall be entitled to receive, upon application and proper proof, a benefit to be used for the purpose of defraying the cost of the attendance or treatment of such spouse or child at one or more appropriate therapeutic, rehabilitative or educational facilities. The application and proof may be made by the parent or legal guardian of the spouse or child on his or her behalf.
    The total benefit provided to any beneficiary under this subsection shall not exceed the cost equivalent of 4 calendar years of full-time enrollment, including summer terms, at the University of Illinois. Whenever practicable in the opinion of the Department of Veterans' Affairs, payment of benefits under this subsection shall be made directly to the facility, the cost of attendance or treatment at which is being defrayed, as such costs accrue.
    (c) The benefits of this Section shall be administered by and paid for out of funds made available to the Illinois Department of Veterans' Affairs. The amounts that become due to any state supported Illinois institution of higher learning shall be payable by the Comptroller to such institution on vouchers approved by the Illinois Department of Veterans' Affairs. The amounts that become due under subsection (b) of this Section shall be payable by warrant upon vouchers issued by the Illinois Department of Veterans' Affairs and approved by the Comptroller. The Illinois Department of Veterans' Affairs shall determine the eligibility of the persons who make application for the benefits provided for in this Section.
(Source: P.A. 100-201, eff. 8-18-17; 101-334, eff. 8-9-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/30-14.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 30-14.3)
    Sec. 30-14.3. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 88-228, eff. 7-1-94.)

    (105 ILCS 5/30-14.5) (from Ch. 122, par. 30-14.5)
    Sec. 30-14.5. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 88-228, eff. 7-1-94.)

    (105 ILCS 5/30-14.6) (from Ch. 122, par. 30-14.6)
    Sec. 30-14.6. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 88-228, eff. 7-1-94.)

    (105 ILCS 5/30-14.7) (from Ch. 122, par. 30-14.7)
    Sec. 30-14.7. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 88-228, eff. 7-1-94.)

    (105 ILCS 5/30-14.8)
    Sec. 30-14.8. Christa McAuliffe Fellowship Program.
    (a) The General Assembly finds that the Christa McAuliffe federal fellowship is an award expressly and exclusively for the benefit of one or more elementary or secondary teachers, provides funding for a sabbatical for the recipient of the fellowship, has no express relationship to post-secondary educational benefits under State and federal grant and loan programs administered by the Illinois Student Assistance Commission (hereinafter in this Section sometimes referred to as the "Commission"), and therefore is a program that from and after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1995 should be administered in this State by the State Board of Education.
    (b) There is hereby transferred to the State Board of Education from the Illinois Student Assistance Commission all authority and responsibility exercised by the Commission before the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1995 with respect to the administration within this State of the Christa McAuliffe federal fellowship program. From and after the effective date of this amendatory Act, the State Board of Education shall administer on behalf of the State of Illinois and in accordance with all applicable rules and regulations the conduct and operation of the Christa McAuliffe federal fellowship program within this State.
    (c) The Illinois Student Assistance Commission shall transfer to the State Board of Education, as successor to the Commission for all purposes of administering the Christa McAuliffe federal fellowship program, all books, accounts, records, papers, documents, contracts, agreements, and pending business in the possession or under the control of the Commission and relating to its administration of the Christa McAuliffe fellowship program in this State. All pending applications made before the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1995 for scholarship awards under the Christa McAuliffe fellowship program and all scholarships awarded under that program before the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1995 shall be unaffected by the transfer to the State Board of Education of all responsibilities and authority formerly exercised by the Commission with respect to that program. The Commission shall furnish to the State Board of Education such other information as the State Board of Education may request to assist it in administering this Section.
(Source: P.A. 89-106, eff. 7-7-95.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/prec. Sec. 30-15 heading)
HIGHER EDUCATION STUDENT ASSISTANCE LAW

    (105 ILCS 5/30-15.25) (from Ch. 122, par. 30-15.25)
    Sec. 30-15.25. (a) As used in this Section, the term "public institution of higher education" includes: the University of Illinois; Southern Illinois University; Chicago State University; Eastern Illinois University; Governors State University; Illinois State University; Northeastern Illinois University; Northern Illinois University; Western Illinois University; the public community colleges of the State; and any other public universities, colleges and community colleges now or hereafter established or authorized by the General Assembly. The term "nonpublic institution of higher education" includes any educational organization in this State, other than a public institution of higher education, which provides a minimum of an organized 2 year program at the private junior college level or higher and which operates not-for-profit and in conformity with standards substantially equivalent to those of public institutions of higher education.
    (b) Each public institution of higher education shall disclose the terms, restrictions and requirements attached to or made a part of any endowment, gift, grant, contract award or property of any kind or value in excess of $100,000 made to such institution, or to any school, college, division, branch or other organizational entity within or forming a part of such institution, by a foreign government or an individual who is neither a citizen nor a resident of the United States, in any calendar or fiscal year. If the foreign government or individual donates more than one gift in any calendar or fiscal year, and the total value of those gifts exceeds $100,000, such institution shall report all the gifts received. This subsection shall not apply to funds that public institutions of higher education receive from grants and contracts through either the federal government or the State of Illinois.
    (c) The provisions of this subsection apply to each nonpublic institution of higher education: (i) which receives any grant or award under the Illinois Financial Assistance Act for Nonpublic Institutions of Higher Learning or under the Higher Education Cooperation Act, or (ii) which is a participant in a program of interinstitutional cooperation administered by a not-for-profit organization that is organized to administer such program under the Higher Education Cooperation Act and that receives any grant under and in furtherance of the purposes of that Act, or (iii) which receives any grant or distribution of grant moneys appropriated from the State Treasury or any fund therein to such institution or to the Board of Higher Education for distribution to nonpublic institutions of higher education for purposes of Section 4 of the Build Illinois Bond Act or for any other purpose authorized by law. Each nonpublic institution of higher education to which the provisions of this subsection apply shall disclose the terms, restrictions and requirements attached to or made a part of any endowment, gift, grant, contract award or property of any kind or value in excess of $250,000 made to such institution, or to any school, college, division, branch or other organizational entity within or forming a part of such institution, by a foreign government or an individual who is neither a citizen nor a resident of the United States, in any calendar or fiscal year. If the foreign government or individual donates more than one gift in any calendar or fiscal year, and the total value of those gifts exceeds $250,000, such institution shall report all the gifts received.
    (d) Such information shall be forwarded to the Attorney General no later than 30 days after the final day of each calendar or fiscal year of such institution, whichever type of year is used by the institution in accounting for the gifts received for the purposes of this Section. The information shall include:
        (1) the name of the foreign government in the case of
    	
a gift by a government, or the name of the foreign country of which an individual donor is a citizen, in the case of a gift by an individual;
        (2) the amount and the date of the contribution or
    	
contributions;
        (3) when the gift is conditional, matching or
    	
designated for a particular purpose, full details of the conditions, matching provisions or designation; and
        (4) the purpose or purposes for which the
    	
contribution will be used.
    Such information shall be a matter of public record.
(Source: P.A. 89-4, eff. 1-1-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/30-16.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 30-16.1)
    Sec. 30-16.1. Purpose. The General Assembly has found and hereby declares that it is essential for the national defense and for the defense of the State of Illinois that among those residents of this State receiving higher education, provisions should be made for Reserve Officer's Training Corps training, in order to provide officers for the several Armed Forces of the United States of America and to that end, that scholarships should be furnished to eligible residents, in order to encourage their participation in the Reserve Officer's Training Corps programs.
(Source: P.A. 79-768.)

    (105 ILCS 5/30-16.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 30-16.2)
    Sec. 30-16.2. Eligible recipients. Those residents of the State of Illinois whose scholastic standing will enable them to enroll in the Reserve Officer's Training Corps programs of the several Armed Forces available at universities supported by the State of Illinois, are considered as eligible recipients for scholarships set forth in Section 30-16.3.
(Source: P.A. 79-768.)

    (105 ILCS 5/30-16.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 30-16.3)
    Sec. 30-16.3. Availability of Scholarships. Scholarships shall be awarded on the following basis:
    (a) One scholastic scholarship to an eligible recipient from each private junior college and public community college which has a total enrollment of less than 500 students.
    (b) Two scholarships to eligible recipients from each private junior college and public community college which has an enrollment of 500 or more, but less than 1,000, students.
    (c) Three scholarships to eligible recipients from private junior colleges and public community colleges having an enrollment of 1,000, or more, students.
    (d) The equivalent of 10 scholarships per class, per branch of service, each academic year, to eligible recipients.
(Source: P.A. 91-503, eff. 8-13-99.)

    (105 ILCS 5/30-16.4) (from Ch. 122, par. 30-16.4)
    Sec. 30-16.4. Privileges Conferred. The scholarships issued under Sections 30-16.1 through 30-16.6, inclusive, of this Article, may be used at those State supported universities where there are provided Reserve Officer's Training Corps programs of the several Armed Services over a period during which the eligible recipient is eligible for enrollment in the program. The scholarships exempt the holder from the payment of tuition, or any matriculation, graduation, activity, term or incidental fee, except any portion of a multi-purpose fee which is used for a purpose for which exemption is not granted under this Section. Exemption may not be granted for any other fees including book rental, service, laboratory, supply, Union Building, hospital and medical insurance fees and any fees established for the operation and maintenance of buildings, the income of which is pledged to the payment of interest and principal, or bonds issued by the governing board of the universities.
    Any student who has been or is awarded a scholarship shall be reimbursed by the appropriate university for any fees which he has paid and for which exemption is granted under this Section, if application for such reimbursement is made within 2 months following the school term for which the fees were paid.
    The holder of a scholarship is subject to all examinations, rules and requirements of the university in which he is enrolled, except as herein directed.
    The provisions of Sections 30-16.1 through 30-16.6 of this Act do not prohibit the Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois, the Board of Trustees of Southern Illinois University, the Board of Trustees of Chicago State University, the Board of Trustees of Eastern Illinois University, the Board of Trustees of Governors State University, the Board of Trustees of Illinois State University, the Board of Trustees of Northeastern Illinois University, the Board of Trustees of Northern Illinois University, and the Board of Trustees of Western Illinois University from granting other scholarships.
(Source: P.A. 89-4, eff. 1-1-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/30-16.5) (from Ch. 122, par. 30-16.5)
    Sec. 30-16.5. Leaves of absence to holders of scholarships. Any student enrolled in a university to which he is requesting a scholarship issued under the provisions of Section 30-16.3 of this Act who satisfies the President of the University, or someone designated by him, that he requires leave of absence while in attendance, or on account of illness, or military service, may be granted such leave and allowed a period of not to exceed 6 years, in which to complete his course at the university. Time spent in the armed services is not a part of the 6 years.
(Source: P.A. 79-768.)

    (105 ILCS 5/30-16.6) (from Ch. 122, par. 30-16.6)
    Sec. 30-16.6. Registration of eligible recipients; examination. The president or chairman of the board of each private junior college or public community college, and the President of each University in which a Reserve Officer's Training Corps program is available, or some individual or committee designated by such person, shall receive and register the names of all eligible recipients applying for the scholarships set forth in Section 30-16.3. Applicants shall take an examination each year according to the rules prescribed jointly by the President of the University of Illinois, the President of Southern Illinois University, the President of Chicago State University, the President of Eastern Illinois University, the President of Governors State University, the President of Illinois State University, the President of Northeastern Illinois University, the President of Northern Illinois University, and the President of Western Illinois University. The scholarships shall be awarded on a merit basis to those eligible recipients receiving the highest grades with evidence of leadership ability, and the number of scholarships to be awarded in any institution shall be as set forth in Section 30-16.3.
(Source: P.A. 89-4, eff. 1-1-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/30-17) (from Ch. 122, par. 30-17)
    Sec. 30-17. Revocation of Scholarship Because of Misconduct. If the holder of any scholarship funded in whole or in part by this State, whether granted by the State Scholarship Commission, granted pursuant to any of Sections 30-1 through 30-16.6 or otherwise granted by any State supported college or university and whether used at a State-supported institution of higher learning or at a private institution, participates in any disorderly disturbance or course of conduct directed against the administration or policies of such an institution using means which are not protected by the constitution of this State or of the United States, his scholarship is thereupon revoked and no further payments under that scholarship may be made to him or on his behalf, notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary.
    The initial determination as to whether the means employed in a course of conduct are not protected by the Constitution of this State or of the United States shall be made by the chief executive officer of the institution at which the scholarship recipient is enrolled. No revocation shall take place until the recipient of the scholarship to be revoked is afforded the opportunity to present evidence against revocation to the chief executive officer or his representatives, either in person, in writing, or by counsel of his choice.
(Source: P.A. 76-1580.)

    (105 ILCS 5/30-17.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 30-17.1)
    Sec. 30-17.1. Scholarships-Draft Registration. Each applicant for any student financial aid funded in whole or in part by this State, whether granted by the Illinois Student Assistance Commission, granted pursuant to any of Sections 30-1 through 30-16.6 or otherwise granted by any State supported college or university, and whether to be used at a State supported institution of higher learning or at a private institution, shall submit to the institution he or she is attending Selective Service registration compliance documentation as required by Part 668 of Title 34 of the Code of Federal Regulations. If an applicant for or holder of any such student financial aid fails to submit documentation in the manner and within the time allowed, any pending application of such person for the award, grant, or renewal of any such student financial aid shall be denied, and any such student financial aid currently held by such person shall be revoked to the extent that no further payments under that student financial aid may be made. Procedures for notification and administrative review shall be consistent with Part 668 of Title 34 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
(Source: P.A. 86-169.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 31 heading)
ARTICLE 31. FRATERNITIES--SORORITIES

    (105 ILCS 5/31-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 31-1)
    Sec. 31-1. Definition.
    A public school fraternity, sorority or secret society, in this Article means any organization, composed wholly or in part of public school pupils, which seeks to perpetuate itself by taking in additional members from the pupils enrolled in such school on the basis of the decision of its membership rather than upon the free choice of any pupil in the school who is qualified by the rules of the school to fill the special aims of the organization.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/31-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 31-2)
    Sec. 31-2. Inimical to public good.
    Any public school fraternity, sorority or secret society is inimical to the public good.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/31-3) (from Ch. 122, par. 31-3)
    Sec. 31-3. Suspension or expulsion of members, pledges and solicitors.
    The governing body of any public school shall suspend or expel any pupil who is a member of or joins or promises to join, or who becomes pledged to become a member of, or who solicits any other person to join, promise to join or be pledged to become a member of any public school fraternity, sorority or secret society.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/31-4) (from Ch. 122, par. 31-4)
    Sec. 31-4. Solicitation unlawful-Penalty.
    It is unlawful for any person not enrolled in any public school of this State to solicit any pupil enrolled therein to join or pledge himself or herself to become a member of any public school fraternity, sorority or secret society or to solicit any such pupil to attend a meeting thereof or any meeting where the joining of any such fraternity, sorority or secret society is encouraged. Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a petty offense and fined not less than $25 nor more than $100.
(Source: P.A. 77-2267.)

    (105 ILCS 5/31-5) (from Ch. 122, par. 31-5)
    Sec. 31-5. Not applicable to universities.
    The provisions of this Article do not apply to fraternities, sororities or secret societies in any State University nor to students thereof in their relations to such organizations in these institutions.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 32 heading)
ARTICLE 32. SPECIAL CHARTER DISTRICTS

    (105 ILCS 5/32-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-1)
    Sec. 32-1. May vote to organize under general law.
    (a) Any special charter district may, by vote of its electors, cease to control its school under the Act under which it was organized, and become part of the school township or townships in which it is situated. Upon petition of 50 voters of the district, presented to the board having the control and management of the schools, the board shall order submitted to the voters at an election to be held in the district, in accordance with the general election law, the question of "organizing under the general school law". The secretary of the board shall make certification to the proper election authority in accordance with the general election law. If, however, a majority of the votes cast at any such election in any school district subject to Sections 32-3 through 32-4.11 is against organizing the district under the general school law, the question may not again be submitted in the district for 22 months thereafter, and then only upon petition signed by at least 2% of the voters of the school district. Notice shall be given in accordance with the general election law, which notice shall be in the following form:
NOTICE OF REFERENDUM
    Notice is hereby given that on (insert date), a referendum will be held at.... for the purpose of deciding the question of organizing under the general school law. The polls will be opened at .... o'clock ..m and closed at .... o'clock ..m.
Signed .....

    If a majority of the votes cast on the proposition is in favor of organizing under the general school law, then the board having the control and management of schools in the district, shall declare the proposition carried.
    When such a proposition is declared to have so carried, the board of education shall continue to exercise its powers and duties under the general school law. Each member of the board of education selected under the provisions of the special charter shall continue in office until his term has expired. Before the term of each of these members expires, the board shall give notice of an election to be held on the date of the next regular school election, in accordance with the general election law to fill the vacancy which is created. Nomination papers filed under this Section are not valid unless the candidate named therein files with the county clerk or the county board of election commissioners, as the case may be, of the county in which the principal office of the school district is located a receipt from the county clerk showing that the candidate has filed a statement of economic interests as required by the Illinois Governmental Ethics Act. Such receipt shall be so filed either previously during the calendar year in which his nomination papers were filed or within the period for the filing of nomination papers in accordance with the general election law.
    (b) Notwithstanding the foregoing, any special charter district whose board is appointed by the mayor or other corporate authority of that municipality may, by resolution adopted by the corporate authorities of that municipality cease to control its school under the Act under which it was organized, become a part of the school township or townships in which it is situated and become organized under the general school law. If such a resolution is adopted, the board of education shall continue to exercise its powers and duties under the general school law. Each member of the board of education selected under the provisions of the special charter shall continue in office until his term has expired. Before the term of each of these members expires, the board shall give notice of an election to be held on the date of the next regular school election, in accordance with the general election law to fill the vacancy which is created.
(Source: P.A. 98-115, eff. 7-29-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-1.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-1.1)
    Sec. 32-1.1. Election and powers of board - No provision in special act. In all special charter districts maintaining schools under any general school laws, where there is no provision in the special Acts creating such districts for the election of boards of education as otherwise provided, there shall be elected, in lieu of the school directors as now provided, a board of education, to consist of 7 members to be elected at the time and in the manner as provided by the general election law for the election and qualification of boards of education in other cases. In any district having a population of more than 100,000 but less than 2,000,000 such board may be increased in size to 11 members upon adoption by a majority of electors residing in the district and voting on the question in a referendum as provided in this Section. Such question shall be submitted to the electors at an election upon a resolution adopted by the Board. Members shall be elected biennially in the school district, whose term of office shall be 4 years, and there shall also be elected in each odd-numbered year a president of the board. Following the first such election, those members elected, other than the president, shall, by lot, determine 3 to serve 2 years and 3 to serve 4 years; thereafter, all terms shall be 4 years. In other cases, however, if 4 members, other than the president, are elected in 1983, then those elected shall, by lot, determine one to serve for 2 years and 3 to serve 4 years; thereafter all terms shall be 4 years. In neither case shall such determinations affect the biennial selection of the president. At the first regular school election after the adoption by the district electors of a question as provided in this Section increasing the size of the board in those districts entitled to exercise an option for and elect an 11 member board, 4 additional members shall be elected and shall determine by lot 2 to serve for 2 years and 2 for 4 years. Their successors shall serve for a 4 year term. In case of an 11 member board already in existence, if 7 members, other than the president, are elected in 1983 then those members elected shall, by lot determine one to serve 2 years and 6 to serve 4 years. Terms thereafter shall be 4 years. The board of education shall have all the powers and duties of trustees of schools in school townships and the powers and duties of boards of education in districts having a population of not fewer than 1,000 and not more than 500,000 as provided by this Act.
    The day upon which the election provided for in this section is to be held is subject to the provisions of the general election law.
(Source: P.A. 86-225.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-1.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-1.2)
    Sec. 32-1.2. Powers of election boards.
    A school board of any special charter district that is elected by the voters shall have the powers and duties of school trustees.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-1.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-1.3)
    Sec. 32-1.3. Determination to elect-Election-Powers. Any special charter district having a population of not less than 1,000 and not over 20,000, may, by vote of its electors, determine to elect, instead of the directors or other governing or managing board now provided for by the special Act under which it was organized, a board of education which shall be elected at the time and in the manner and have the powers conferred upon boards of education of districts under this Act.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-1.4) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-1.4)
    Sec. 32-1.4. Petition - referendum - election of board. Upon petition of 50 voters of any district as defined in Section 32-1.3 presented to the board having the control and management of schools, the board shall, at the next regularly scheduled election held in such district cause to be submitted to the voters thereof, in accordance with the general election law, the proposition of "electing a board of education having the powers conferred upon such boards in districts organized under The School Code". The board shall publish notice of such election, in the manner provided by the general election law, which notice may be in the following form:
    Public notice is hereby given that on (insert date), a referendum will be held at ...., between the hours of ... ..m. and ... ..m. of said day for the purpose of deciding the question of "electing a board of education having the powers conferred upon such boards in districts organized under the School Code".
    If a majority of the votes cast is in favor of the proposition, then at the time of the next regular election for boards of education, there shall be elected a board of education for the district.
(Source: P.A. 91-357, eff. 7-29-99.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-1.5) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-1.5)
    Sec. 32-1.5. Election of board of education. Any special charter district may, by vote of its electors, determine to elect, instead of the managing board provided for by its special charter, a board of education which shall be elected at the time and in the manner as boards of education under Article 10 of this Act; but such determination shall not affect any other powers or duties conferred or imposed by the special charter.
    Upon petition of 10% or 200 of the voters, whichever is less, of any such district requesting a referendum therefor, presented to the managing board thereof, the board shall, or upon its own initiative if no such petition has been presented the board may order submitted to the voters at the next regular election, in accordance with the general election law, a proposition to elect a board of education of 3 or 5 or 7 members, as the case may be. The proposition shall be substantially as follows:
--------------------------------------------------------------
    Shall school district.... be governed
 by a board of education of.... members           YES
 to be elected at the time and in the manner  ----------------
 as boards of education under Article 10          NO
 of the School Code?
--------------------------------------------------------------
    If more than one proposition is properly presented to the board, the one first presented shall be submitted to the electors.
    If such proposition receives a majority of all valid votes cast thereon, the change in membership shall be effectuated at the next succeeding regular school election. In the conduct of such election, the managing board shall take such measures as may be necessary to arrange for the election of a board of 3, 5, or 7 members, as the case may be. The new board shall be organized as provided in Article 10 of this Act, except that, if only 5 members are to be elected, 2 (instead of 3) shall be selected by lot for a 2 year term, and if only 3 members are to be elected, then one shall be selected by lot for a 2 year term. In case of a 5 member board already established, if 4 are elected in 1983, then those elected shall by lot determine 2 to serve 2 years and 2 to serve 4 years. All successors, except to fill vacancies, shall be elected for terms of 4 years. In the case of a 5 member board already established, on which the members serve 5 year terms, the member elected in 1981 shall serve a 6 year term. The 2 members elected in 1983 shall serve 6 year terms. The 2 members elected in 1985 shall also serve 6 year terms. All successors, except to fill vacancies, shall be elected for terms of 6 years. As soon as the first new board is organized, the terms of all members of the predecessor board shall terminate.
    In any such school district which determines to elect a new board of education as hereinabove authorized, the number of members on the board may thereafter be changed by following the procedure hereinabove set forth.
    At least 22 months must elapse after the date of an election under this section before any of the above propositions may be again submitted to the electors.
(Source: P.A. 81-1490.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-1.6) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-1.6)
    Sec. 32-1.6. School board districts.
    Section 9-22 applies to all special charter districts as well as those organized under the general school law.
(Source: P.A. 78-536.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-2.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-2.1)
    Sec. 32-2.1. Boards to which preceding section applicable. The provisions of Section 32-2 shall apply to the board of school inspectors of the City of Peoria and to all other boards of directors, boards of education, and boards of school inspectors existing under any special school charter heretofore granted by the State.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-2.5) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-2.5)
    Sec. 32-2.5. Election of board of education in lieu of appointive board. In all special charter districts having a population of over 35,000 by the last federal census, where the board of directors or board of education is elected or appointed by the city council of the city, of which school district such city may form the whole or a part, and where there are no provisions in the special charter creating such school district for the election of a board of directors or board of education, there shall be elected in lieu of the present governing body a board of education to consist of 7 members. Nomination of a candidate for member of the board of education shall be made by petitions signed in the aggregate by not less than 200 qualified voters residing in the school district, and also by filing with the petitions a statement of candidacy as provided in the general election law, which petitions and statements of candidacy shall be filed in the office of the board of education in accordance with the general election law.
    Nomination papers filed under this Section are not valid unless the candidate named therein files with the county clerk or the county board of election commissioners, as the case may be, of the county in which the principal office of the school district is located a receipt from the county clerk showing that the candidate has filed a statement of economic interests as required by the Illinois Governmental Ethics Act. Such receipt shall be so filed either previously during the calendar year in which his nomination papers were filed or within the period for the filing of nomination papers in accordance with the general election law.
    The county clerk or the county board of election commissioners shall make certification to the proper election authority in accordance with the general election law.
(Source: P.A. 98-115, eff. 7-29-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-2.6) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-2.6)
    Sec. 32-2.6. Election - vacancies - names on ballots. All elections in school districts described in Section 32-2.5 shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of the general election law. If any member of the board of education is disqualified to hold office, the board of education may, by resolution, declare the office vacant, and provide for an appointment to fill the vacancy until the next election for members of the board of education. The nomination and election of a candidate thereupon to fill the vacancy shall be made in the same manner as the nomination of a candidate for a regular term, as hereinbefore provided, except that there shall be printed on the ballot that the election is for a certain number of persons for a certain number of years to fill a vacancy. The names of all candidates for member of such board of education shall be printed on the ballot in alphabetical order according to their surnames.
(Source: P.A. 80-1469.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-2.10) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-2.10)
    Sec. 32-2.10. Application of law. In all special charter districts of this State having a population of not more than 50,000 lying wholly or in part within any city, village, or incorporated town, the school directors or members of the board of education, as provided in the special charter, shall be elected at elections held as provided by the general election law, and all propositions pertaining to said school districts required to be submitted to the voters thereof shall be voted upon at elections held as provided in the general election law.
(Source: P.A. 81-1490.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-2.11) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-2.11)
    Sec. 32-2.11. Election of board members. In every city whose schools have been operating under special Acts and are governed by a board of school inspectors where such city, together with territory added thereto for school purposes, includes 2 districts for the purpose of electing 6 inspectors (3 in each district) and 1 district for all other school purposes, there shall continue to be elected a board of school inspectors, consisting of 6 members (3 in each district) and 1 inspector at large who shall be chosen for a term of 4 years. If 4 inspectors, excluding the inspector at large, are elected in 1983, those selected shall by lot determine one inspector to serve for 2 years and 3 for 4 years. Thereafter all terms shall be for 4 years.
(Source: P.A. 81-1490.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-2.12) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-2.12)
    Sec. 32-2.12. Time for election of board members. In all special charter districts, the regular election of members of such boards shall hereafter be held on the date set for school elections as provided in the general election law in odd numbered years.
(Source: P.A. 81-1490.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-2.13) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-2.13)
    Sec. 32-2.13. No annexation accomplished pursuant to Section 7-2.1 shall affect the method of selection of the board of the special charter district as otherwise provided by law excepting in those instances where the special charter has an appointive school board appointed solely within the boundaries of a municipality within such special charter school district; in those instances where there are voters living within the school district, but outside the municipality, the county superintendent of schools having supervision over the greatest portion of the territory of the special charter district shall appoint one additional member to the board of education of the special charter district effective with the date and for the term for which other appointments to the special charter board are effective; provided, further, that during any period the number of voters living within such school district but outside the municipality exceeds a quotient determined by dividing the total number of voters living in the municipality by the number of school board members appointed within said municipality, the county superintendent shall appoint one additional school board member for each time such quotient is equaled.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-3) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-3)
    Sec. 32-3. Law governing appointment. Where, by the provisions of any general or special law, the members of the city council of any city have been made ex-officio school directors or members of the board of education for the school district of which the city constitutes the whole or a part, the school directors or members of the board of education shall be appointed as provided in Section 32-3.1.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-3.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-3.1)
    Sec. 32-3.1. Nomination by mayor-President of board. The mayor of any city described in Section 32-3, at the first regular meeting of the city council, after each annual municipal election and after his installation into office, shall nominate and place before the council for confirmation as school directors or members of the board of education, as the case may be, 1 person from each ward of the city to serve for 2 years and 1 person from the city at large to serve for 1 year. If the persons so appointed are confirmed by a majority vote of the city council, to be entered of record, such persons shall constitute the board of education or school directors for the district. The person appointed from the city at large for 1 year shall be president of the board of education or school directors but shall have no vote except in case of a tie.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-3.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-3.2)
    Sec. 32-3.2. City of 45,000-Number of members-Nomination-Vacancy. In any city, however, having a population of 45,000 or more, constituting a school district to which Sections 32-3 to 32-4.11, inclusive, are applicable, the board of education shall consist of 11 persons who shall be nominated by the mayor from the city at large and confirmed by a majority vote of the city council, 1 of which persons shall be designated by the mayor as the president of the board of education. The president shall have no vote except in case of a tie. 5 Members of the board of education and such person as may be designated as the president thereof shall be nominated by the mayor and placed before the city council for confirmation at the first regular meeting of the city council after the mayor's installation into office, and upon confirmation by the council shall hold their offices for 2 years and until their successor shall be chosen as herein provided. The remaining 5 members of the board of education shall be nominated by the mayor and placed before the city council for confirmation at the first regular meeting of the city council next after 1 year from the date of the mayor's installation into office, and upon confirmation by the council shall hold their offices for 2 years and until their successors shall be chosen as herein provided. If a vacancy occurs in the board of education, the mayor shall nominate and place before the city council for confirmation at a regular meeting thereof some person to fill the vacancy, and upon confirmation by the city council, the person so nominated shall hold the office during the remainder of the term for which his predecessor was appointed.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-3.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-3.3)
    Sec. 32-3.3. Organization and powers of board. The board members appointed under Section 32-3.1 to 32-3.2 shall, as soon as practicable after their appointment, organize by electing 1 of their number secretary, who shall hold his office for 1 year.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-3.5)
    Sec. 32-3.5. Student board member. The governing board of a special charter district may appoint a student to the board to serve in an advisory capacity. The student member shall serve for a term as determined by the board. The board may not grant the student member any voting privileges, but shall consider the student member as an advisor. The student member may not participate in or attend any executive session of the board.
(Source: P.A. 94-231, eff. 7-14-05.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-4) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-4)
    Sec. 32-4. Powers of board.
    The board of inspectors referred to in Section 32-2.11 may, in addition to the powers conferred upon it by special law and the applicable provisions of this Act, employ teachers, janitors and such other employees as it deems necessary and fix the amount of their compensation; buy or lease sites for schoolhouses, with the necessary grounds; build, erect, lease or purchase buildings suitable for school purposes; repair and improve buildings and furnish them with the necessary supplies, fixtures, apparatus, libraries and fuel; and may lease school property, when not needed for school purposes, for a term of not longer than 99 years from the date of the granting of the lease. All such leases shall provide for revaluation privileges at least once in every 20 years.
    In case the school board and the lessee cannot agree on revaluation and a new rent, the same shall be determined in the following manner: 3 arbitrators shall be appointed, 1 by the school board, 1 by the lessee, and 1 by the arbitrators appointed by the school board and the lessee. The 3 arbitrators, or a majority of them, shall fix and determine the revaluation and the new rent and their decision or a decision of a majority of them shall be final.
    When, in the opinion of the school board, a school site, building, or site with building thereon, or any other real estate of the district, has become unnecessary or unsuitable or inconvenient for a school, or unnecessary for the uses of the district and the school board decides to sell the same, unless the property is to be sold to a tenant that has leased the property for 10 or more years and that tenant is a non-profit agency, the school board shall give notice of the sale stating the time and place the sale is to be held, the terms of the sale and a description of the property to be sold. The notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation published in the district, or if none, in the county in which the district is situated, such notice to be published once each week for 3 successive weeks, and the first publication to be at least 30 days prior to the day the sale is to be held. Unless the school board holds legal title to the property, the school board shall notify the trustees of schools of the terms upon which the school board desires the property to be conveyed. The school board or trustees of schools holding legal title to the property shall convey the property in accordance with the terms fixed by the school board. The deed of conveyance shall be executed by the president and secretary or clerk of the school board or trustees of the school holding legal title to the property and the proceeds if any shall be paid to the school treasurer for the benefit of the district.
    In the case of a sale of property to a tenant that has leased the property for 10 or more years and that is a non-profit agency, an appraisal is required prior to the sale. If the non-profit agency purchases the property for less than the appraised value and subsequently sells the property, the agency may retain only a percentage of the profits that is proportional to the percentage of the appraisal, plus any improvements made by the agency while the agency was the owner, that the agency paid in the initial sale. The remaining portion of the profits made by the non-profit agency shall revert to the school district.
(Source: P.A. 92-365, eff. 8-15-01.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-4.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-4.1)
    Sec. 32-4.1. Annual tax levy - Township treasurer custodian.
    The board of school inspectors of districts described in Section 32-2.11 may levy a tax, annually, upon all of the taxable property of the district, in the manner provided by Sections 17-2 through 17-9, and in accordance with the powers conferred by Section 32-4. All moneys raised by taxation for school purposes, or received from the common school fund or any other source, or held or collected for school purposes, shall be paid to and held by the school treasurer as a special fund for school purposes, subject to the order of the board of school inspectors upon warrants signed by the president and secretary thereof or a majority of the board.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-4.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-4.2)
    Sec. 32-4.2. Leasehold revenue bonds. The board of inspectors of districts described in Section 32-2.11 in addition to all other powers conferred upon it by special law and the applicable provisions of this Act, may borrow money for the purpose of building schoolhouses, or repairing, altering or building additions to any schoolhouses already erected, or purchasing schoolhouse sites, or purchasing land outside the school district pursuant to the provisions of Section 22-16 and as evidence of the indebtedness may issue revenue bonds in denominations of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 payable solely from rentals or other revenue to be derived from any lease of school property made by said board of inspectors in accordance with the power conferred by Section 32-4. Said bonds shall be negotiable instruments and shall bear interest at a rate not exceeding the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, payable semi-annually, and shall mature at or prior to the expiration of the term of said lease, provided that in any event all such bonds shall mature within 40 years from the date of said bonds. Said bonds shall not constitute a general obligation of the school district and may be issued in addition to all other bonds which the school district is now or hereafter may be authorized to issue. Said bonds shall not constitute an indebtedness of the school district within the meaning of any constitutional or statutory limitation.
    With respect to instruments for the payment of money issued under this Section either before, on, or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1989, it is and always has been the intention of the General Assembly (i) that the Omnibus Bond Acts are and always have been supplementary grants of power to issue instruments in accordance with the Omnibus Bond Acts, regardless of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts, (ii) that the provisions of this Section are not a limitation on the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts, and (iii) that instruments issued under this Section within the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts are not invalid because of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts.
(Source: P.A. 86-4.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-4.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-4.3)
    Sec. 32-4.3. Resolution.
    Said bonds shall be sold in such manner and upon such terms not inconsistent with the provisions hereof as the board of inspectors shall determine by resolution authorizing the issuance of said bonds. The resolution may contain such covenants and restrictions upon the issuance of additional revenue bonds thereafter as may be deemed necessary or advisable for the assurance of the payment of all revenue bonds previously issued and secured by the rentals and other revenue from any lease upon the same school property. The resolution shall pledge the rentals and other revenue from said school property for the purpose of paying the cost of operation and maintenance of said school property, providing an adequate depreciation fund, and paying the principal of and interest on bonds issued pursuant thereto and shall provide for the deposit of all rentals and other revenue, as received, in a special fund to be used only for the purpose of paying the cost of operating and maintaining said school property, providing an adequate depreciation fund, and paying the principal of and interest on said bonds.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-4.4) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-4.4)
    Sec. 32-4.4. Publication - Referendum on petition. Within 10 days after this resolution has been adopted by the board of inspectors it shall be published at least once in 1 or more newspapers published in the school district, or if no newspaper is published in such school district, then in 1 or more newspapers with a general circulation therein. The publication of the resolution shall include a notice of (1) the specific number of voters required to sign a petition requesting that the question of the adoption of the resolution be submitted to the electors of the school district; (2) the time in which such petition must be filed; and (3) the date of the prospective referendum. The secretary of the Board of inspectors shall provide a petition form to any individual requesting one. If no petition is filed with the secretary of the board of inspectors as hereinafter provided in this Section within 30 days after the publication of the resolution, or if any and all petition filed are invalid, the resolution shall be in effect immediately upon the expiration of that 30 day period. But if within that 30 day period a petition is filed with the secretary, signed by voters residing within the school district equal to 10% or more of the number of registered voters in the district, asking that the question of issuing revenue bonds as provided in said resolution be submitted to the voters of the school district, the board of inspectors of the school district shall certify the proposition of issuing revenue bonds as described in said resolution to the proper election authorities for submission to the electors in accordance with the general election law. If a majority of the voters voting upon the question voted in favor of the issuance of said revenue bonds, then the resolution shall be in effect, but if a majority of the voters voting upon the question are not in favor thereof, the resolution shall not take effect.
(Source: P.A. 87-767.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-4.5) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-4.5)
    Sec. 32-4.5. Signing, attestation, numbering and registration.
    All bonds issued pursuant to the authority of sections 32-4.2 to 32-4.5, inclusive, shall be signed, attested, countersigned, numbered, and registered and disposition thereof made pursuant to the provisions of section 32-5.9.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-4.6) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-4.6)
    Sec. 32-4.6. Title, care and custody of property; supervision and control. The title, care and custody of all schoolhouses and school sites belonging to districts that are described in Section 32-2.11 and that are not districts whose school boards under subsection (a) of Section 10-22.35B of this Code are to hold legal title to school buildings and school sites of the district shall be vested in the trustees of schools of the townships in which the districts are situated, but the supervision and control of such schoolhouses and sites shall be vested in the board of inspectors of the districts. In all other cases, the legal title, care, custody and control of school houses and school sites belonging to districts that are described in Section 32-2.11, together with the supervision and control of those school houses and sites, shall be vested in the board of inspectors of the districts.
(Source: P.A. 100-374, eff. 8-25-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-4.7) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-4.7)
    Sec. 32-4.7. Change of boundaries. The trustees of schools of townships in which districts described in Section 32-2.11 are situated may change the boundaries of such school districts when petitioned as provided by this Act.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-4.8) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-4.8)
    Sec. 32-4.8. Powers of boards - Bond of treasurer.
    The board of education of a school district described in Section 32-2.5 shall have all the powers of trustees of schools in school townships and all the powers of boards of directors, and boards of education elected by virtue of this Act, and shall also have power to elect and appoint a secretary for such board, who shall attend all its meetings and keep an accurate record of all proceedings of the board and shall also have power to appoint a treasurer for the district whose term of office, duties and obligations shall be the same as a treasurer appointed by the trustees of schools, except that the treasurer appointed under this section shall not be obliged to keep a record of the proceedings of the board. The treasurer shall, before entering upon his duties, execute a bond in such amount and with such sureties to be approved by the board of education, and containing such provisions, as provided in Section 8-2 for the bonds of treasurers appointed by trustees of schools; provided, however, the board of education of a school district described in Section 32-2.5 shall not be required to submit to the voters the propositions of selecting school sites, purchasing school sites and building school buildings, as provided by any other section of this Act, but shall have power in its discretion to select and purchase school sites and build, repair, alter and build additions to any school buildings which is deemed necessary and in the interests of the district, and the power to issue bonds and the procedure to be followed in the issuance of bonds shall be governed by the provisions of Sections 32-5.6 to 32-5.9 inclusive.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-4.9) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-4.9)
    Sec. 32-4.9. Powers and duties of board members.
    All rights, powers and duties heretofore exercised by and devolved upon the members of the city council, as ex-officio member of the board of education, or school directors, shall devolve upon and be exercised by the members of the board of education and school directors appointed under the provisions of this Article.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-4.10) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-4.10)
    Sec. 32-4.10. Amount to be raised-Tax levy. In all school districts to which Sections 32-3 to 32-4.11, inclusive, apply the school boards shall annually, before August 1, certify to the city council under the signatures of the president and secretary of the board, the amount of money required to be raised by taxation for school purposes in the district for the ensuing year, and the city council shall thereupon cause the amount to be levied and collected in the manner now provided by law for the levy and collection of taxes for school purposes in the district, but the amount to be so levied and collected shall not exceed the amount now allowed to be collected for school purposes by this Act. When such taxes have been collected and paid over to the treasurer of the city or school district, as may be provided by the terms of the Act under which the district has been organized, such funds shall be paid out only on the order of the board of education or school directors, signed by the president and secretary.
(Source: P.A. 84-550.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-4.10a)
    Sec. 32-4.10a. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 77-4. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-4.11) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-4.11)
    Sec. 32-4.11. Tax anticipation warrants. Whenever there is no money in the hands of the treasurer of any school district to which Sections 32-2 to 32-4.11, inclusive, shall apply, to defray the necessary expenses of such district, including amounts necessary to pay maturing principal and interest of bonds, it is lawful for the school board of the district to draw and issue warrants against and in anticipation of any taxes already levied for the payment of the necessary expenses of the district, either for transportation, educational or for all operations, building and maintenance purposes, or for payments to the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund, or for the payment of maturing principal and interest of bonds, as the case may be, to the extent of 85% of the total amount of any such taxes levied. The warrants shall show upon their face that they are payable solely from said taxes when collected, and shall be received by any collector of taxes in payment of the taxes against which they are issued. The taxes against which the warrants are drawn shall be set apart and held for their payment. Every warrant shall bear interest, payable only out of the taxes against which it shall be drawn, at a rate not to exceed the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, if issued before January 1, 1972 and not to exceed the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, if issued after January 1, 1972, from the date of its issuance until paid, or until notice is given by publication in a newspaper or otherwise that the money for its payment is available and that it will be paid upon presentation.
    With respect to instruments for the payment of money issued under this Section either before, on, or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1989, it is and always has been the intention of the General Assembly (i) that the Omnibus Bond Acts are and always have been supplementary grants of power to issue instruments in accordance with the Omnibus Bond Acts, regardless of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts, (ii) that the provisions of this Section are not a limitation on the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts, and (iii) that instruments issued under this Section within the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts are not invalid because of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts.
(Source: P.A. 86-4.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-4.12) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-4.12)
    Sec. 32-4.12. Sale of real estate-Use of proceeds.
    The board of education of any special charter district may sell and dispose of any real estate conveyed to it by any city for school purposes and use the proceeds derived from the sale thereof for school building purposes or for the purchase of other real estate for such purposes.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-4.13) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-4.13)
    Sec. 32-4.13. Eminent domain.
    Whenever any school district existing by virtue of any special charter and governed by any or all such special charter or special school laws of this State, and having a population of fewer than 500,000 inhabitants, requires any lot or parcel of land situated within the district for a site for a school building or for an addition to any school building already erected and used for school purposes, or requires any lot or parcel of land situated within such school district for the purpose of a playground for school children, and the compensation for such lot or parcel of land cannot be agreed upon between the owner or owners of such lot or parcel of land and the corporate authority managing and controlling the public schools of such district it is lawful for the corporate authority of the district to acquire such lot or parcel of land and have the compensation to be paid therefor determined in the manner provided by law for the exercise of the right of eminent domain.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-4.14) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-4.14)
    Sec. 32-4.14. Issuance of orders.
    The corporate authorities of any special charter district having a population of less than 500,000 may issue and deliver at least once each month to the teachers and employees of the district orders on the treasurer of the district in payment of their salaries. Such orders shall state the rate of compensation and time for which the teacher or employee is paid and an order so issued, properly endorsed and paid in full shall be sufficient receipt for the purpose of this and the succeeding section. The corporate authorities shall issue no order except an order for the payment of wages of teachers and employees unless at the time of its issuance there are sufficient funds in the hands of the treasurer to pay it.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-4.15) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-4.15)
    Sec. 32-4.15. Form of orders.
    Every order issued by the corporate authorities of a district as described in Section 32-4.14 shall state for what purpose and on what account it is issued, and shall be in the following form:
STATE OF ILLINOIS
$.......                                            No. ....
    To the Treasurer of .... School District, .... County, Illinois.
    Pay to the order of .... the sum of .... Dollars ($....) for .....
    By order of the Board of Education (or Board of School Inspectors) of .... School District, .... County, Illinois.
....(President)
....(Clerk)
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-4.16) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-4.16)
    Sec. 32-4.16. Cities, villages and towns-Levy made by board of education. Where a school district was organized as a special charter district of a city, village, or town, and where such district has an elective board of education of either 5 or 7 members, and of which board the mayor of the city, village or town is not ex officio a member, it is not necessary for such board of education to present an annual financial report to the city, village or town council, or board of trustees, nor a statement as to the amount of money necessary to be raised by taxation for school purposes for the ensuing school year and the council or board of trustees, as the case may be, shall not make the levy for school purposes but the board of education shall make the levy for school purposes for such district.
    The certificate of such levy shall be made at the time and, as near as may be, in the form and manner provided in Section 17-11.
(Source: P.A. 77-490.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-5) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-5)
    Sec. 32-5. Bond issues - district boundaries coextensive with city. For the purpose of building or repairing schoolhouses or purchasing or improving school sites, including the purchase of school sites outside the boundaries of the school district and building school buildings thereon as provided by Section 10-20.10 of this Act, any special charter district governed by a special charter, and special or general school laws, whose boundaries are coextensive with or greater than the boundaries of any incorporated city, town or village, where authorized by a majority of all the votes cast on the proposition may borrow money and as evidence of the indebtedness, may issue bonds in denominations of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000, for a term not to exceed 20 years bearing interest at a rate not to exceed the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, payable annually, semi-annually, or quarterly, signed by the president and secretary of the school board of the district; provided, that the amount borrowed shall not exceed, including existing indebtedness, 5% of the taxable property of such school district, as ascertained by the last assessment for State and county taxes previous to incurring such indebtedness.
    With respect to instruments for the payment of money issued under this Section either before, on, or after June 6, 1989 (the effective date of Public Act 86-4), it is and always has been the intention of the General Assembly (i) that the Omnibus Bond Acts are and always have been supplementary grants of power to issue instruments in accordance with the Omnibus Bond Acts, regardless of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts, (ii) that the provisions of this Section are not a limitation on the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts, and (iii) that instruments issued under this Section within the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts are not invalid because of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts.
(Source: P.A. 99-642, eff. 7-28-16.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-5.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-5.1)
    Sec. 32-5.1. Registration, numbering and countersigning. All bonds authorized by Section 32-5, before being issued, negotiated and sold, shall be registered, numbered and countersigned by the treasurer of the school district. The registration shall be made in a book in which shall be entered the record of the election authorizing the school district to issue bonds, and a description of the bonds issued, including the number, date, amount, rate of interest and when payable.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-5.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-5.2)
    Sec. 32-5.2. Moneys paid into treasury - Delivery of bonds - Records. All moneys borrowed by virtue of Section 32-5 shall be paid into the treasury of the school district. Upon receiving the moneys, the treasurer shall deliver the bonds issued therefor to the persons entitled to receive them, and shall credit the amount received to the district. The treasurer shall record the amount received for each bond issued, and when any bond is paid the treasurer shall cancel it and enter in the register opposite the record of the bond the words "paid and cancelled" and the date of the payment.
(Source: P.A. 91-357, eff. 7-29-99.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-5.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-5.3)
    Sec. 32-5.3. Election - Notice - Judges. Whenever it is desired to hold a referendum for the purpose of borrowing money as provided by Section 32-5, the school board of the district in which the proposition is to be held shall adopt a resolution ordering the referendum and shall certify the proposition to the proper election authorities who shall submit the proposition at a regular scheduled election in accordance with the general election law.
(Source: P.A. 81-1489.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-5.5) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-5.5)
    Sec. 32-5.5. Issue of new bonds. When any school district described in Section 32-5 has heretofore issued bonds or other evidences of indebtedness, on account of any public school building, or for any other purpose, which are now binding and subsisting obligations against such school district and remaining outstanding, such school district may, upon the surrender of any such bonds or any part thereof, or other evidences of indebtedness, issue in lieu thereof, to the holders of the bonds, or to any persons, for money with which to take them up, new bonds in accordance with the provisions of Sections 32-5 to 32-5.4, inclusive; provided, such bonds shall not be issued so as to increase the aggregate indebtedness of such school district to exceed, including existing indebtedness, 5% of the taxable property of such school district, to be ascertained by the last assessment for State and county taxes previous to incurring such indebtedness.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-5.6) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-5.6)
    Sec. 32-5.6. Special charter districts with population less than 500,000 - Authority to borrow money and issue bonds. The corporate authorities of any special charter district having a population of less than 500,000 governed by a special charter, or special charter and general law, may borrow money for the purpose of building schoolhouses, or repairing, altering and building additions to any schoolhouse already erected, or purchasing schoolhouse sites or purchasing grounds adjoining any schoolhouse site, or separated therefrom only by a public street or way, and shall also include the purchase of school sites outside the boundaries of the school district and building school buildings thereon as provided by Sections 10-22.35 and 10-22.36 of this Act, and may issue its negotiable coupon bonds therefor in such form and such denominations, payable at such place and at such time or times (not exceeding 20 years from date of issuance) and bearing interest at such rate as the corporate authorities may by resolution prescribe. The bonds shall be in denominations of not less than $100 nor more than $5,000, and shall bear interest at a rate not to exceed the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, if issued before January 1, 1972 and not to exceed the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, if issued after January 1, 1972, payable semi-annually. No money may be borrowed or bonds issued, however, unless the proposition to borrow money and issue bonds for the purpose or purposes and in the amount prescribed in the resolution is certified to the proper election authorities and submitted to the voters of the school district at a regular scheduled election in accordance with the general election law, and the majority of all the votes cast on the proposition is in favor thereof. The corporate authorities may not incur any indebtedness under this Section, which together with all other outstanding indebtedness, exceeds in the aggregate the indebtedness limitation under Section 19-1 of this Act that would be applicable if the district were not a special charter district.
    With respect to instruments for the payment of money issued under this Section either before, on, or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1989, it is and always has been the intention of the General Assembly (i) that the Omnibus Bond Acts are and always have been supplementary grants of power to issue instruments in accordance with the Omnibus Bond Acts, regardless of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts, (ii) that the provisions of this Section are not a limitation on the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts, and (iii) that instruments issued under this Section within the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts are not invalid because of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts.
(Source: P.A. 86-4.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-5.7) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-5.7)
    Sec. 32-5.7. Submission to voters - Notice of election. Whenever it is desired to submit to the voters of any school district to which Section 32-5.6 applies the proposition to borrow money and issue bonds for any or all of the purposes specified in Section 32-5.6, the school board of such school district shall adopt a resolution directing that such proposition be submitted to referendum and the secretary of the board shall certify the proposition to the proper election authorities for submission to the electors in accordance with the general election law.
(Source: P.A. 81-1489.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-5.8) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-5.8)
    Sec. 32-5.8. Ballots. The proposition submitted to the voters of any school district to which Sections 32-5.6 to 32-5.9, inclusive, apply shall specify the total amount of the bonds sought to be issued, and the specific purpose or purposes for which the bonds shall be issued, and shall be substantially in the following form:
--------------------------------------------------------------
    Shall bonds or obligations for
the purpose of (state specific               YES
purpose) in the sum of $.... be
issued by (state whether to be          ----------------------
issued by the board of education
or board of school inspectors)               NO
of....?
--------------------------------------------------------------
(Source: P.A. 81-1489.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-5.9) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-5.9)
    Sec. 32-5.9. Signature and attestation - Numbering and registration - Delivery of bonds.
    All bonds authorized to be issued under Sections 32-5.6 to 32-5.9, inclusive, before being issued, negotiated and sold shall be signed by the president of the school board and attested by the secretary and countersigned by the treasurer of the school board or of the school district. All of the bonds shall be numbered by such treasurer and registered in a book. All moneys borrowed under Section 32-5.6 to 32-5.9, inclusive, shall be paid into the treasury of the school board, or of the school district, and thereupon the treasurer thereof shall deliver the bonds therefor to the persons entitled to receive them. The treasurer shall record the amount for which each bond is issued, negotiated and sold, and when any bond is paid, he shall cancel it and enter in the register opposite the record of the bond the date, month and year when it was paid.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-5.10) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-5.10)
    Sec. 32-5.10. Assumption of indebtedness of city for school purposes.
    Whenever any city is by special law made a school district, or whenever any school district created by special law is coterminous with any city, the directors of the district may, at the request of the city council, assume and provide for, by borrowing and taxation, any indebtedness created by the authorities of the city for school purposes.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-6.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-6.1)
    Sec. 32-6.1. Territory disconnected from city or village.
    Whenever the territorial limits of any special charter district governed by any or all of the provisions of the special charter coincide with the territorial limits of (1) any township which is wholly surrounded by any school district, and (2) any city, town, or village from which any land has been heretofore or is hereafter disconnected under the provisions of Section 7-3-6 of the Illinois Municipal Code, as heretofore and hereafter amended, as the territorial limits of such city, town or village existed immediately prior to such disconnection, the land disconnected from such city, town or village shall also be deemed to be disconnected from such school district and annexed to a school district in the township it adjoins.
(Source: Laws 1963, p. 923.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-6.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-6.2)
    Sec. 32-6.2. Bonded indebtedness. The disconnection of any land under Section 32-6.1 shall not exempt it from taxation for the purpose of paying any bonded indebtedness contracted prior to the disconnection, but such land shall be assessed and taxed for this purpose until such indebtedness is completely paid, the same as though not disconnected. After the disconnection the county clerk of the county in which such land is situated shall not include such land within the limits of such school district for any purpose, except as stated herein, but shall include it within the adjoining district.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-7) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-7)
    Sec. 32-7. Form of bond. The form of bond to be given by any treasurer who has the custody of funds belonging to any special charter district shall be substantially in the following form:
    We, (AB), principal, and (CD and EF), sureties, all of the County of .... and State of Illinois, are obligated to the People of the State of Illinois, for the use of the .... (name of school district) in the penal sum of $...., for the payment of which to be made, we obligate ourselves, and each of us, our heirs, executors, administrators, successors, and assigns.
    Dated (insert date).
    The condition of the above bond is that if the above obligated (AB) shall perform all the duties which are, or may be required by law to be performed by him as treasurer of the school district in the time and manner prescribed, or to be prescribed by law, and when he shall be succeeded in office and surrender and deliver over to his successor in office all books, papers, moneys, and other things belonging to the school district and pertaining to his office, then the above bond to be void; otherwise, to remain in full force.
    It is expressly understood and intended that the obligation of the above named sureties shall not extend to any loss sustained by the insolvency, failure, or closing of any bank or savings and loan association organized and operating either under the laws of the State of Illinois or the United States wherein such treasurer has placed the funds in his custody or control, or any part thereof, provided, such depository has been approved by the (board of education, board of school inspectors or other governing body of the particular district) of the .... (name of district).
A B ....
C D ....
E F ....
(Source: P.A. 91-357, eff. 7-29-99.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-7.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-7.1)
    Sec. 32-7.1. Amount of bond. The amount of the bond prescribed by Section 32-7 shall be fixed by the governing body of the district but shall not be less than 1/10 of the maximum amount of all moneys which came into the hands or control of such treasurer or his predecessors during any fiscal year in the preceding 5 years nor less than 1 1/2 times the largest amount estimated by such governing body will be in his hands or control at any one time if individuals act as sureties nor less than the largest amount estimated by such governing body will be in his hands or control at any one time if the surety is a surety company authorized to do business in this State.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-7.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-7.2)
    Sec. 32-7.2. Teachers' orders. The school treasurer of any special charter district having a population of less than 500,000 shall pay out no funds of the district except on an order of the corporate authorities thereof, signed by the president and clerk, or by a majority of the board. When an order issued for the wages of any teacher or employee of such district is presented to the treasurer and is not paid for want of funds, the treasurer shall endorse it over his signature "not paid for want of funds", with the date of presentation, and shall make and keep a record of such endorsement. The order shall thereafter bear interest at the rate established by the school board of the district, payable annually, not exceeding the rate authorized from time to time under the Bond Authorization Act until the treasurer of such district notifies the clerk in writing that he has funds to pay it, and the treasurer shall keep a record of such notices and hold the funds necessary to pay such order until it is presented. The order shall draw no interest after notice is given to the clerk. Orders presented within 10 days after the notice is mailed to the clerk shall be payable in the numerical order of their issuance.
(Source: P.A. 86-715; 86-1161.)

    (105 ILCS 5/32-7.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 32-7.3)
    Sec. 32-7.3. Depositaries. The governing body of any special charter district, when requested by the treasurer or custodian of the funds of the district, shall designate one or more banks or savings and loan associations in which the funds in the custody of the treasurer or custodian may be kept. A bank or savings and loan association designated as a depositary shall continue as such until 10 days have elapsed after a new depositary is designated and has qualified by furnishing the statements of resources and liabilities as is required by this Section. When a new depositary is designated, the board of education or other governing body shall notify the sureties of the treasurer or custodian of that fact, in writing, at least 5 days before the transfer of funds. The treasurer or custodian shall be discharged from responsibility for all funds which he deposits in a depositary so designated while such funds are so deposited.
    No bank or savings and loan association shall receive public funds as permitted by this Section, unless it has complied with the requirements established pursuant to Section 6 of the Public Funds Investment Act.
(Source: P.A. 100-863, eff. 8-14-18.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 33 heading)
ARTICLE 33. DISTRICTS FROM 100,000 TO NOT MORE THAN 500,000 INHABITANTS

    (105 ILCS 5/33-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 33-1)
    Sec. 33-1. Board of Education - Election - Terms. In all school districts, including special charter districts having a population of 100,000 and not more than 500,000, which adopt this Article, as hereinafter provided, there shall be maintained a system of free schools in charge of a board of education, which shall be a body politic and corporate by the name of "Board of Education of the City of....". The board shall consist of 7 members elected by the voters of the district. Except as provided in Section 33-1b of this Act, the regular election for members of the board shall be held at the consolidated election in odd numbered years and at the general primary election in even numbered years. The law governing the registration of voters for the primary election shall apply to the regular election. At the first regular election 7 persons shall be elected as members of the board. The person who receives the greatest number of votes shall be elected for a term of 5 years. The 2 persons who receive the second and third greatest number of votes shall be elected for a term of 4 years. The person who receives the fourth greatest number of votes shall be elected for a term of 3 years. The 2 persons who receive the fifth and sixth greatest number of votes shall be elected for a term of 2 years. The person who receives the seventh greatest number of votes shall be elected for a term of 1 year. Thereafter, at each regular election for members of the board, the successors of the members whose terms expire in the year of election shall be elected for a term of 5 years. All terms shall commence on July 1 next succeeding the elections. Any vacancy occurring in the membership of the board shall be filled by appointment until the next regular election for members of the board.
    In any school district which has adopted this Article, a proposition for the election of board members by school board district rather than at large may be submitted to the voters of the district at the regular school election of any year in the manner provided in Section 9-22. If the proposition is approved by a majority of those voting on the propositions, the board shall divide the school district into 7 school board districts as provided in Section 9-22. At the regular school election in the year following the adoption of such proposition, one member shall be elected from each school board district, and the 7 members so elected shall, by lot, determine one to serve for one year, 2 for 2 years, one for 3 years, 2 for 4 years, and one for 5 years. Thereafter their respective successors shall be elected for terms of 5 years. The terms of all incumbent members expire July 1 of the year following the adoption of such a proposition.
    Any school district which has adopted this Article may, by referendum in accordance with Section 33-1a, adopt the method of electing members of the board of education provided in that Section.
    Reapportionment of the voting districts provided for in this Article or created pursuant to a court order, shall be completed pursuant to Section 33-1c.
    A board of education may appoint a student to the board to serve in an advisory capacity. The student member shall serve for a term as determined by the board. The board may not grant the student member any voting privileges, but shall consider the student member as an advisor. The student member may not participate in or attend any executive session of the board.
(Source: P.A. 94-231, eff. 7-14-05; 95-6, eff. 6-20-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/33-1a) (from Ch. 122, par. 33-1a)
    Sec. 33-1a. Board of Education-Alternative Method of Election-Terms. The board of education may, on its own motion, or shall upon the petition of the lesser of 2,500 or 5% of the voters registered in the district, submit to the voters of the district at a regular school election held in an even-numbered year a proposition for the election of 4 board members from school board districts and 3 board members at large. If the proposition is approved by a majority of those voting on the proposition, the board shall divide the school district into 4 school board districts, each of which must be compact and contiguous and substantially equal in population to each other district. At the school election in the following year, one member shall be elected from each school board district and 3 members shall be elected at large. They shall commence their terms on July 1, at which time the terms of the incumbent board members expire. Those members first elected under this Section shall determine by lot which member at large and which 2 district members shall serve for 2 years; the other 2 members at large and the other 2 district members shall serve for a 4 year term. Their respective successors shall be elected for terms of 4 years.
    The regular election for members of the board of education shall be held on the same day as the regular township or municipal election. Terms shall commence on July 1 following the election. Any vacancy occurring in the membership of the board shall be filled by appointment of the board until the next regular election for members of such board at which election the office shall be filled.
(Source: P.A. 80-1469.)

    (105 ILCS 5/33-1b) (from Ch. 122, par. 33-1b)
    Sec. 33-1b. Whenever the date designated in Section 33-1 for the election of members of boards of education conflicts with the celebration of Passover, that election shall be postponed to the first Tuesday following the last day of Passover.
(Source: P.A. 82-1014.)

    (105 ILCS 5/33-1c) (from Ch. 122, par. 33-1c)
    Sec. 33-1c. Reapportionment of board voting districts. In the year following each decennial census, the Board of Education shall reapportion the board voting districts to reflect the results of such census. The board voting districts shall be compact, contiguous and have substantially the same ratio of population to the total population of the school district as the ratio of the board members elected from that board voting district has to the total number of members of the Board of Education. The reapportionment plan shall be completed and formally approved by a majority of the members of the board not less than 90 days before the last date established by law for the filing of nominating petitions for the second school board election after the decennial census year. If by reapportionment a board member no longer resides within the board voting district from which the member was elected, the member shall continue to serve in office until the expiration of the member's regular term. All new members shall be elected from the board voting districts as reapportioned.
(Source: P.A. 86-1331.)

    (105 ILCS 5/33-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 33-2)
    Sec. 33-2. Eligibility. To be eligible for election to the board, a person shall be a citizen of the United States, shall have been a resident of the district for at least one year immediately preceding his or her election, and shall not be a child sex offender as defined in Section 11-9.3 of the Criminal Code of 2012. Permanent removal from the district by any member constitutes a resignation from and creates a vacancy in the board. Board members shall serve without compensation.
    Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary in any special charter, petitions nominating candidates for the board of education shall be signed by at least 200 voters of the district; and the polls, whether they be located within a city lying in the district or outside of a city, shall remain open during the hours specified in the Election Code.
(Source: P.A. 97-1150, eff. 1-25-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/33-3) (from Ch. 122, par. 33-3)
    Sec. 33-3. President, secretary and treasurer.
    At the first regular meeting of the board in July of each year, or as soon thereafter as may be, the board shall choose 1 of its number as president, and shall appoint a secretary and a treasurer, who need not be members of the board. The president, secretary and treasurer shall hold their offices for 1 year and until their successors are appointed and qualified. They shall be subject to removal by a majority of all the members and in case of removal or where a vacancy otherwise occurs in either of the offices the board shall appoint a successor to fill the vacancy.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/33-4) (from Ch. 122, par. 33-4)
    Sec. 33-4. Rights, powers and duties of board.
    The board of education shall succeed to all rights, powers and duties of the former governing body of the district.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/33-5) (from Ch. 122, par. 33-5)
    Sec. 33-5. Interest in contracts or transactions.
    No member or employee of the board shall be directly or indirectly interested in any contract, work, or business of the district, or in the sale of any article, the expense, price or consideration of which is paid by the district; nor in the purchase of any real estate or property belonging to the district, or which shall be sold by virtue of legal process at the suit of the district. Whoever violates any provision of this Section shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
(Source: P.A. 77-2267.)

    (105 ILCS 5/33-6) (from Ch. 122, par. 33-6)
    Sec. 33-6. Adoption of article by voters. The electors of any such school district may adopt this Article in the following manner: whenever 1000 of the voters of the district voting at the last preceding election petition the Chief Judge of the Circuit Court or any Judge of that Circuit designated by the Chief Judge of the county in which the district is located to submit to a vote of the electors of the district the proposition as to whether the district shall adopt this Article, the circuit court shall, upon entering an order to that effect, submit the proposition at the next regular scheduled election. The court shall certify the proposition to the proper election authorities for submission to the electors in accordance with the general election law.
(Source: P.A. 81-1489.)

    (105 ILCS 5/33-7) (from Ch. 122, par. 33-7)
    Sec. 33-7. Notice of election - Law applicable - Statement of proposition. The Chief Judge of the Circuit Court or any Judge of that Circuit designated by the Chief Judge shall give notice of the election at which such proposition is to be submitted by publishing the notice in accordance with the general election law. If a majority of the votes cast upon the proposition is in favor thereof this Article shall thereby be adopted by the school district, and the circuit court shall thereupon enter an order declaring this Article in force therein.
(Source: P.A. 81-1490.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 34 heading)
ARTICLE 34. CITIES OF OVER 500,000
INHABITANTS - BOARD OF EDUCATION

    (105 ILCS 5/34-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-1)
    Sec. 34-1. Application of article; Definitions. This Article applies only to cities having a population exceeding 500,000.
    "Trustees", when used in this Article, means the Chicago School Reform Board of Trustees created by this amendatory Act of 1995 and serving as the governing board of the school district organized under this Article beginning with its appointment on or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1995 and continuing until June 30, 1999 or the appointment of a new Chicago Board of Education as provided in Section 34-3, whichever is later.
    "Board", or "board of education" when used in this Article, means: (i) the Chicago School Reform Board of Trustees for the period that begins with the appointment of the Trustees and that ends on the later of June 30, 1999 or the appointment of a new Chicago Board of Education as provided in Section 34-3; and (ii) the new Chicago Board of Education from and after June 30, 1999 or from and after its appointment as provided in Section 34-3, whichever is later.
    Except during the period that begins with the appointment of the Chicago School Reform Board of Trustees on or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1995 and that ends on the later of June 30, 1999 or the appointment of a new Chicago Board of Education as provided in Section 34-3: (i) the school district organized under this Article may be subject to further limitations imposed under Article 34A; and (ii) the provisions of Article 34A prevail over the other provisions of this Act, including the provisions of this Article, to the extent of any conflict.
(Source: P.A. 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-1.01) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-1.01)
    Sec. 34-1.01. Intent. The General Assembly has previously established that the primary purpose of schooling is the transmission of knowledge and culture through which children learn in areas necessary to their continuing development, and the General Assembly has defined these areas as including language arts, mathematics, biological, physical and social sciences, the fine arts, and physical development and health. The General Assembly declares its intent to achieve the primary purpose of schooling in elementary and secondary schools subject to this Article, as now or hereafter amended, in cities of over 500,000 inhabitants, through the provisions of this amendatory Act of 1991.
    A. Goals. In the furtherance of this intent, the General Assembly is committed to the belief that, while such urban schools should foster improvement and student growth in a number of areas, first priority should be given to achieving the following goals:
        1. assuring that students show significant progress
    	
toward meeting and exceeding State performance standards in State mandated learning areas, including the mastery of higher order thinking skills in these and other learning areas;
        2. assuring that students attend school regularly and
    	
graduate from high school at rates that equal or surpass national norms;
        3. assuring that students are adequately prepared for
    	
further education and aiding students in making a successful transition to further education;
        4. assuring that students are adequately prepared for
    	
successful entry into employment and aiding students in making a successful transition to employment;
        5. assuring that students are, to the maximum extent
    	
possible, provided with a common learning experience that is of high academic quality and that reflects high expectations for all students' capacities to learn;
        6. assuring that students are better prepared to
    	
compete in the international market place by having foreign language proficiency and stronger international studies;
        7. assuring that students are encouraged in exploring
    	
potential interests in fields such as journalism, drama, art and music;
        8. assuring that individual teachers are granted the
    	
professional authority to make decisions about instruction and the method of teaching;
        9. assuring that students are provided the means to
    	
express themselves creatively and to respond to the artistic expression of others through the visual arts, music, drama and dance; and
        10. assuring that students are provided adequate
    	
athletic programs that encourage pride and positive identification with the attendance center and that reduce the number of dropouts and teenage delinquents.
    B. Achieving goals. To achieve these priority goals, the General Assembly intends to make the individual local school the essential unit for educational governance and improvement and to establish a process for placing the primary responsibility for school governance and improvement in furtherance of such goals in the hands of parents, community residents, teachers, and the school principal at the school level.
    Further, to achieve these priority goals, the General Assembly intends to lodge with the board of education key powers in limited areas related to district-wide policy, so that the board of education supports school-level governance and improvement and carries out functions that can be performed more efficiently through centralized action.
    The General Assembly does not intend to alter or amend the provisions of the desegregation obligations of the board of education, including but not limited to the Consent Decree or the Desegregation Plan in United States v. Chicago Board of Education, 80 C 5124, U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Illinois. Accordingly, the implementation of this amendatory Act of 1991, to the extent practicable, shall be consistent with and, in all cases, shall be subject to the desegregation obligations pursuant to such Consent Decree and Desegregation Plan.
(Source: P.A. 87-455; 88-686, eff. 1-24-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-1.02) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-1.02)
    Sec. 34-1.02. Educational reform. The General Assembly hereby finds and declares that educational reform in school districts organized under this Article shall be implemented in such manner that:
    1. the percentage of entering freshmen who 4 years later graduate from 12th grade from each high school attendance center within the district in each of the 1989-90, 1990-91, 1991-92, 1992-93 and 1993-94 school years exceeds by at least 5% the percentage of similar students graduating from that high school attendance center in the immediately preceding school year;
    2. the average daily student attendance rate within the district in each of the 1989-90, 1990-91, 1991-92, 1992-93 and 1993-94 school years exceeds by at least 1% the average daily student attendance rate within the district for the immediately preceding school year;
    3. by the conclusion of the 1993-1994 school year, the percentage of students within the district failing and not advancing to the next higher grade or graduating is at least 10% less than the percentage of students within the district failing and not advancing to the next higher grade or graduating at the conclusion of the 1987-88 school year;
    4. on an annual basis, each attendance center within the district makes significant progress toward meeting and exceeding State performance standards in reading, writing, mathematics, and other State mandated learning areas, including the mastery of higher order thinking skills in these learning areas. Significant annual progress toward meeting and exceeding State performance standards shall occur for all students regardless of race, ethnicity, gender, or income status, based on the expectation that these subgroups shall meet and exceed State performance standards. Annual objectives for significant progress and timeframes during which the students' performance overall and as measured within subgroups will meet and exceed State performance standards shall be specified in the school improvement plan required in Section 34-2.4; and
    5. appropriate improvement and progress are realized each school year in each attendance center within the district, when compared to the performance of such attendance center during the immediately preceding school year, in advancing toward and achieving the objectives established by paragraphs 1 through 4 of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 88-686, eff. 1-24-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-1.05)
    Sec. 34-1.05. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 98-1053, eff. 1-1-15. Repealed internally, eff. 5-31-16.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-1.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-1.1)
    Sec. 34-1.1. Definitions. As used in this Article:
    "Academic Accountability Council" means the Chicago Schools Academic Accountability Council created under Section 34-3.4.
    "Local School Council" means a local school council established under Section 34-2.1.
    "School" and "attendance center" are used interchangeably to mean any attendance center operated pursuant to this Article and under the direction of one principal.
    "Secondary Attendance Center" means a school which has students enrolled in grades 9 through 12 (although it may also have students enrolled in grades below grade 9).
    "Local Attendance Area School" means a school which has a local attendance area established by the board.
    "Multi-area school" means a school other than a local attendance area school.
    "Contract school" means an attendance center managed and operated by a for-profit or not-for-profit private entity retained by the board to provide instructional and other services to a majority of the pupils enrolled in the attendance center.
    "Contract turnaround school" means an experimental contract school created by the board to implement alternative governance in an attendance center subject to restructuring or similar intervention.
    "Parent" means a parent or legal guardian of an enrolled student of an attendance center.
    "Community resident" means a person, 18 years of age or older, residing within an attendance area served by a school, excluding any person who is a parent of a student enrolled in that school; provided that with respect to any multi-area school, community resident means any person, 18 years of age or older, residing within the voting district established for that school pursuant to Section 34-2.1c, excluding any person who is a parent of a student enrolled in that school.
    "School staff" means all certificated and uncertificated school personnel, including all teaching and administrative staff (other than the principal) and including all custodial, food service and other civil service employees, who are employed at and assigned to perform the majority of their employment duties at one attendance center served by the same local school council.
    "Regular meetings" means the meeting dates established by the local school council at its annual organizational meeting.
(Source: P.A. 100-1046, eff. 8-23-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-2) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-2)
    Sec. 34-2. City to constitute district-Corporate status of board.
    Each city having a population exceeding 500,000 shall constitute one school district which shall maintain a system of free schools under the charge of a board of education. The district shall be a body politic and corporate by the name of "Board of Education of the City of ...." and by that name may sue and be sued in all courts and places where judicial proceedings are had.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-2.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-2.1)
    Sec. 34-2.1. Local School Councils - Composition - Voter-Eligibility - Elections - Terms.
    (a) A local school council shall be established for each attendance center within the school district. Each local school council shall consist of the following 12 voting members: the principal of the attendance center, 2 teachers employed and assigned to perform the majority of their employment duties at the attendance center, 6 parents of students currently enrolled at the attendance center, one employee of the school district employed and assigned to perform the majority of his or her employment duties at the attendance center who is not a teacher, and 2 community residents. Neither the parents nor the community residents who serve as members of the local school council shall be employees of the Board of Education. In each secondary attendance center, the local school council shall consist of 13 voting members -- the 12 voting members described above and one full-time student member, appointed as provided in subsection (m) below. In the event that the chief executive officer of the Chicago School Reform Board of Trustees determines that a local school council is not carrying out its financial duties effectively, the chief executive officer is authorized to appoint a representative of the business community with experience in finance and management to serve as an advisor to the local school council for the purpose of providing advice and assistance to the local school council on fiscal matters. The advisor shall have access to relevant financial records of the local school council. The advisor may attend executive sessions. The chief executive officer shall issue a written policy defining the circumstances under which a local school council is not carrying out its financial duties effectively.
    (b) Within 7 days of January 11, 1991, the Mayor shall appoint the members and officers (a Chairperson who shall be a parent member and a Secretary) of each local school council who shall hold their offices until their successors shall be elected and qualified. Members so appointed shall have all the powers and duties of local school councils as set forth in this amendatory Act of 1991. The Mayor's appointments shall not require approval by the City Council.
    The membership of each local school council shall be encouraged to be reflective of the racial and ethnic composition of the student population of the attendance center served by the local school council.
    (c) Beginning with the 1995-1996 school year and in every even-numbered year thereafter, the Board shall set second semester Parent Report Card Pick-up Day for Local School Council elections and may schedule elections at year-round schools for the same dates as the remainder of the school system. Elections shall be conducted as provided herein by the Board of Education in consultation with the local school council at each attendance center.
    (c-5) Notwithstanding subsection (c), for the local school council election set for the 2019-2020 school year, the Board may hold the election on the first semester Parent Report Card Pick-up Day of the 2020-2021 school year, making any necessary modifications to the election process or date to comply with guidance from the Department of Public Health and the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The terms of office of all local school council members eligible to serve and seated on or after March 23, 2020 through January 10, 2021 are extended through January 10, 2021, provided that the members continue to meet eligibility requirements for local school council membership.
    (d) Beginning with the 1995-96 school year, the following procedures shall apply to the election of local school council members at each attendance center:
        (i) The elected members of each local school council
    	
shall consist of the 6 parent members and the 2 community resident members.
        (ii) Each elected member shall be elected by the
    	
eligible voters of that attendance center to serve for a two-year term commencing on July 1 immediately following the election described in subsection (c), except that the terms of members elected to a local school council under subsection (c-5) shall commence on January 11, 2021 and end on July 1, 2022. Eligible voters for each attendance center shall consist of the parents and community residents for that attendance center.
        (iii) Each eligible voter shall be entitled to cast
    	
one vote for up to a total of 5 candidates, irrespective of whether such candidates are parent or community resident candidates.
        (iv) Each parent voter shall be entitled to vote in
    	
the local school council election at each attendance center in which he or she has a child currently enrolled. Each community resident voter shall be entitled to vote in the local school council election at each attendance center for which he or she resides in the applicable attendance area or voting district, as the case may be.
        (v) Each eligible voter shall be entitled to vote
    	
once, but not more than once, in the local school council election at each attendance center at which the voter is eligible to vote.
        (vi) The 2 teacher members and the non-teacher
    	
employee member of each local school council shall be appointed as provided in subsection (l) below each to serve for a two-year term coinciding with that of the elected parent and community resident members. From March 23, 2020 through January 10, 2021, the chief executive officer or his or her designee may make accommodations to fill the vacancy of a teacher or non-teacher employee member of a local school council.
        (vii) At secondary attendance centers, the voting
    	
student member shall be appointed as provided in subsection (m) below to serve for a one-year term coinciding with the beginning of the terms of the elected parent and community members of the local school council. For the 2020-2021 school year, the chief executive officer or his or her designee may make accommodations to fill the vacancy of a student member of a local school council.
    (e) The Council shall publicize the date and place of the election by posting notices at the attendance center, in public places within the attendance boundaries of the attendance center and by distributing notices to the pupils at the attendance center, and shall utilize such other means as it deems necessary to maximize the involvement of all eligible voters.
    (f) Nomination. The Council shall publicize the opening of nominations by posting notices at the attendance center, in public places within the attendance boundaries of the attendance center and by distributing notices to the pupils at the attendance center, and shall utilize such other means as it deems necessary to maximize the involvement of all eligible voters. Not less than 2 weeks before the election date, persons eligible to run for the Council shall submit their name, date of birth, social security number, if available, and some evidence of eligibility to the Council. The Council shall encourage nomination of candidates reflecting the racial/ethnic population of the students at the attendance center. Each person nominated who runs as a candidate shall disclose, in a manner determined by the Board, any economic interest held by such person, by such person's spouse or children, or by each business entity in which such person has an ownership interest, in any contract with the Board, any local school council or any public school in the school district. Each person nominated who runs as a candidate shall also disclose, in a manner determined by the Board, if he or she ever has been convicted of any of the offenses specified in subsection (c) of Section 34-18.5; provided that neither this provision nor any other provision of this Section shall be deemed to require the disclosure of any information that is contained in any law enforcement record or juvenile court record that is confidential or whose accessibility or disclosure is restricted or prohibited under Section 5-901 or 5-905 of the Juvenile Court Act of 1987. Failure to make such disclosure shall render a person ineligible for election or to serve on the local school council. The same disclosure shall be required of persons under consideration for appointment to the Council pursuant to subsections (l) and (m) of this Section.
    (f-5) Notwithstanding disclosure, a person who has been convicted of any of the following offenses at any time shall be ineligible for election or appointment to a local school council and ineligible for appointment to a local school council pursuant to subsections (l) and (m) of this Section: (i) those defined in Section 11-1.20, 11-1.30, 11-1.40, 11-1.50, 11-1.60, 11-6, 11-9.1, 11-14.4, 11-16, 11-17.1, 11-19, 11-19.1, 11-19.2, 11-20.1, 11-20.1B, 11-20.3, 12-13, 12-14, 12-14.1, 12-15, or 12-16, or subdivision (a)(2) of Section 11-14.3, of the Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012, or (ii) any offense committed or attempted in any other state or against the laws of the United States, which, if committed or attempted in this State, would have been punishable as one or more of the foregoing offenses. Notwithstanding disclosure, a person who has been convicted of any of the following offenses within the 10 years previous to the date of nomination or appointment shall be ineligible for election or appointment to a local school council: (i) those defined in Section 401.1, 405.1, or 405.2 of the Illinois Controlled Substances Act or (ii) any offense committed or attempted in any other state or against the laws of the United States, which, if committed or attempted in this State, would have been punishable as one or more of the foregoing offenses.
    Immediately upon election or appointment, incoming local school council members shall be required to undergo a criminal background investigation, to be completed prior to the member taking office, in order to identify any criminal convictions under the offenses enumerated in Section 34-18.5. The investigation shall be conducted by the Department of State Police in the same manner as provided for in Section 34-18.5. However, notwithstanding Section 34-18.5, the social security number shall be provided only if available. If it is determined at any time that a local school council member or member-elect has been convicted of any of the offenses enumerated in this Section or failed to disclose a conviction of any of the offenses enumerated in Section 34-18.5, the general superintendent shall notify the local school council member or member-elect of such determination and the local school council member or member-elect shall be removed from the local school council by the Board, subject to a hearing, convened pursuant to Board rule, prior to removal.
    (g) At least one week before the election date, the Council shall publicize, in the manner provided in subsection (e), the names of persons nominated for election.
    (h) Voting shall be in person by secret ballot at the attendance center between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
    (i) Candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall be declared elected by the Council. In cases of a tie, the Council shall determine the winner by lot.
    (j) The Council shall certify the results of the election and shall publish the results in the minutes of the Council.
    (k) The general superintendent shall resolve any disputes concerning election procedure or results and shall ensure that, except as provided in subsections (e) and (g), no resources of any attendance center shall be used to endorse or promote any candidate.
    (l) Beginning with the 1995-1996 school year and in every even numbered year thereafter, the Board shall appoint 2 teacher members to each local school council. These appointments shall be made in the following manner:
        (i) The Board shall appoint 2 teachers who are
    	
employed and assigned to perform the majority of their employment duties at the attendance center to serve on the local school council of the attendance center for a two-year term coinciding with the terms of the elected parent and community members of that local school council. These appointments shall be made from among those teachers who are nominated in accordance with subsection (f).
        (ii) A non-binding, advisory poll to ascertain the
    	
preferences of the school staff regarding appointments of teachers to the local school council for that attendance center shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures used to elect parent and community Council representatives. At such poll, each member of the school staff shall be entitled to indicate his or her preference for up to 2 candidates from among those who submitted statements of candidacy as described above. These preferences shall be advisory only and the Board shall maintain absolute discretion to appoint teacher members to local school councils, irrespective of the preferences expressed in any such poll.
        (iii) In the event that a teacher representative is
    	
unable to perform his or her employment duties at the school due to illness, disability, leave of absence, disciplinary action, or any other reason, the Board shall declare a temporary vacancy and appoint a replacement teacher representative to serve on the local school council until such time as the teacher member originally appointed pursuant to this subsection (l) resumes service at the attendance center or for the remainder of the term. The replacement teacher representative shall be appointed in the same manner and by the same procedures as teacher representatives are appointed in subdivisions (i) and (ii) of this subsection (l).
    (m) Beginning with the 1995-1996 school year, and in every year thereafter, the Board shall appoint one student member to each secondary attendance center. These appointments shall be made in the following manner:
        (i) Appointments shall be made from among those
    	
students who submit statements of candidacy to the principal of the attendance center, such statements to be submitted commencing on the first day of the twentieth week of school and continuing for 2 weeks thereafter. The form and manner of such candidacy statements shall be determined by the Board.
        (ii) During the twenty-second week of school in every
    	
year, the principal of each attendance center shall conduct a non-binding, advisory poll to ascertain the preferences of the school students regarding the appointment of a student to the local school council for that attendance center. At such poll, each student shall be entitled to indicate his or her preference for up to one candidate from among those who submitted statements of candidacy as described above. The Board shall promulgate rules to ensure that these non-binding, advisory polls are conducted in a fair and equitable manner and maximize the involvement of all school students. The preferences expressed in these non-binding, advisory polls shall be transmitted by the principal to the Board. However, these preferences shall be advisory only and the Board shall maintain absolute discretion to appoint student members to local school councils, irrespective of the preferences expressed in any such poll.
        (iii) For the 1995-96 school year only, appointments
    	
shall be made from among those students who submitted statements of candidacy to the principal of the attendance center during the first 2 weeks of the school year. The principal shall communicate the results of any nonbinding, advisory poll to the Board. These results shall be advisory only, and the Board shall maintain absolute discretion to appoint student members to local school councils, irrespective of the preferences expressed in any such poll.
    (n) The Board may promulgate such other rules and regulations for election procedures as may be deemed necessary to ensure fair elections.
    (o) In the event that a vacancy occurs during a member's term, the Council shall appoint a person eligible to serve on the Council, to fill the unexpired term created by the vacancy, except that any teacher vacancy shall be filled by the Board after considering the preferences of the school staff as ascertained through a non-binding advisory poll of school staff.
    (p) If less than the specified number of persons is elected within each candidate category, the newly elected local school council shall appoint eligible persons to serve as members of the Council for two-year terms.
    (q) The Board shall promulgate rules regarding conflicts of interest and disclosure of economic interests which shall apply to local school council members and which shall require reports or statements to be filed by Council members at regular intervals with the Secretary of the Board. Failure to comply with such rules or intentionally falsifying such reports shall be grounds for disqualification from local school council membership. A vacancy on the Council for disqualification may be so declared by the Secretary of the Board. Rules regarding conflicts of interest and disclosure of economic interests promulgated by the Board shall apply to local school council members. No less than 45 days prior to the deadline, the general superintendent shall provide notice, by mail, to each local school council member of all requirements and forms for compliance with economic interest statements.
    (r) (1) If a parent member of a local school council ceases to have any child enrolled in the attendance center governed by the Local School Council due to the graduation or voluntary transfer of a child or children from the attendance center, the parent's membership on the Local School Council and all voting rights are terminated immediately as of the date of the child's graduation or voluntary transfer. If the child of a parent member of a local school council dies during the member's term in office, the member may continue to serve on the local school council for the balance of his or her term. Further, a local school council member may be removed from the Council by a majority vote of the Council as provided in subsection (c) of Section 34-2.2 if the Council member has missed 3 consecutive regular meetings, not including committee meetings, or 5 regular meetings in a 12 month period, not including committee meetings. If a parent member of a local school council ceases to be eligible to serve on the Council for any other reason, he or she shall be removed by the Board subject to a hearing, convened pursuant to Board rule, prior to removal. A vote to remove a Council member by the local school council shall only be valid if the Council member has been notified personally or by certified mail, mailed to the person's last known address, of the Council's intent to vote on the Council member's removal at least 7 days prior to the vote. The Council member in question shall have the right to explain his or her actions and shall be eligible to vote on the question of his or her removal from the Council. The provisions of this subsection shall be contained within the petitions used to nominate Council candidates.
    (2) A person may continue to serve as a community resident member of a local school council as long as he or she resides in the attendance area served by the school and is not employed by the Board nor is a parent of a student enrolled at the school. If a community resident member ceases to be eligible to serve on the Council, he or she shall be removed by the Board subject to a hearing, convened pursuant to Board rule, prior to removal.
    (3) A person may continue to serve as a teacher member of a local school council as long as he or she is employed and assigned to perform a majority of his or her duties at the school, provided that if the teacher representative resigns from employment with the Board or voluntarily transfers to another school, the teacher's membership on the local school council and all voting rights are terminated immediately as of the date of the teacher's resignation or upon the date of the teacher's voluntary transfer to another school. If a teacher member of a local school council ceases to be eligible to serve on a local school council for any other reason, that member shall be removed by the Board subject to a hearing, convened pursuant to Board rule, prior to removal.
    (s) As used in this Section only, "community resident" means a person, 17 years of age or older, residing within an attendance area served by a school, excluding any person who is a parent of a student enrolled in that school; provided that with respect to any multi-area school, community resident means any person, 17 years of age or older, residing within the voting district established for that school pursuant to Section 34-2.1c, excluding any person who is a parent of a student enrolled in that school. This definition does not apply to any provisions concerning school boards.
(Source: P.A. 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-2.1b) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-2.1b)
    Sec. 34-2.1b. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-2.1c) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-2.1c)
    Sec. 34-2.1c. Multi-Area Schools - Establishment of Voting Districts.
    (a) On or before September 1, 1991, the Board shall establish a voting district for each multi-area school. The Board shall take into account the following criteria in establishing such voting districts:
        (i) in cases where the multi-area school was
    	
previously a school with a local attendance area established by the Board, the boundaries of such local attendance area;
        (ii) the location of physical characteristics in the
    	
surrounding geographic area, including but not limited to, expressways, rapid transit and railroad rights-of-way, rivers and viaducts;
        (iii) the location of established neighborhood and
    	
community area boundaries and of boundaries established for other elected offices within the city and the State;
        (iv) size of student population; and
    (v) compactness and contiguity of voting districts.
    Prior to establishing voting districts for multi-area schools, the Board shall hold at least one public hearing thereon. The Board shall establish procedures to ensure the maximum participation of all interested persons in such hearing or hearings.
    (b) The Board shall publicize the location and description of these voting districts by posting notices at each multi-area school and in public places within each voting district, by distributing notices to students at the multi-area school and by placing notices both in daily newspapers of general circulation published in the city and in local and community newspapers published within each voting district. The Board shall utilize other means to ensure adequate dissemination of the description and location of the voting districts.
    (c) The Board may adjust or alter the voting districts of any multi-area school once every tenth year. The Board shall utilize the same criteria and procedures described above in connection with any adjustment or alteration of any voting district.
    (d) With respect to any school designated as a multi-area school subsequent to the establishment of voting districts, as described in subsection (a), or subsequent to the adjustment of these districts, as described in subsection (c), the Board shall establish a voting district for that school prior to the commencement of its operation as a multi-area school. The Board shall utilize the same criteria and procedures described in subsection (a) in connection with the establishment of such a voting district.
(Source: P.A. 87-454.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-2.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-2.2)
    Sec. 34-2.2. Local school councils - Manner of operation.
    (a) The annual organizational meeting of each local school council shall be held at the attendance center or via videoconference or teleconference if guidance from the Department of Public Health or Centers for Disease Control and Prevention limits the size of in-person meetings at the time of the meeting. At the annual organization meeting, which shall be held no sooner than July 1 and no later than July 14, a parent member of the local school council shall be selected by the members of such council as its chairperson, and a secretary shall be selected by the members of such council from among their number, each to serve a term of one year. However, an organizational meeting held by members elected to a local school council under subsection (c-5) of Section 34-2.1 may be held no sooner than January 11, 2021 and no later than January 31, 2021. Whenever a vacancy in the office of chairperson or secretary of a local school council shall occur, a new chairperson (who shall be a parent member) or secretary, as the case may be, shall be elected by the members of the local school council from among their number to serve as such chairperson or secretary for the unexpired term of office in which the vacancy occurs. At each annual organizational meeting, the time and place of any regular meetings of the local school council shall be fixed. Special meetings of the local school council may be called by the chairperson or by any 4 members by giving notice thereof in writing, specifying the time, place and purpose of the meeting. Public notice of meetings shall also be given in accordance with the Open Meetings Act.
    (b) Members and officers of the local school council shall serve without compensation and without reimbursement of any expenses incurred in the performance of their duties, except that the board of education may by rule establish a procedure and thereunder provide for reimbursement of members and officers of local school councils for such of their reasonable and necessary expenses (excluding any lodging or meal expenses) incurred in the performance of their duties as the board may deem appropriate.
    (c) A majority of the full membership of the local school council shall constitute a quorum, and whenever a vote is taken on any measure before the local school council, a quorum being present, the affirmative vote of a majority of the votes of the full membership then serving of the local school council shall determine the outcome thereof; provided that whenever the measure before the local school council is (i) the evaluation of the principal, or (ii) the renewal of his or her performance contract or the inclusion of any provision or modification of the contract, or (iii) the direct selection by the local school council of a new principal (including a new principal to fill a vacancy) to serve under a 4 year performance contract, or (iv) the determination of the names of candidates to be submitted to the general superintendent for the position of principal, the principal and student member of a high school council shall not be counted for purposes of determining whether a quorum is present to act on the measure and shall have no vote thereon; and provided further that 7 affirmative votes of the local school council shall be required for the direct selection by the local school council of a new principal to serve under a 4 year performance contract but not for the renewal of a principal's performance contract.
    (d) Student members of high school councils shall not be eligible to vote on personnel matters, including but not limited to principal evaluations and contracts and the allocation of teaching and staff resources.
    (e) The local school council of an attendance center which provides bilingual education shall be encouraged to provide translators at each council meeting to maximize participation of parents and the community.
    (f) Each local school council of an attendance center which provides bilingual education shall create a Bilingual Advisory Committee or recognize an existing Bilingual Advisory Committee as a standing committee. The Chair and a majority of the members of the advisory committee shall be parents of students in the bilingual education program. The parents on the advisory committee shall be selected by parents of students in the bilingual education program, and the committee shall select a Chair. The advisory committee for each secondary attendance center shall include at least one full-time bilingual education student. The Bilingual Advisory Committee shall serve only in an advisory capacity to the local school council.
    (g) Local school councils may utilize the services of an arbitration board to resolve intra-council disputes.
(Source: P.A. 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-2.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-2.3)
    Sec. 34-2.3. Local school councils - Powers and duties. Each local school council shall have and exercise, consistent with the provisions of this Article and the powers and duties of the board of education, the following powers and duties:
    1. (A) To annually evaluate the performance of the principal of the attendance center using a Board approved principal evaluation form, which shall include the evaluation of (i) student academic improvement, as defined by the school improvement plan, (ii) student absenteeism rates at the school, (iii) instructional leadership, (iv) the effective implementation of programs, policies, or strategies to improve student academic achievement, (v) school management, and (vi) any other factors deemed relevant by the local school council, including, without limitation, the principal's communication skills and ability to create and maintain a student-centered learning environment, to develop opportunities for professional development, and to encourage parental involvement and community partnerships to achieve school improvement;
    (B) to determine in the manner provided by subsection (c) of Section 34-2.2 and subdivision 1.5 of this Section whether the performance contract of the principal shall be renewed; and
    (C) to directly select, in the manner provided by subsection (c) of Section 34-2.2, a new principal (including a new principal to fill a vacancy) -- without submitting any list of candidates for that position to the general superintendent as provided in paragraph 2 of this Section -- to serve under a 4 year performance contract; provided that (i) the determination of whether the principal's performance contract is to be renewed, based upon the evaluation required by subdivision 1.5 of this Section, shall be made no later than 150 days prior to the expiration of the current performance-based contract of the principal, (ii) in cases where such performance contract is not renewed -- a direct selection of a new principal -- to serve under a 4 year performance contract shall be made by the local school council no later than 45 days prior to the expiration of the current performance contract of the principal, and (iii) a selection by the local school council of a new principal to fill a vacancy under a 4 year performance contract shall be made within 90 days after the date such vacancy occurs. A Council shall be required, if requested by the principal, to provide in writing the reasons for the council's not renewing the principal's contract.
    1.5. The local school council's determination of whether to renew the principal's contract shall be based on an evaluation to assess the educational and administrative progress made at the school during the principal's current performance-based contract. The local school council shall base its evaluation on (i) student academic improvement, as defined by the school improvement plan, (ii) student absenteeism rates at the school, (iii) instructional leadership, (iv) the effective implementation of programs, policies, or strategies to improve student academic achievement, (v) school management, and (vi) any other factors deemed relevant by the local school council, including, without limitation, the principal's communication skills and ability to create and maintain a student-centered learning environment, to develop opportunities for professional development, and to encourage parental involvement and community partnerships to achieve school improvement. If a local school council fails to renew the performance contract of a principal rated by the general superintendent, or his or her designee, in the previous years' evaluations as meeting or exceeding expectations, the principal, within 15 days after the local school council's decision not to renew the contract, may request a review of the local school council's principal non-retention decision by a hearing officer appointed by the American Arbitration Association. A local school council member or members or the general superintendent may support the principal's request for review. During the period of the hearing officer's review of the local school council's decision on whether or not to retain the principal, the local school council shall maintain all authority to search for and contract with a person to serve as interim or acting principal, or as the principal of the attendance center under a 4-year performance contract, provided that any performance contract entered into by the local school council shall be voidable or modified in accordance with the decision of the hearing officer. The principal may request review only once while at that attendance center. If a local school council renews the contract of a principal who failed to obtain a rating of "meets" or "exceeds expectations" in the general superintendent's evaluation for the previous year, the general superintendent, within 15 days after the local school council's decision to renew the contract, may request a review of the local school council's principal retention decision by a hearing officer appointed by the American Arbitration Association. The general superintendent may request a review only once for that principal at that attendance center. All requests to review the retention or non-retention of a principal shall be submitted to the general superintendent, who shall, in turn, forward such requests, within 14 days of receipt, to the American Arbitration Association. The general superintendent shall send a contemporaneous copy of the request that was forwarded to the American Arbitration Association to the principal and to each local school council member and shall inform the local school council of its rights and responsibilities under the arbitration process, including the local school council's right to representation and the manner and process by which the Board shall pay the costs of the council's representation. If the local school council retains the principal and the general superintendent requests a review of the retention decision, the local school council and the general superintendent shall be considered parties to the arbitration, a hearing officer shall be chosen between those 2 parties pursuant to procedures promulgated by the State Board of Education, and the principal may retain counsel and participate in the arbitration. If the local school council does not retain the principal and the principal requests a review of the retention decision, the local school council and the principal shall be considered parties to the arbitration and a hearing officer shall be chosen between those 2 parties pursuant to procedures promulgated by the State Board of Education. The hearing shall begin (i) within 45 days after the initial request for review is submitted by the principal to the general superintendent or (ii) if the initial request for review is made by the general superintendent, within 45 days after that request is mailed to the American Arbitration Association. The hearing officer shall render a decision within 45 days after the hearing begins and within 90 days after the initial request for review. The Board shall contract with the American Arbitration Association for all of the hearing officer's reasonable and necessary costs. In addition, the Board shall pay any reasonable costs incurred by a local school council for representation before a hearing officer.
    1.10. The hearing officer shall conduct a hearing, which shall include (i) a review of the principal's performance, evaluations, and other evidence of the principal's service at the school, (ii) reasons provided by the local school council for its decision, and (iii) documentation evidencing views of interested persons, including, without limitation, students, parents, local school council members, school faculty and staff, the principal, the general superintendent or his or her designee, and members of the community. The burden of proof in establishing that the local school council's decision was arbitrary and capricious shall be on the party requesting the arbitration, and this party shall sustain the burden by a preponderance of the evidence. The hearing officer shall set the local school council decision aside if that decision, in light of the record developed at the hearing, is arbitrary and capricious. The decision of the hearing officer may not be appealed to the Board or the State Board of Education. If the hearing officer decides that the principal shall be retained, the retention period shall not exceed 2 years.
    2. In the event (i) the local school council does not renew the performance contract of the principal, or the principal fails to receive a satisfactory rating as provided in subsection (h) of Section 34-8.3, or the principal is removed for cause during the term of his or her performance contract in the manner provided by Section 34-85, or a vacancy in the position of principal otherwise occurs prior to the expiration of the term of a principal's performance contract, and (ii) the local school council fails to directly select a new principal to serve under a 4 year performance contract, the local school council in such event shall submit to the general superintendent a list of 3 candidates -- listed in the local school council's order of preference -- for the position of principal, one of which shall be selected by the general superintendent to serve as principal of the attendance center. If the general superintendent fails or refuses to select one of the candidates on the list to serve as principal within 30 days after being furnished with the candidate list, the general superintendent shall select and place a principal on an interim basis (i) for a period not to exceed one year or (ii) until the local school council selects a new principal with 7 affirmative votes as provided in subsection (c) of Section 34-2.2, whichever occurs first. If the local school council fails or refuses to select and appoint a new principal, as specified by subsection (c) of Section 34-2.2, the general superintendent may select and appoint a new principal on an interim basis for an additional year or until a new contract principal is selected by the local school council. There shall be no discrimination on the basis of race, sex, creed, color or disability unrelated to ability to perform in connection with the submission of candidates for, and the selection of a candidate to serve as principal of an attendance center. No person shall be directly selected, listed as a candidate for, or selected to serve as principal of an attendance center (i) if such person has been removed for cause from employment by the Board or (ii) if such person does not hold a valid administrative certificate issued or exchanged under Article 21 and endorsed as required by that Article for the position of principal. A principal whose performance contract is not renewed as provided under subsection (c) of Section 34-2.2 may nevertheless, if otherwise qualified and certified as herein provided and if he or she has received a satisfactory rating as provided in subsection (h) of Section 34-8.3, be included by a local school council as one of the 3 candidates listed in order of preference on any candidate list from which one person is to be selected to serve as principal of the attendance center under a new performance contract. The initial candidate list required to be submitted by a local school council to the general superintendent in cases where the local school council does not renew the performance contract of its principal and does not directly select a new principal to serve under a 4 year performance contract shall be submitted not later than 30 days prior to the expiration of the current performance contract. In cases where the local school council fails or refuses to submit the candidate list to the general superintendent no later than 30 days prior to the expiration of the incumbent principal's contract, the general superintendent may appoint a principal on an interim basis for a period not to exceed one year, during which time the local school council shall be able to select a new principal with 7 affirmative votes as provided in subsection (c) of Section 34-2.2. In cases where a principal is removed for cause or a vacancy otherwise occurs in the position of principal and the vacancy is not filled by direct selection by the local school council, the candidate list shall be submitted by the local school council to the general superintendent within 90 days after the date such removal or vacancy occurs. In cases where the local school council fails or refuses to submit the candidate list to the general superintendent within 90 days after the date of the vacancy, the general superintendent may appoint a principal on an interim basis for a period of one year, during which time the local school council shall be able to select a new principal with 7 affirmative votes as provided in subsection (c) of Section 34-2.2.
    2.5. Whenever a vacancy in the office of a principal occurs for any reason, the vacancy shall be filled in the manner provided by this Section by the selection of a new principal to serve under a 4 year performance contract.
    3. To establish additional criteria to be included as part of the performance contract of its principal, provided that such additional criteria shall not discriminate on the basis of race, sex, creed, color or disability unrelated to ability to perform, and shall not be inconsistent with the uniform 4 year performance contract for principals developed by the board as provided in Section 34-8.1 of the School Code or with other provisions of this Article governing the authority and responsibility of principals.
    4. To approve the expenditure plan prepared by the principal with respect to all funds allocated and distributed to the attendance center by the Board. The expenditure plan shall be administered by the principal. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act or any other law, any expenditure plan approved and administered under this Section 34-2.3 shall be consistent with and subject to the terms of any contract for services with a third party entered into by the Chicago School Reform Board of Trustees or the board under this Act.
    Via a supermajority vote of 7 members of the local school council or 8 members of a high school local school council, the Council may transfer allocations pursuant to Section 34-2.3 within funds; provided that such a transfer is consistent with applicable law and collective bargaining agreements.
    Beginning in fiscal year 1991 and in each fiscal year thereafter, the Board may reserve up to 1% of its total fiscal year budget for distribution on a prioritized basis to schools throughout the school system in order to assure adequate programs to meet the needs of special student populations as determined by the Board. This distribution shall take into account the needs catalogued in the Systemwide Plan and the various local school improvement plans of the local school councils. Information about these centrally funded programs shall be distributed to the local school councils so that their subsequent planning and programming will account for these provisions.
    Beginning in fiscal year 1991 and in each fiscal year thereafter, from other amounts available in the applicable fiscal year budget, the board shall allocate a lump sum amount to each local school based upon such formula as the board shall determine taking into account the special needs of the student body. The local school principal shall develop an expenditure plan in consultation with the local school council, the professional personnel leadership committee and with all other school personnel, which reflects the priorities and activities as described in the school's local school improvement plan and is consistent with applicable law and collective bargaining agreements and with board policies and standards; however, the local school council shall have the right to request waivers of board policy from the board of education and waivers of employee collective bargaining agreements pursuant to Section 34-8.1a.
    The expenditure plan developed by the principal with respect to amounts available from the fund for prioritized special needs programs and the allocated lump sum amount must be approved by the local school council.
    The lump sum allocation shall take into account the following principles:
        a. Teachers: Each school shall be allocated funds
    	
equal to the amount appropriated in the previous school year for compensation for teachers (regular grades kindergarten through 12th grade) plus whatever increases in compensation have been negotiated contractually or through longevity as provided in the negotiated agreement. Adjustments shall be made due to layoff or reduction in force, lack of funds or work, change in subject requirements, enrollment changes, or contracts with third parties for the performance of services or to rectify any inconsistencies with system-wide allocation formulas or for other legitimate reasons.
        b. Other personnel: Funds for other teacher
    	
certificated and uncertificated personnel paid through non-categorical funds shall be provided according to system-wide formulas based on student enrollment and the special needs of the school as determined by the Board.
        c. Non-compensation items: Appropriations for all
    	
non-compensation items shall be based on system-wide formulas based on student enrollment and on the special needs of the school or factors related to the physical plant, including but not limited to textbooks, electronic textbooks and the technological equipment necessary to gain access to and use electronic textbooks, supplies, electricity, equipment, and routine maintenance.
        d. Funds for categorical programs: Schools shall
    	
receive personnel and funds based on, and shall use such personnel and funds in accordance with State and Federal requirements applicable to each categorical program provided to meet the special needs of the student body (including but not limited to, Federal Chapter I, Bilingual, and Special Education).
        d.1. Funds for State Title I: Each school shall
    	
receive funds based on State and Board requirements applicable to each State Title I pupil provided to meet the special needs of the student body. Each school shall receive the proportion of funds as provided in Section 18-8 or 18-8.15 to which they are entitled. These funds shall be spent only with the budgetary approval of the Local School Council as provided in Section 34-2.3.
        e. The Local School Council shall have the right to
    	
request the principal to close positions and open new ones consistent with the provisions of the local school improvement plan provided that these decisions are consistent with applicable law and collective bargaining agreements. If a position is closed, pursuant to this paragraph, the local school shall have for its use the system-wide average compensation for the closed position.
        f. Operating within existing laws and collective
    	
bargaining agreements, the local school council shall have the right to direct the principal to shift expenditures within funds.
        g. (Blank).
    Any funds unexpended at the end of the fiscal year shall be available to the board of education for use as part of its budget for the following fiscal year.
    5. To make recommendations to the principal concerning textbook selection and concerning curriculum developed pursuant to the school improvement plan which is consistent with systemwide curriculum objectives in accordance with Sections 34-8 and 34-18 of the School Code and in conformity with the collective bargaining agreement.
    6. To advise the principal concerning the attendance and disciplinary policies for the attendance center, subject to the provisions of this Article and Article 26, and consistent with the uniform system of discipline established by the board pursuant to Section 34-19.
    7. To approve a school improvement plan developed as provided in Section 34-2.4. The process and schedule for plan development shall be publicized to the entire school community, and the community shall be afforded the opportunity to make recommendations concerning the plan. At least twice a year the principal and local school council shall report publicly on progress and problems with respect to plan implementation.
    8. To evaluate the allocation of teaching resources and other certificated and uncertificated staff to the attendance center to determine whether such allocation is consistent with and in furtherance of instructional objectives and school programs reflective of the school improvement plan adopted for the attendance center; and to make recommendations to the board, the general superintendent and the principal concerning any reallocation of teaching resources or other staff whenever the council determines that any such reallocation is appropriate because the qualifications of any existing staff at the attendance center do not adequately match or support instructional objectives or school programs which reflect the school improvement plan.
    9. To make recommendations to the principal and the general superintendent concerning their respective appointments, after August 31, 1989, and in the manner provided by Section 34-8 and Section 34-8.1, of persons to fill any vacant, additional or newly created positions for teachers at the attendance center or at attendance centers which include the attendance center served by the local school council.
    10. To request of the Board the manner in which training and assistance shall be provided to the local school council. Pursuant to Board guidelines a local school council is authorized to direct the Board of Education to contract with personnel or not-for-profit organizations not associated with the school district to train or assist council members. If training or assistance is provided by contract with personnel or organizations not associated with the school district, the period of training or assistance shall not exceed 30 hours during a given school year; person shall not be employed on a continuous basis longer than said period and shall not have been employed by the Chicago Board of Education within the preceding six months. Council members shall receive training in at least the following areas:
        1. school budgets;
        2. educational theory pertinent to the attendance
    	
center's particular needs, including the development of the school improvement plan and the principal's performance contract; and
        3. personnel selection.
Council members shall, to the greatest extent possible, complete such training within 90 days of election.
    11. In accordance with systemwide guidelines contained in the System-Wide Educational Reform Goals and Objectives Plan, criteria for evaluation of performance shall be established for local school councils and local school council members. If a local school council persists in noncompliance with systemwide requirements, the Board may impose sanctions and take necessary corrective action, consistent with Section 34-8.3.
    12. Each local school council shall comply with the Open Meetings Act and the Freedom of Information Act. Each local school council shall issue and transmit to its school community a detailed annual report accounting for its activities programmatically and financially. Each local school council shall convene at least 2 well-publicized meetings annually with its entire school community. These meetings shall include presentation of the proposed local school improvement plan, of the proposed school expenditure plan, and the annual report, and shall provide an opportunity for public comment.
    13. Each local school council is encouraged to involve additional non-voting members of the school community in facilitating the council's exercise of its responsibilities.
    14. The local school council may adopt a school uniform or dress code policy that governs the attendance center and that is necessary to maintain the orderly process of a school function or prevent endangerment of student health or safety, consistent with the policies and rules of the Board of Education. A school uniform or dress code policy adopted by a local school council: (i) shall not be applied in such manner as to discipline or deny attendance to a transfer student or any other student for noncompliance with that policy during such period of time as is reasonably necessary to enable the student to acquire a school uniform or otherwise comply with the dress code policy that is in effect at the attendance center into which the student's enrollment is transferred; and (ii) shall include criteria and procedures under which the local school council will accommodate the needs of or otherwise provide appropriate resources to assist a student from an indigent family in complying with an applicable school uniform or dress code policy. A student whose parents or legal guardians object on religious grounds to the student's compliance with an applicable school uniform or dress code policy shall not be required to comply with that policy if the student's parents or legal guardians present to the local school council a signed statement of objection detailing the grounds for the objection.
    15. All decisions made and actions taken by the local school council in the exercise of its powers and duties shall comply with State and federal laws, all applicable collective bargaining agreements, court orders and rules properly promulgated by the Board.
    15a. To grant, in accordance with board rules and policies, the use of assembly halls and classrooms when not otherwise needed, including lighting, heat, and attendants, for public lectures, concerts, and other educational and social activities.
    15b. To approve, in accordance with board rules and policies, receipts and expenditures for all internal accounts of the attendance center, and to approve all fund-raising activities by nonschool organizations that use the school building.
    16. (Blank).
    17. Names and addresses of local school council members shall be a matter of public record.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-2.3a) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-2.3a)
    Sec. 34-2.3a. Recommendations of the Principal. The principal of each attendance center shall be encouraged to make recommendations to the appropriate local school council concerning all educational aspects of the attendance center.
(Source: P.A. 85-1418; 86-1477.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-2.3b)
    Sec. 34-2.3b. Local School Council Training. The board shall collaborate with universities and other interested entities and individuals to offer training to local school council members on topics relevant to school operations and their responsibilities as local school council members, including but not limited to legal requirements, role differentiation, responsibilities, and authorities, and improving student achievement. Training of local school council members shall be provided at the direction of the board in consultation with the Council of Chicago-area Deans of Education. Incoming local school council members shall be required to complete a 3-day training program provided under this Section within 6 months of taking office. The board shall monitor the compliance of incoming local school council members with the 3-day training program requirement established by this Section. The board shall declare vacant the office of a local school council member who fails to complete the 3-day training program provided under this Section within the 6 month period allowed. Any such vacancy shall be filled as provided in subsection (o) of Section 34-2.1 by appointment of another person qualified to hold the office. In addition to requiring local school council members to complete the 3-day training program under this Section, the board may encourage local school council members to complete additional training during their term of office and shall provide recognition for individuals completing that additional training. The board is authorized to collaborate with universities, non-profits, and other interested organizations and individuals to offer additional training to local school council members on a regular basis during their term in office. The board shall not be required to bear the cost of the required 3-day training program or any additional training provided to local school council members under this Section.
    The board shall also offer training to aid local school councils in developing principal evaluation procedures and criteria. The board shall send out requests for proposals concerning this training and is authorized to contract with universities, non-profits, and other interested organizations and individuals to provide this training. The board is authorized to use funds from private organizations, non-profits, or any other outside source as well as its own funds for this purpose.
(Source: P.A. 90-100, eff. 7-11-97; 91-622, eff. 8-19-99.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-2.4) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-2.4)
    Sec. 34-2.4. School improvement plan. A 3-year local school improvement plan shall be developed and implemented at each attendance center. This plan shall reflect the overriding purpose of the attendance center to improve educational quality. The local school principal shall develop a school improvement plan in consultation with the local school council, all categories of school staff, parents and community residents. Once the plan is developed, reviewed by the professional personnel leadership committee, and approved by the local school council, the principal shall be responsible for directing implementation of the plan, and the local school council shall monitor its implementation. After the termination of the initial 3-year plan, a new 3-year plan shall be developed and modified as appropriate on an annual basis.
    The school improvement plan shall be designed to achieve priority goals including but not limited to:
        (a) assuring that students show significant progress
    	
toward meeting and exceeding State performance standards in State mandated learning areas, including the mastery of higher order thinking skills in these areas;
        (b) assuring that students attend school regularly
    	
and graduate from school at such rates that the district average equals or surpasses national norms;
        (c) assuring that students are adequately prepared
    	
for and aided in making a successful transition to further education and life experience;
        (d) assuring that students are adequately prepared
    	
for and aided in making a successful transition to employment; and
        (e) assuring that students are, to the maximum extent
    	
possible, provided with a common learning experience that is of high academic quality and that reflects high expectations for all students' capacities to learn.
    With respect to these priority goals, the school improvement plan shall include but not be limited to the following:
        (a) an analysis of data collected in the attendance
    	
center and community indicating the specific strengths and weaknesses of the attendance center in light of the goals specified above, including data and analysis specified by the State Board of Education pertaining to specific measurable outcomes for student performance, the attendance centers, and their instructional programs;
        (b) a description of specific annual objectives the
    	
attendance center will pursue in achieving the goals specified above;
        (c) a description of the specific activities the
    	
attendance center will undertake to achieve its objectives;
        (d) an analysis of the attendance center's staffing
    	
pattern and material resources, and an explanation of how the attendance center's planned staffing pattern, the deployment of staff, and the use of material resources furthers the objectives of the plan;
        (e) a description of the key assumptions and
    	
directions of the school's curriculum and the academic and non-academic programs of the attendance center, and an explanation of how this curriculum and these programs further the goals and objectives of the plan;
        (f) a description of the steps that will be taken to
    	
enhance educational opportunities for all students, regardless of gender, including English learners, students with disabilities, low-income students, and minority students;
        (g) a description of any steps which may be taken by
    	
the attendance center to educate parents as to how they can assist children at home in preparing their children to learn effectively;
        (h) a description of the steps the attendance center
    	
will take to coordinate its efforts with, and to gain the participation and support of, community residents, business organizations, and other local institutions and individuals;
        (i) a description of any staff development program
    	
for all school staff and volunteers tied to the priority goals, objectives, and activities specified in the plan;
        (j) a description of the steps the local school
    	
council will undertake to monitor implementation of the plan on an ongoing basis;
        (k) a description of the steps the attendance center
    	
will take to ensure that teachers have working conditions that provide a professional environment conducive to fulfilling their responsibilities;
        (l) a description of the steps the attendance center
    	
will take to ensure teachers the time and opportunity to incorporate new ideas and techniques, both in subject matter and teaching skills, into their own work;
        (m) a description of the steps the attendance center
    	
will take to encourage pride and positive identification with the attendance center through various athletic activities; and
        (n) a description of the student need for and
    	
provision of services to special populations, beyond the standard school programs provided for students in grades K through 12 and those enumerated in the categorical programs cited in item d of part 4 of Section 34-2.3, including financial costs of providing same and a timeline for implementing the necessary services, including but not limited, when applicable, to ensuring the provisions of educational services to all eligible children aged 4 years for the 1990-91 school year and thereafter, reducing class size to State averages in grades K-3 for the 1991-92 school year and thereafter and in all grades for the 1993-94 school year and thereafter, and providing sufficient staff and facility resources for students not served in the regular classroom setting.
    Based on the analysis of data collected indicating specific strengths and weaknesses of the attendance center, the school improvement plan may place greater emphasis from year to year on particular priority goals, objectives, and activities.
(Source: P.A. 99-30, eff. 7-10-15; 99-143, eff. 7-27-15; 99-642, eff. 7-28-16.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-2.4a) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-2.4a)
    Sec. 34-2.4a. Professional personnel leadership committee.
    (a) At each attendance center operated pursuant to this Article, a professional personnel leadership committee consisting of (i) up to 7 members elected each school year who are certified classroom teachers or other certificated personnel, who are employed at the attendance center, and who desire to be members of the committee and (ii) the 2 teacher members of the local school council. The teacher members of the local school council shall serve as co-chairs of the committee, or one teacher member of the local school council chosen by the committee shall serve as chair of the committee. The size of the committee shall be determined by the certified classroom teachers and other certificated personnel at the attendance center, including the principal.
    (b) The purpose of the committee is to develop and formally present recommendations to the principal and the local school council on all matters of educational program, including but not limited to curriculum, school improvement plan development and implementation, and school budgeting.
    (c) For the elected committee members, the principal shall convene a publicized meeting of all certified classroom teachers and other certificated personnel, at which meeting those certified classroom teachers and other certificated personnel present, excluding the principal, shall elect members to serve on the committee. A staff member eligible to vote may vote for the same number of candidates in the election as the number of members to be elected, but votes shall not be cumulated. Ties shall be determined by lot. Vacancies shall be filled in like manner.
    (d) All committee meetings shall be held before or after school with no loss of instructional time. Committee members shall receive no compensation for their activities as committee members.
    (e) In furtherance of its purpose, the committee shall have the authority to gather information from school staff through interviews, on noninstructional time, without the prior approval of the principal, the local school council, the board, the board's chief executive officer, or the chief executive officer's administrative staff.
    The committee shall meet once a month with the principal to make recommendations to the principal regarding the specific methods and contents of the school's curriculum and to make other educational improvement recommendations approved by the committee. A report from the committee regarding these matters may be an agenda item at each regular meeting of the local school council.
    The principal shall provide the committee with the opportunity to review and make recommendations regarding the school improvement plan and school budget. The teacher members of the local school council may bring motions concerning the recommendations approved by the committee, which motions shall formally be considered at meetings of the local school council.
(Source: P.A. 93-48, eff. 7-1-03.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-2.4b) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-2.4b)
    Sec. 34-2.4b. Limitation upon applicability. The provisions of Sections 34-2.1, 34-2.2, 34-2.3, 34-2.3a, 34-2.4 and 34-8.3, and those provisions of paragraph 1 of Section 34-18 and paragraph (c) of Section 34A-201a relating to the allocation or application -- by formula or otherwise -- of lump sum amounts and other funds to attendance centers, shall not apply to attendance centers that have applied for and been designated as a "Small School" by the Board, the Cook County Juvenile Detention Center and Cook County Jail schools, nor to the district's alternative schools for pregnant girls, nor to alternative schools established under Article 13A, nor to a contract school, nor to the Michael R. Durso School, the Jackson Adult Center, the Hillard Adult Center, the Alternative Transitional School, or any other attendance center designated by the Board as an alternative school, provided that the designation is not applied to an attendance center that has in place a legally constituted local school council, except for contract turnaround schools. The board of education shall have and exercise with respect to those schools and with respect to the conduct, operation, affairs and budgets of those schools, and with respect to the principals, teachers and other school staff there employed, the same powers which are exercisable by local school councils with respect to the other attendance centers, principals, teachers and school staff within the district, together with all powers and duties generally exercisable by the board of education with respect to all attendance centers within the district. The board of education shall develop appropriate alternative methods for involving parents, community members and school staff to the maximum extent possible in all of the activities of those schools, and may delegate to the parents, community members and school staff so involved the same powers which are exercisable by local school councils with respect to other attendance centers.
(Source: P.A. 96-105, eff. 7-30-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-2.4c)
    Sec. 34-2.4c. Whistle Blower Protection.
    (a) In any case involving the disclosure of information by an employee of the board of education or a local school council member, which the employee or member reasonably believes evidences (1) a violation of any law, rule, regulation, or policy, or (2) waste, fraud, mismanagement, abuse of authority, or a danger to the health or safety of students or the public, the identity of the employee or members may not be disclosed without the written consent of the employee or member during any investigation of the information or related matters.
    (b) No disciplinary action may be taken against any employee or local school council member for the disclosure of information by that employee or local school council member that evidences (1) a violation of any law, rule, regulation, or policy, or (2) waste, fraud, mismanagement, abuse of authority, or a danger to the health or safety of a student or the public. For the purposes of this Section, disciplinary action means any retaliatory action taken against an employee or local school council member by the board of education, employees of the board of education, local school councils, or exclusive bargaining representatives of employees, including, but not limited to, reprimand, suspension, discharge, demotion, involuntary transfer, harassment, or denial of promotion or voluntary transfer.
    (c) A violation of this Section shall be a Class A misdemeanor.
(Source: P.A. 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-2.5) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-2.5)
    Sec. 34-2.5. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-3) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-3)
    Sec. 34-3. Chicago School Reform Board of Trustees; new Chicago Board of Education; members; term; vacancies.
    (a) Within 30 days after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1995, the terms of all members of the Chicago Board of Education holding office on that date are abolished and the Mayor shall appoint, without the consent or approval of the City Council, a 5 member Chicago School Reform Board of Trustees which shall take office upon the appointment of the fifth member. The Chicago School Reform Board of Trustees and its members shall serve until, and the terms of all members of the Chicago School Reform Board of Trustees shall expire on, June 30, 1999 or upon the appointment of a new Chicago Board of Education as provided in subsection (b), whichever is later. Any vacancy in the membership of the Trustees shall be filled through appointment by the Mayor, without the consent or approval of the City Council, for the unexpired term. One of the members appointed by the Mayor to the Trustees shall be designated by the Mayor to serve as President of the Trustees. The Mayor shall appoint a full-time, compensated chief executive officer, and his or her compensation as such chief executive officer shall be determined by the Mayor. The Mayor, at his or her discretion, may appoint the President to serve simultaneously as the chief executive officer.
    (b) Within 30 days before the expiration of the terms of the members of the Chicago Reform Board of Trustees as provided in subsection (a), a new Chicago Board of Education consisting of 7 members shall be appointed by the Mayor to take office on the later of July 1, 1999 or the appointment of the seventh member. Three of the members initially so appointed under this subsection shall serve for terms ending June 30, 2002, 4 of the members initially so appointed under this subsection shall serve for terms ending June 30, 2003, and each member initially so appointed shall continue to hold office until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. Thereafter at the expiration of the term of any member a successor shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall hold office for a term of 4 years, from July 1 of the year in which the term commences and until a successor is appointed and qualified. Any vacancy in the membership of the Chicago Board of Education shall be filled through appointment by the Mayor for the unexpired term. No appointment to membership on the Chicago Board of Education that is made by the Mayor under this subsection shall require the approval of the City Council, whether the appointment is made for a full term or to fill a vacancy for an unexpired term on the Board. The board shall elect annually from its number a president and vice-president, in such manner and at such time as the board determines by its rules. The officers so elected shall each perform the duties imposed upon their respective office by the rules of the board, provided that (i) the president shall preside at meetings of the board and vote as any other member but have no power of veto, and (ii) the vice president shall perform the duties of the president if that office is vacant or the president is absent or unable to act. The secretary of the Board shall be selected by the Board and shall be an employee of the Board rather than a member of the Board, notwithstanding subsection (d) of Section 34-3.3. The duties of the secretary shall be imposed by the rules of the Board.
    (c) The board may appoint a student to the board to serve in an advisory capacity. The student member shall serve for a term as determined by the board. The board may not grant the student member any voting privileges, but shall consider the student member as an advisor. The student member may not participate in or attend any executive session of the board.
(Source: P.A. 94-231, eff. 7-14-05.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-3.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-3.1)
    Sec. 34-3.1. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-3.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-3.2)
    Sec. 34-3.2. Board training. After January 1, 1990 all board members shall participate in training provided by board employees or not-for-profit organizations, including without limitation the following:
    1. budget and revenue review;
    2. education theory and governance;
    3. governmental relations;
    4. school-based management; and
    5. State and federal education law and regulations.
(Source: P.A. 85-1418; 86-1477.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-3.3)
    Sec. 34-3.3. Chicago School Reform Board of Trustees; powers and duties; chief operating, fiscal, educational, and purchasing officers. The General Assembly finds that an education crisis exists in the Chicago Public Schools and that a 5-member Chicago School Reform Board of Trustees shall be established for a 4 year period to bring educational and financial stability to the system. The Trustees and their chief executive officer are empowered and directed to: (i) increase the quality of educational services in the Chicago Public Schools; (ii) reduce the cost of non-educational services and implement cost-saving measures including the privatization of services where deemed appropriate; (iii) develop a long-term financial plan that to the maximum extent possible reflects a balanced budget for each year; (iv) streamline and strengthen the management of the system, including a responsible school-based budgeting process, in order to refocus resources on student achievement; (v) ensure ongoing academic improvement in schools through the establishment of an Academic Accountability Council and a strong school improvement and recognition process; (vi) enact policies and procedures that ensure the system runs in an ethical as well as efficient manner; (vii) establish within 60 days after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1995, develop, and implement a process for the selection of a local school council advisory board for the Trustees in which those individuals active on Local School Councils serve an advisory role to the Trustees; (viii) establish any organizational structures, including regional offices, that it deems necessary to ensure the efficient and effective operation of the system; and (ix) provide for such other local school council advisory bodies as the Trustees deem appropriate to function in an advisory capacity to any other organizations or offices established by the Trustees under clause (viii) of this Section.
    (a) Unless otherwise provided in this Article, the Trustees shall have all powers and duties exercised and performed by the Chicago Board of Education at the time the terms of its members are abolished as provided in subsection (a) of Section 34-3.
    (b) The Mayor shall appoint a chief executive officer who shall be a person of recognized administrative ability and management experience, who shall be responsible for the management of the system, and who shall have all other powers and duties of the general superintendent as set forth in this Article 34. The chief executive officer shall make recommendations to the Trustees with respect to contracts, policies, and procedures.
    (c) The chief executive officer shall appoint, with the approval of the Trustees, a chief operating officer, a chief fiscal officer, a chief educational officer, and a chief purchasing officer to serve until June 30, 1999. These officers shall be assigned duties and responsibilities by the chief executive officer. The chief operating officer, the chief fiscal officer, the chief educational officer, and the chief purchasing officer may be granted authority to hire a specific number of employees to assist in meeting immediate responsibilities. The chief executive officer may remove any officer, subject to the approval of the Trustees. Conditions of employment for such personnel shall not be subject to the provisions of Section 34-85.
    (d) Upon the expiration on June 30, 1999 of the terms of office of the chief executive, operating, fiscal, educational, and purchasing officers appointed under this Section and the appointment of a new Chicago Board of Education under subsection (b) of Section 34-3, the board may retain, reorganize, or abolish any or all of those offices and appoint qualified successors to fill any of those offices that it does not abolish.
    (e) The Trustees shall report to the State Superintendent of Education with respect to its performance, the nature of the reforms which it has instituted, the effect those reforms have had in the operation of the central administrative office and in the performance of pupils, staff, and members of the local school councils at the several attendance centers within the district, and such other matters as the Trustees deem necessary to help assure continuing improvement in the public school system of the district. The reports shall be public documents and shall be made annually, beginning with the school year that commences in 1995 and concluding in the school year beginning in 1999.
(Source: P.A. 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-3.4)
    Sec. 34-3.4. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 91-622, eff. 8-19-99. Repealed internally, eff. 6-30-04.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-3.5)
    Sec. 34-3.5. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 93-3, eff. 4-16-03. Repealed by P.A. 100-1046, eff. 8-23-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-4) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-4)
    Sec. 34-4. Eligibility. To be eligible for appointment to the board, a person shall be a citizen of the United States, shall be a registered voter as provided in the Election Code, shall have been a resident of the city for at least 3 years immediately preceding his or her appointment, and shall not be a child sex offender as defined in Section 11-9.3 of the Criminal Code of 2012. Permanent removal from the city by any member of the board during his term of office constitutes a resignation therefrom and creates a vacancy in the board. Except for the President of the Chicago School Reform Board of Trustees who may be paid compensation for his or her services as chief executive officer as determined by the Mayor as provided in subsection (a) of Section 34-3, board members shall serve without any compensation; provided, that board members shall be reimbursed for expenses incurred while in the performance of their duties upon submission of proper receipts or upon submission of a signed voucher in the case of an expense allowance evidencing the amount of such reimbursement or allowance to the president of the board for verification and approval. The board of education may continue to provide health care insurance coverage, employer pension contributions, employee pension contributions, and life insurance premium payments for an employee required to resign from an administrative, teaching, or career service position in order to qualify as a member of the board of education. They shall not hold other public office under the Federal, State or any local government other than that of Director of the Regional Transportation Authority, member of the economic development commission of a city having a population exceeding 500,000, notary public or member of the National Guard, and by accepting any such office while members of the board, or by not resigning any such office held at the time of being appointed to the board within 30 days after such appointment, shall be deemed to have vacated their membership in the board.
(Source: P.A. 97-1150, eff. 1-25-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-4.5)
    Sec. 34-4.5. Chronic truants.
    (a) Office of Chronic Truant Adjudication. The board shall establish and implement an Office of Chronic Truant Adjudication, which shall be responsible for administratively adjudicating cases of chronic truancy and imposing appropriate sanctions. The board shall appoint or employ hearing officers to perform the adjudicatory functions of that Office. Principals and other appropriate personnel may refer pupils suspected of being chronic truants, as defined in Section 26-2a of this Code, to the Office of Chronic Truant Adjudication.
    (b) Notices. Before any hearing may be held under subsection (c), the principal of the school attended by the pupil or the principal's designee shall notify the pupil's parent or guardian by personal visit, letter, or telephone of each unexcused absence of the pupil. After giving the parent or guardian notice of the tenth unexcused absence of the pupil, the principal or the principal's designee shall send the pupil's parent or guardian a letter, by certified mail, return receipt requested, notifying the parent or guardian that he or she is subjecting himself or herself to a hearing procedure as provided under subsection (c) and clearly describing any and all possible penalties that may be imposed as provided for in subsections (d) and (e) of this Section.
    (c) Hearing. Once a pupil has been referred to the Office of Chronic Truant Adjudication, a hearing shall be scheduled before an appointed hearing officer, and the pupil and the pupil's parents or guardian shall be notified by certified mail, return receipt requested stating the time, place, and purpose of the hearing. The hearing officer shall hold a hearing and render a written decision within 14 days determining whether the pupil is a chronic truant as defined in Section 26-2a of this Code and whether the parent or guardian took reasonable steps to assure the pupil's attendance at school. The hearing shall be private unless a public hearing is requested by the pupil's parent or guardian, and the pupil may be present at the hearing with a representative in addition to the pupil's parent or guardian. The board shall present evidence of the pupil's truancy, and the pupil and the parent or guardian or representative of the pupil may cross examine witnesses, present witnesses and evidence, and present defenses to the charges. All testimony at the hearing shall be taken under oath administered by the hearing officer. The decision of the hearing officer shall constitute an "administrative decision" for purposes of judicial review under the Administrative Review Law.
    (d) Penalties. The hearing officer may require the pupil or the pupil's parent or guardian or both the pupil and the pupil's parent or guardian to do any or all of the following: perform reasonable school or community services for a period not to exceed 30 days; complete a parenting education program; obtain counseling or other supportive services; and comply with an individualized educational plan or service plan as provided by appropriate school officials. If the parent or guardian of the chronic truant shows that he or she took reasonable steps to insure attendance of the pupil at school, he or she shall not be required to perform services.
    (e) Non-compliance with sanctions. If a pupil determined by a hearing officer to be a chronic truant or the parent or guardian of the pupil fails to comply with the sanctions ordered by the hearing officer under subsection (c) of this Section, the Office of Chronic Truant Adjudication may refer the matter to the State's Attorney for prosecution under Section 3-33.5 of the Juvenile Court Act of 1987.
    (f) Limitation on applicability. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to apply to a parent or guardian of a pupil not required to attend a public school pursuant to Section 26-1.
(Source: P.A. 94-1011, eff. 7-7-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-5) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-5)
    Sec. 34-5. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-6) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-6)
    Sec. 34-6. Superintendent of schools. After June 30, 1999, the board may, by a vote of a majority of its full membership, appoint a general superintendent of schools to serve pursuant to a performance-based contract for a term ending on June 30th of the third calendar year after his or her appointment. He shall be the chief administrative officer of the board and shall have charge and control, subject to the approval of the board and to other provisions of this Article, of all departments and the employees therein of public schools, except the law department. He shall negotiate contracts with all labor organizations which are exclusive representatives of educational employees employed under the Illinois Educational Labor Relations Act. All contracts shall be subject to approval of the Board of Education. The board may conduct a national search for a general superintendent. An incumbent general superintendent may not be precluded from being included in such national search. Persons appointed pursuant to this Section shall be exempt from the provisions and requirements of Sections 21-1a, 21-7.1, and 21B-15 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 97-607, eff. 8-26-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-6.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-6.1)
    Sec. 34-6.1. The president or general superintendent shall report any requests made of the district under provisions of The Freedom of Information Act and shall report the status of the district's response.
(Source: P.A. 85-942.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-7) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-7)
    Sec. 34-7. Establishment of departments.
    The board of education shall establish such general departments as it may deem necessary or appropriate and determine the duties and functions of each. The heads of such departments shall be appointed by the general superintendent of schools subject to the approval of a majority of the full membership of the board. Nothing contained in this Section shall apply to the law department.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-8) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-8)
    Sec. 34-8. Powers and duties of general superintendent. The general superintendent of schools shall prescribe and control, subject to the approval of the board and to other provisions of this Article, the courses of study mandated by State law, textbooks, educational apparatus and equipment, discipline in and conduct of the schools, and shall perform such other duties as the board may by rule prescribe. The superintendent shall also notify the State Board of Education, the board and the chief administrative official, other than the alleged perpetrator himself, in the school where the alleged perpetrator serves, that any person who is employed in a school or otherwise comes into frequent contact with children in the school has been named as a perpetrator in an indicated report filed pursuant to the Abused and Neglected Child Reporting Act, approved June 26, 1975, as amended.
    The general superintendent may be granted the authority by the board to hire a specific number of employees to assist in meeting immediate responsibilities. Conditions of employment for such personnel shall not be subject to the provisions of Section 34-85.
    The general superintendent may, pursuant to a delegation of authority by the board and Section 34-18, approve contracts and expenditures.
    Pursuant to other provisions of this Article, sites shall be selected, schoolhouses located thereon and plans therefor approved, and textbooks and educational apparatus and equipment shall be adopted and purchased by the board only upon the recommendation of the general superintendent of schools or by a majority vote of the full membership of the board and, in the case of textbooks, subject to Article 28 of this Act. The board may furnish free textbooks to pupils and may publish its own textbooks and manufacture its own apparatus, equipment and supplies.
    In addition, in January of each year, the general superintendent of schools shall report to the State Board of Education the number of high school students in the district who are enrolled in accredited courses (for which high school credit will be awarded upon successful completion of the courses) at any community college, together with the name and number of the course or courses which each such student is taking.
    The general superintendent shall also have the authority to monitor the performance of attendance centers, to identify and place an attendance center on remediation and probation, and to recommend to the board that the attendance center be placed on intervention and be reconstituted, subject to the provisions of Sections 34-8.3 and 8.4.
    The general superintendent, or his or her designee, shall conduct an annual evaluation of each principal in the district pursuant to guidelines promulgated by the Board and the Board approved principal evaluation form. The evaluation shall be based on factors, including the following: (i) student academic improvement, as defined by the school improvement plan; (ii) student absenteeism rates at the school; (iii) instructional leadership; (iv) effective implementation of programs, policies, or strategies to improve student academic achievement; (v) school management; and (vi) other factors, including, without limitation, the principal's communication skills and ability to create and maintain a student-centered learning environment, to develop opportunities for professional development, and to encourage parental involvement and community partnerships to achieve school improvement.
    Effective no later than September 1, 2012, the general superintendent or his or her designee shall develop a written principal evaluation plan. The evaluation plan must be in writing and shall supersede the evaluation requirements set forth in this Section. The evaluation plan must do at least all of the following:
        (1) Provide for annual evaluation of all principals
    	
employed under a performance contract by the general superintendent or his or her designee, no later than July 1st of each year.
        (2) Consider the principal's specific duties,
    	
responsibilities, management, and competence as a principal.
        (3) Specify the principal's strengths and weaknesses,
    	
with supporting reasons.
        (4) Align with research-based standards.
        (5) Use data and indicators on student growth as a
    	
significant factor in rating principal performance.
(Source: P.A. 95-496, eff. 8-28-07; 96-861, eff. 1-15-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-8.05)
    Sec. 34-8.05. Reporting firearms in schools. On or after January 1, 1997, upon receipt of any written, electronic, or verbal report from any school personnel regarding a verified incident involving a firearm in a school or on school owned or leased property, including any conveyance owned, leased, or used by the school for the transport of students or school personnel, the general superintendent or his or her designee shall report all such firearm-related incidents occurring in a school or on school property to the local law enforcement authorities no later than 24 hours after the occurrence of the incident and to the Department of State Police in a form, manner, and frequency as prescribed by the Department of State Police.
    The State Board of Education shall receive an annual statistical compilation and related data associated with incidents involving firearms in schools from the Department of State Police. As used in this Section, the term "firearm" shall have the meaning ascribed to it in Section 1.1 of the Firearm Owners Identification Card Act.
(Source: P.A. 89-498, eff. 6-27-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-8.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-8.1)
    Sec. 34-8.1. Principals. Principals shall be employed to supervise the operation of each attendance center. Their powers and duties shall include but not be limited to the authority (i) to direct, supervise, evaluate, and suspend with or without pay or otherwise discipline all teachers, assistant principals, and other employees assigned to the attendance center in accordance with board rules and policies and (ii) to direct all other persons assigned to the attendance center pursuant to a contract with a third party to provide services to the school system. The right to employ, discharge, and layoff shall be vested solely with the board, provided that decisions to discharge or suspend non-certified employees, including disciplinary layoffs, and the termination of certified employees from employment pursuant to a layoff or reassignment policy are subject to review under the grievance resolution procedure adopted pursuant to subsection (c) of Section 10 of the Illinois Educational Labor Relations Act. The grievance resolution procedure adopted by the board shall provide for final and binding arbitration, and, notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the arbitrator's decision may include all make-whole relief, including without limitation reinstatement. The principal shall fill positions by appointment as provided in this Section and may make recommendations to the board regarding the employment, discharge, or layoff of any individual. The authority of the principal shall include the authority to direct the hours during which the attendance center shall be open and available for use provided the use complies with board rules and policies, to determine when and what operations shall be conducted within those hours, and to schedule staff within those hours. Under the direction of, and subject to the authority of the principal, the Engineer In Charge shall be accountable for the safe, economical operation of the plant and grounds and shall also be responsible for orientation, training, and supervising the work of Engineers, Trainees, school maintenance assistants, custodial workers and other plant operation employees under his or her direction.
    There shall be established by the board a system of semi-annual evaluations conducted by the principal as to performance of the engineer in charge. Nothing in this Section shall prevent the principal from conducting additional evaluations. An overall numerical rating shall be given by the principal based on the evaluation conducted by the principal. An unsatisfactory numerical rating shall result in disciplinary action, which may include, without limitation and in the judgment of the principal, loss of promotion or bidding procedure, reprimand, suspension with or without pay, or recommended dismissal. The board shall establish procedures for conducting the evaluation and reporting the results to the engineer in charge.
    Under the direction of, and subject to the authority of, the principal, the Food Service Manager is responsible at all times for the proper operation and maintenance of the lunch room to which he is assigned and shall also be responsible for the orientation, training, and supervising the work of cooks, bakers, porters, and lunchroom attendants under his or her direction.
    There shall be established by the Board a system of semi-annual evaluations conducted by the principal as to the performance of the food service manager. Nothing in this Section shall prevent the principal from conducting additional evaluations. An overall numerical rating shall be given by the principal based on the evaluation conducted by the principal. An unsatisfactory numerical rating shall result in disciplinary action which may include, without limitation and in the judgment of the principal, loss of promotion or bidding procedure, reprimand, suspension with or without pay, or recommended dismissal. The board shall establish rules for conducting the evaluation and reporting the results to the food service manager.
    Nothing in this Section shall be interpreted to require the employment or assignment of an Engineer-In-Charge or a Food Service Manager for each attendance center.
    Principals shall be employed to supervise the educational operation of each attendance center. If a principal is absent due to extended illness or leave of absence, an assistant principal may be assigned as acting principal for a period not to exceed 100 school days. Each principal shall assume administrative responsibility and instructional leadership, in accordance with reasonable rules and regulations of the board, for the planning, operation and evaluation of the educational program of the attendance center to which he is assigned. The principal shall submit recommendations to the general superintendent concerning the appointment, dismissal, retention, promotion, and assignment of all personnel assigned to the attendance center; provided, that from and after September 1, 1989: (i) if any vacancy occurs in a position at the attendance center or if an additional or new position is created at the attendance center, that position shall be filled by appointment made by the principal in accordance with procedures established and provided by the Board whenever the majority of the duties included in that position are to be performed at the attendance center which is under the principal's supervision, and each such appointment so made by the principal shall be made and based upon merit and ability to perform in that position without regard to seniority or length of service, provided, that such appointments shall be subject to the Board's desegregation obligations, including but not limited to the Consent Decree and Desegregation Plan in U.S. v. Chicago Board of Education; (ii) the principal shall submit recommendations based upon merit and ability to perform in the particular position, without regard to seniority or length of service, to the general superintendent concerning the appointment of any teacher, teacher aide, counselor, clerk, hall guard, security guard and any other personnel which is to be made by the general superintendent whenever less than a majority of the duties of that teacher, teacher aide, counselor, clerk, hall guard, and security guard and any other personnel are to be performed at the attendance center which is under the principal's supervision; and (iii) subject to law and the applicable collective bargaining agreements, the authority and responsibilities of a principal with respect to the evaluation of all teachers and other personnel assigned to an attendance center shall commence immediately upon his or her appointment as principal of the attendance center, without regard to the length of time that he or she has been the principal of that attendance center.
    Notwithstanding the existence of any other law of this State, nothing in this Act shall prevent the board from entering into a contract with a third party for services currently performed by any employee or bargaining unit member.
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article, each principal may approve contracts, binding on the board, in the amount of no more than $10,000, if the contract is endorsed by the Local School Council.
    Unless otherwise prohibited by law or by rule of the board, the principal shall provide to local school council members copies of all internal audits and any other pertinent information generated by any audits or reviews of the programs and operation of the attendance center.
    Each principal shall hold a valid administrative certificate issued or exchanged in accordance with Article 21 and endorsed as required by that Article for the position of principal. The board may establish or impose academic, educational, examination, and experience requirements and criteria that are in addition to those established and required by Article 21 for issuance of a valid certificate endorsed for the position of principal as a condition of the nomination, selection, appointment, employment, or continued employment of a person as principal of any attendance center, or as a condition of the renewal of any principal's performance contract.
    The board shall specify in its formal job description for principals, and from and after July 1, 1990 shall specify in the 4 year performance contracts for use with respect to all principals, that his or her primary responsibility is in the improvement of instruction. A majority of the time spent by a principal shall be spent on curriculum and staff development through both formal and informal activities, establishing clear lines of communication regarding school goals, accomplishments, practices and policies with parents and teachers. The principal, with the assistance of the local school council, shall develop a school improvement plan as provided in Section 34-2.4 and, upon approval of the plan by the local school council, shall be responsible for directing implementation of the plan. The principal, with the assistance of the professional personnel leadership committee, shall develop the specific methods and contents of the school's curriculum within the board's system-wide curriculum standards and objectives and the requirements of the school improvement plan. The board shall ensure that all principals are evaluated on their instructional leadership ability and their ability to maintain a positive education and learning climate. It shall also be the responsibility of the principal to utilize resources of proper law enforcement agencies when the safety and welfare of students and teachers are threatened by illegal use of drugs and alcohol, by illegal use or possession of weapons, or by illegal gang activity.
    Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the board and the exclusive representative of the district's teachers from entering into an agreement under Section 34-85c of this Code to establish alternative procedures for teacher evaluation, remediation, and removal for cause after remediation, including an alternative system for peer evaluation and recommendations, for teachers assigned to schools identified in that agreement.
    On or before October 1, 1989, the Board of Education, in consultation with any professional organization representing principals in the district, shall promulgate rules and implement a lottery for the purpose of determining whether a principal's existing performance contract (including the performance contract applicable to any principal's position in which a vacancy then exists) expires on June 30, 1990 or on June 30, 1991, and whether the ensuing 4 year performance contract begins on July 1, 1990 or July 1, 1991. The Board of Education shall establish and conduct the lottery in such manner that of all the performance contracts of principals (including the performance contracts applicable to all principal positions in which a vacancy then exists), 50% of such contracts shall expire on June 30, 1990, and 50% shall expire on June 30, 1991. All persons serving as principal on May 1, 1989, and all persons appointed as principal after May 1, 1989 and prior to July 1, 1990 or July 1, 1991, in a manner other than as provided by Section 34-2.3, shall be deemed by operation of law to be serving under a performance contract which expires on June 30, 1990 or June 30, 1991; and unless such performance contract of any such principal is renewed (or such person is again appointed to serve as principal) in the manner provided by Section 34-2.2 or 34-2.3, the employment of such person as principal shall terminate on June 30, 1990 or June 30, 1991.
    Commencing on July 1, 1990, or on July 1, 1991, and thereafter, the principal of each attendance center shall be the person selected in the manner provided by Section 34-2.3 to serve as principal of that attendance center under a 4 year performance contract. All performance contracts of principals expiring after July 1, 1990, or July 1, 1991, shall commence on the date specified in the contract, and the renewal of their performance contracts and the appointment of principals when their performance contracts are not renewed shall be governed by Sections 34-2.2 and 34-2.3. Whenever a vacancy in the office of a principal occurs for any reason, the vacancy shall be filled by the selection of a new principal to serve under a 4 year performance contract in the manner provided by Section 34-2.3.
    The board of education shall develop and prepare, in consultation with the organization representing principals, a performance contract for use at all attendance centers, and shall furnish the same to each local school council. The term of the performance contract shall be 4 years, unless the principal is retained by the decision of a hearing officer pursuant to subdivision 1.5 of Section 34-2.3, in which case the contract shall be extended for 2 years. The performance contract of each principal shall consist of the uniform performance contract, as developed or from time to time modified by the board, and such additional criteria as are established by a local school council pursuant to Section 34-2.3 for the performance contract of its principal.
    During the term of his or her performance contract, a principal may be removed only as provided for in the performance contract except for cause. He or she shall also be obliged to follow the rules of the board of education concerning conduct and efficiency.
    In the event the performance contract of a principal is not renewed or a principal is not reappointed as principal under a new performance contract, or in the event a principal is appointed to any position of superintendent or higher position, or voluntarily resigns his position of principal, his or her employment as a principal shall terminate and such former principal shall not be reinstated to the position from which he or she was promoted to principal, except that he or she, if otherwise qualified and certified in accordance with Article 21, shall be placed by the board on appropriate eligibility lists which it prepares for use in the filling of vacant or additional or newly created positions for teachers. The principal's total years of service to the board as both a teacher and a principal, or in other professional capacities, shall be used in calculating years of experience for purposes of being selected as a teacher into new, additional or vacant positions.
    In the event the performance contract of a principal is not renewed or a principal is not reappointed as principal under a new performance contract, such principal shall be eligible to continue to receive his or her previously provided level of health insurance benefits for a period of 90 days following the non-renewal of the contract at no expense to the principal, provided that such principal has not retired.
(Source: P.A. 99-642, eff. 7-28-16.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-8.1a)
    Sec. 34-8.1a. Waiver of collective bargaining agreement provisions. Notwithstanding the provisions of any law or collective bargaining agreement to the contrary, the principal, with the concurrence of at least 63.5% through August 31, 1995, and 51% thereafter of an attendance center's personnel in the teachers' bargaining unit, whether certificated or uncertificated non-academic, shall have the right to declare waived and superseded a provision of the teachers' collective bargaining agreement as it applies in or at the attendance center to the bargaining unit's employees. Any collective bargaining agreement entered into after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1995 with a bargaining unit other than the teachers' bargaining unit shall contain a waiver procedure that meets the requirements of this Section.
    Any waiver approved as provided in this Section shall be final upon concurrence of the required percentage of personnel and shall not be subject to approval or rejection by a bargaining unit or a committee of the bargaining unit.
(Source: P.A. 88-511; 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-8.1b)
    Sec. 34-8.1b. Exemption from bargaining unit membership. Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law, any employee of the Chicago public schools system whose job description or actual performance of duties requires an Illinois Type 75 General Administrative Certificate or its equivalent shall not be a member of the teachers collective bargaining unit.
(Source: P.A. 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-8.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-8.3)
    Sec. 34-8.3. Remediation and probation of attendance centers.
    (a) The general superintendent shall monitor the performance of the attendance centers within the district and shall identify attendance centers, pursuant to criteria that the board shall establish, in which:
        (1) there is a failure to develop, implement, or
    	
comply with a school improvement plan;
        (2) there is a pervasive breakdown in the educational
    	
program as indicated by factors, including, but not limited to, the absence of improvement in student reading and math achievement scores, an increased drop-out rate, a decreased graduation rate, and a decrease in rate of student attendance;
        (3) (blank); or
        (4) there is a failure or refusal to comply with the
    	
provisions of this Act, other applicable laws, collective bargaining agreements, court orders, or with Board rules which the Board is authorized to promulgate.
    (b) If the general superintendent identifies a nonperforming school as described herein, he or she shall place the attendance center on remediation by developing a remediation plan for the center. The purpose of the remediation plan shall be to correct the deficiencies in the performance of the attendance center by one or more of the following methods:
        (1) drafting a new school improvement plan;
        (2) applying to the board for additional funding for
    	
training for the local school council;
        (3) directing implementation of a school improvement
    	
plan;
        (4) mediating disputes or other obstacles to reform
    	
or improvement at the attendance center.
    If, however, the general superintendent determines that the problems are not able to be remediated by these methods, the general superintendent shall place the attendance center on probation. The board shall establish guidelines that determine the factors for placing an attendance center on probation.
    (c) Each school placed on probation shall have a school improvement plan and school budget for correcting deficiencies identified by the board. The plan shall include specific steps that the local school council and school staff must take to correct identified deficiencies and specific objective criteria by which the school's subsequent progress will be determined. The school budget shall include specific expenditures directly calculated to correct educational and operational deficiencies identified at the school by the probation team.
    (d) Schools placed on probation that, after a maximum of one year, fail to make adequate progress in correcting deficiencies are subject to the following actions by the general superintendent with the approval of the board, after opportunity for a hearing:
        (1) Ordering new local school council elections.
        (2) Removing and replacing the principal.
        (3) Replacement of faculty members, subject to the
    	
provisions of Section 24A-5.
        (4) Reconstitution of the attendance center and
    	
replacement and reassignment by the general superintendent of all employees of the attendance center.
        (5) Intervention under Section 34-8.4.
        (5.5) Operating an attendance center as a contract
    	
turnaround school.
        (6) Closing of the school.
    (e) Schools placed on probation shall remain on probation from year to year until deficiencies are corrected, even if such schools make acceptable annual progress. The board shall establish, in writing, criteria for determining whether or not a school shall remain on probation. If academic achievement tests are used as the factor for placing a school on probation, the general superintendent shall consider objective criteria, not just an increase in test scores, in deciding whether or not a school shall remain on probation. These criteria shall include attendance, test scores, student mobility rates, poverty rates, bilingual education eligibility, special education, and English language proficiency programs, with progress made in these areas being taken into consideration in deciding whether or not a school shall remain on probation.
    (f) Where the board has reason to believe that violations of civil rights, or of civil or criminal law have occurred, or when the general superintendent deems that the school is in educational crisis it may take immediate corrective action, including the actions specified in this Section, without first placing the school on remediation or probation. Nothing described herein shall limit the authority of the board as provided by any law of this State. The board shall develop criteria governing the determination regarding when a school is in educational crisis.
    (g) All persons serving as subdistrict superintendent on May 1, 1995 shall be deemed by operation of law to be serving under a performance contract which expires on June 30, 1995, and the employment of each such person as subdistrict superintendent shall terminate on June 30, 1995. The board shall have no obligation to compensate any such person as a subdistrict superintendent after June 30, 1995.
    (h) The general superintendent shall, in consultation with local school councils, conduct an annual evaluation of each principal in the district pursuant to guidelines promulgated by the Board of Education.
(Source: P.A. 96-105, eff. 7-30-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-8.3a)
    Sec. 34-8.3a. Financial supervision of attendance centers.
    (a) A fiscal advisor that has been appointed pursuant to subsection (a) of Section 34-2.1 of this Code shall, not later than 90 days after his or her appointment, report to the general superintendent, the board of education, the local school council, and the principal of the school on the progress made in addressing any of the financial deficiencies. If the fiscal advisor determines that the attendance center has rectified all identified deficiencies or has made satisfactory progress in addressing identified deficiencies such that the deficiencies shall be corrected subsequent to the 90-day period, no further action shall be taken by the Board. If, however, the local school council and the principal have not rectified or made satisfactory progress in correcting identified deficiencies, the general superintendent may appoint a financial supervision team, consisting of the fiscal advisor, the general superintendent or his or her designee, and a representative of an outside, independent auditor. Financial supervision teams may develop and implement school budgets to correct the financial irregularities identified in the fiscal advisor's report. The budget shall identify specifically those expenditures that directly correct the irregularities identified in the fiscal advisor's report. Financial supervision teams shall institute systems and procedures necessary to achieve appropriate fiscal management at the school.
    (b) Financial supervision teams may modify an existing school improvement plan only to the extent necessary to implement the school budget it develops. Modifications to a school improvement plan shall include specific steps that the local school council and school staff must take to correct each specific financial irregularity identified by the fiscal advisor's report. The modifications to a school improvement plan shall further specify objective criteria by which the deficiencies identified in the fiscal advisor's report are to be corrected. The local school council and school staff shall be consulted on the school budget and modifications to the school improvement plan to be implemented by the financial supervision team but will have no authority to modify either.
    (c) Upon implementation of the budget developed by the financial supervision team, and accompanying modifications to a school improvement plan, the financial supervision team's authority to conduct fiscal or related educational management of a school shall cease.
(Source: P.A. 91-622, eff. 8-19-99.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-8.4)
    Sec. 34-8.4. Intervention. The Chicago Schools Academic Accountability Council may recommend to the Chicago School Reform Board of Trustees that any school placed on remediation or probation under Section 34-8.3 or schools that for the 3 consecutive school years of 1992-1993, 1993-1994, and 1994-1995 have met the State Board of Education's category of "does not meet expectations" be made subject to intervention under this Section 34-8.4. In addition to any powers created under this Section, the Trustees shall have all powers created under Section 34-8.3 with respect to schools subjected to intervention.
    Prior to subjecting a school to intervention, the Trustees shall conduct a public hearing and make findings of facts concerning the recommendation of the Chicago Schools Academic Accountability Council and the factors causing the failure of the school to adequately perform. The Trustees shall afford an opportunity at the hearing for interested persons to comment about the intervention recommendation. After the hearing has been held and completion of findings of fact, the Trustees shall make a determination whether to subject the school to intervention.
    If the Trustees determine that a school shall be subject to intervention under this Section, the Trustees shall develop an intervention implementation plan and shall cause a performance evaluation to be made of each employee at the school. Upon consideration of such evaluations, and consistent with the intervention implementation plan, the Trustees may reassign, layoff, or dismiss any employees at the attendance center, notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 24A-5 and 34-85.
    The chief educational officer shall appoint a principal for the school and shall set the terms and conditions of the principal's contract, which in no case may be longer than 2 years. The principal shall select all teachers and non-certified personnel for the school as may be necessary. Any provision of Section 34-8.1 that conflicts with this Section shall not apply to a school subjected to intervention under this Section.
    If pursuant to this Section, the general superintendent, with the approval of the board, orders new local school council elections, the general superintendent shall carry out the responsibilities of the local school council for a school subject to intervention until the new local school council members are elected and trained.
    Each school year, 5% of the supplemental general State aid funds distributed to a school subject to intervention during that school year under subsection 5(i)(1)(a) of part A of Section 18-8 or subsection (H) of Section 18-8.05 shall be used for employee performance incentives. The Trustees shall prepare a report evaluating the results of any interventions undertaken pursuant to this Section and shall make recommendations concerning implementation of special programs for dealing with underperforming schools on an ongoing basis. This report shall be submitted to the State Superintendent of Education and Mayor of the City of Chicago by January 1, 1999.
(Source: P.A. 89-15, eff. 5-30-95; 89-698, eff. 1-14-97; 90-548, eff. 1-1-98.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-8.5)
    Sec. 34-8.5. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 89-3, eff. 2-27-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-8.6)
    Sec. 34-8.6. Short title. Sections 34-8.6 through 34-8.19 of this Act may be cited as the Chicago Learning Zone Implementation Law.
(Source: P.A. 89-3, eff. 2-27-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-8.7)
    Sec. 34-8.7. Findings. The General Assembly observes that the Chicago Learning Zone Advisory Committee has issued its report and recommendations. The General Assembly finds, after due consideration of the Committee's report and recommendations, that establishment of a Chicago Learning Zone designation, as the educational version of enterprise zones, will create an opportunity to accelerate the process of Chicago school reform. The General Assembly further finds that the Chicago Learning Zone will offer a fundamental change in operations from a mode of following regulations to an outcome mode, that this change will be one which concentrates on improving academic achievement in ways that can be utilized to reform the system, and that this change will be predicated on the overriding philosophy that attendance centers should be empowered to develop models most appropriate to their situations.
    The General Assembly further observes that the value of a learning experience is determined by the outcomes achieved, not by the time or place of attendance; and, it finds that Learning Zone schools should have the ability to operate without State laws and regulations, board rules, and policies, and the ability to operate with contractual waivable conditions by a vote of the school staff governed by the contracts. Accordingly, the General Assembly finds that the educational needs of the schoolchildren of Chicago will be served by establishing a Chicago Learning Zone.
(Source: P.A. 89-3, eff. 2-27-95; 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-8.8)
    Sec. 34-8.8. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-8.9)
    Sec. 34-8.9. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-8.10)
    Sec. 34-8.10. Applications for Learning Zone designation. The board shall evaluate applications from attendance centers within Chicago. Applications shall be in the form prescribed by the board. The board shall, upon majority vote, grant Learning Zone designations that, in its judgment, satisfy the goals and requirements of this Law. The board shall establish policies and procedures necessary to implement this Law.
(Source: P.A. 89-3, eff. 2-27-95; 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-8.11)
    Sec. 34-8.11. Evaluation criteria. In determining whether to grant Learning Zone designation, the board shall consider the following factors:
    (1) The extent to which the application demonstrates that improved student learning will be the paramount priority and outcome;
    (2) Proposed adoption of high, rigorous standards of achievement and outcome for all students and staff;
    (3) Proposed use of shared, collegial decision-making;
    (4) Creative, flexible, and innovative proposed restructuring of the applicant attendance centers to create student-centered learning environments;
    (5) Parental and community integration and involvement;
    (6) Development of collaborative relationships with health and human services agencies;
    (7) Ability to function on a localized, decentralized basis within the Chicago public school system;
    (8) Appropriateness of budget and resource allocations, including those functions to be assumed and those to remain centralized;
    (9) Impact of the statutes, regulations, rules, and policies for which waivers are sought; and
    (10) Such other factors, not confined to the foregoing, that are fiscally sound and reasonably determinative of successful student outcome.
(Source: P.A. 89-3, eff. 2-27-95; 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-8.12)
    Sec. 34-8.12. Attendance center support. Applications for Learning Zone designation must include evidence that the application is supported by the principal of the attendance center and by a majority vote of the Local School Council and attendance center staff. Applications shall include that evidence for each participating attendance center.
(Source: P.A. 89-3, eff. 2-27-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-8.13)
    Sec. 34-8.13. Learning Zone designation principles. In performing its duties under this Law, the board shall be guided by the following additional principles:
    (1) Learning Zone designations should be effective for an initial period of no less than 3 and no more than 6 years;
    (2) Learning Zone designations should encompass clusters of attendance centers through joint application from secondary and feeder elementary schools or in other reasonably related clusters;
    (3) Learning Zone designations should encompass, in the aggregate, approximately 10% of the students enrolled in attendance centers within Chicago;
    (4) Learning Zone designations should, in the aggregate, be reflective of the racial and ethnic diversity and demography of students enrolled in attendance centers within Chicago;
    (5) Learning Zone designations should be fully operational commencing with the 1996-97 school year; and
    (6) Learning Zone designation renewals, revisions, and applications for additional waivers of statutes, regulations, rules, and policies should be evaluated in light of the goals of this Law.
(Source: P.A. 89-3, eff. 2-27-95; 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-8.14)
    Sec. 34-8.14. Non-waivable provisions. Notwithstanding anything in this Code to the contrary, statutes, regulations, rules, and policy provisions concerning the following shall not be waivable:
        (1) student civil rights;
        (2) staff civil rights;
        (3) health and safety;
        (4) performance and financial audits;
        (5) Local School Council provisions, including
    	
required statements of economic disclosure;
        (6) the Open Meetings Act;
        (7) the Freedom of Information Act;
        (8) the assessments required under Section 2-3.64a-5
    	
of this Code;
        (9) Chicago learning outcomes;
        (10) Sections 2-3.25a through 2-3.25j of this Code;
    	
and
        (11) collective bargaining agreements.
(Source: P.A. 98-972, eff. 8-15-14.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-8.15)
    Sec. 34-8.15. Reports. The board shall file reports describing statutory waivers encompassed in the Learning Zone designations it grants under Section 34-8.10 with the House of Representatives, the Senate, and the Secretary of State before October 1, 1995 and thereafter before each May 1 and October 1. The provisions in the report or as amended by the General Assembly shall take effect as provided by law.
(Source: P.A. 89-3, eff. 2-27-95; 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-8.16)
    Sec. 34-8.16. Disapproval or amendment of reports. The General Assembly may disapprove the report of the board in whole, or amend it within 30 calendar days after each house of the legislature next convenes after the report is filed, by adoption of a resolution by a record vote of the majority of the members elected in each house directed to the board. The resolution shall be binding upon the board. Reports shall become effective if the General Assembly fails to disapprove or amend the report within the 30 day period.
    For the initial report that the board is required to file before October 1, 1995, the General Assembly may, by January 1, 1996, disapprove the report of the board in whole or amend it, after the report is filed, by the adoption of a resolution by a record vote of the majority of the members. The initial report shall become effective if the General Assembly fails to disapprove or amend the report by January 1, 1996.
(Source: P.A. 89-3, eff. 2-27-95; 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-8.17)
    Sec. 34-8.17. Lump-sum allocation; key centralized functions. Final designation as a Learning Zone under this Law shall entitle the participating attendance centers to receive funds in lump-sum allocations, to budget and spend those funds, and to operate in accordance with the designation and this Law. Lump-sum allocations shall be based on the number of enrolled regular and special needs students and shall include all operating funds for compensation, supplies, equipment, repairs, energy, maintenance, transportation, and professional services, and all special funds that follow special populations, including desegregation, special education, bilingual, federal, and State Chapter 1 funds. A sum equal to 3.2% of operating funds shall be deducted by the board to provide key centralized functions, unless a designated Learning Zone obtains one or more of those functions elsewhere, in which case the sum shall be appropriately adjusted. As used in this Law, key centralized functions shall mean:
        (1) Equity assurance staff to ensure that services
    	
are maintained for students with disabilities, English learners, low-income students, and any other special need students as required by federal law;
        (2) Payroll services and background and credential
    	
checks;
        (3) Budget and treasury services to levy and collect
    	
taxes and distribute lump-sum funding;
        (4) Central computer systems providing information
    	
distribution and networking;
        (5) On-line data collection and analysis centers for
    	
student and school data;
        (6) Emergency pool funding; and
        (7) Legal and labor departmental services for
    	
system-wide litigation and collective bargaining negotiations.
(Source: P.A. 99-30, eff. 7-10-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-8.18)
    Sec. 34-8.18. The board shall revoke Learning Zone designation and the attendance center or centers involved shall return to their prior status upon a finding of:
        (1) A material violation of conditions, standards, or
    	
procedures established in the designation or this Law;
        (2) Failure to meet or make reasonable progress
    	
toward achievement of goals;
        (3) Failure to meet generally accepted standards of
    	
fiscal management; or
        (4) Conditions jeopardizing the health or safety of
    	
students.
    Technical assistance designed to resolve items (1) through (4) may, in the discretion of the board, be provided to attendance centers prior to or in lieu of revocation of Learning Zone designations.
(Source: P.A. 89-3, eff. 2-27-95; 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-8.19)
    Sec. 34-8.19. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-9) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-9)
    Sec. 34-9. Report and estimates. On or before December 1, 1972, on or before December 1, 1973, on or before August 1, 1974 and on or before August 1 of each fiscal year thereafter, the general superintendent of schools shall submit to the board a report containing:
        1. A separate balance sheet for each fund under the
    	
control of the board, showing, by classes, the estimated current assets and liabilities thereof as of the beginning of the next fiscal year and the amounts of such assets available for appropriation in such year, either for expenditures or charges to be made or incurred during such year or for liabilities unpaid at the beginning thereof. Estimates of taxes to be received from prior levies shall be net, after deducting amounts sufficient to cover the loss and cost of collecting taxes and also deferred collections thereof and abatements in the amount of taxes extended or to be extended upon the collectors' books. Estimates of the liabilities of the respective funds shall include (a) all final judgments, and accrued interest thereon, entered against the board and unpaid at the beginning of such next fiscal year, (b) the principal of all general obligation notes or anticipation tax warrants and all temporary loans and all accrued interest thereon unpaid at the beginning of such next fiscal year, (c) any amount for which the board is required to reimburse the working cash fund from the educational purposes fund pursuant to the provisions of Sections 34-30 to 34-36 inclusive, and (d) estimates of all accounts payable including estimates of audited vouchers, participation certificates, interfund loans and purchase orders payable.
        2. Detailed estimates, by funds, of all taxes to be
    	
levied for the next fiscal year and of all other current revenues to be derived from other sources, which will be applicable to expenditures or charges to be made or incurred during such year. In estimating taxes to be levied for any purpose, except for the payment of bonded indebtedness or interest thereon and except for pension fund or working cash fund purposes, the general superintendent of schools shall be governed by the limitations in Sections 34-43 to 34-52, inclusive.
        3. Estimates, by funds, of the amounts necessary for
    	
the board to appropriate for expenditures or charges to be made or incurred during the next succeeding fiscal year, including estimates of the interest to accrue during such year upon general obligation notes or anticipation tax warrants and temporary loans. Such estimates shall be so classified as to show the different objects and purposes for which expenditures or charges are to be made or incurred and the amount required for each object or purpose.
        4. Such other information concerning the financial
    	
affairs of the board as the board may prescribe.
(Source: P.A. 77-2734.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-10) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-10)
    Sec. 34-10. Revised report-Amendments-Excessive appropriations. Within the first 15 days of each fiscal year the general superintendent of schools may submit to the board a revised report on all matters specified in Section 34-9, upon the basis of information then available, and may submit amendments to such report at any time prior to the passage of the annual school budget. He shall also submit to the board, whenever requested by it, any additional or supplemental information he may have concerning matters upon which he is required to report. He shall, within 10 days after the first regular meeting of the board occurring not less than 7 days after the adoption of the school budget, report to the board the extent to which and in what respects, if any, the appropriations contained in such budget in his judgment exceed the appropriations which the board is by law authorized to make.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-11) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-11)
    Sec. 34-11. Duties of general counsel; assistants. The board by a majority vote of its full membership shall appoint a general counsel who shall have charge and control, subject to the approval of the board, of the law department and of all litigation, legal questions and such other legal matters as may be referred to the department by the board or by the general superintendent of schools. Appointments, promotions and discharge of assistant attorneys shall be made by a majority of the board upon recommendation of the attorney or by a majority vote of the full membership of the board. The general counsel shall hold this office for an indefinite term subject to removal by a majority vote of the full membership of the board. In this Article, "attorney" means general counsel.
(Source: P.A. 91-622, eff. 8-19-99.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-12) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-12)
    Sec. 34-12. Participation in meetings by superintendent and attorney. The general superintendent of schools and the general counsel may be present at all meetings of the board and shall have a right to take part in its discussions and deliberations, but shall have no vote.
(Source: P.A. 91-622, eff. 8-19-99.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-13) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-13)
    Sec. 34-13. Appointment, removal or suspension of attorney and assistants. The appointment and removal of the general superintendent of schools, heads of general departments now in existence or hereafter established, the general counsel, and all assistant attorneys shall not be subject to the civil service law. The heads of general departments now in existence or hereafter established may be removed by a majority vote of the full membership of the board upon the recommendation of the general superintendent of schools or by a majority vote of the full membership of the board.
(Source: P.A. 91-622, eff. 8-19-99.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-13.1)
    Sec. 34-13.1. Inspector General.
    (a) The Inspector General and his office in existence on the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1995 shall be transferred to the jurisdiction of the board upon appointment of the Chicago School Reform Board of Trustees. The Inspector General shall have the authority to conduct investigations into allegations of or incidents of waste, fraud, and financial mismanagement in public education within the jurisdiction of the board by a local school council member or an employee, contractor, or member of the board or involving school projects managed or handled by the Public Building Commission. The Inspector General shall make recommendations to the board about the investigations. The Inspector General in office on the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1996 shall serve for a term expiring on June 30, 1998. His or her successors in office shall each be appointed by the Mayor, without the consent or approval of the City Council, for 4 year terms expiring on June 30th of an even numbered year. If the Inspector General leaves office or if a vacancy in that office otherwise occurs, the Mayor shall appoint, without the consent or approval of the City Council, a successor to serve under this Section for the remainder of the unexpired term. The Inspector General shall be independent of the operations of the board and the School Finance Authority, and shall perform other duties requested by the board.
    (b) The Inspector General shall have access to all information and personnel necessary to perform the duties of the office. If the Inspector General determines that a possible criminal act has been committed or that special expertise is required in the investigation, he or she shall immediately notify the Chicago Police Department and the Cook County State's Attorney. All investigations conducted by the Inspector General shall be conducted in a manner that ensures the preservation of evidence for use in criminal prosecutions.
    (c) At all times the Inspector General shall be granted access to any building or facility that is owned, operated, or leased by the board, the Public Building Commission, or the city in trust and for the use and benefit of the schools of the district.
    (d) The Inspector General shall have the power to subpoena witnesses and compel the production of books and papers pertinent to an investigation authorized by this Code. Any person who (1) fails to appear in response to a subpoena; (2) fails to answer any question; (3) fails to produce any books or papers pertinent to an investigation under this Code; or (4) knowingly gives false testimony during an investigation under this Code, is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
    (e) The Inspector General shall provide to the board and the Illinois General Assembly a summary of reports and investigations made under this Section for the previous fiscal year no later than January 1 of each year, except that the Inspector General shall provide the summary of reports and investigations made under this Section for the period commencing July 1, 1998 and ending April 30, 1999 no later than May 1, 1999. The summaries shall detail the final disposition of those recommendations. The summaries shall not contain any confidential or identifying information concerning the subjects of the reports and investigations. The summaries shall also include detailed recommended administrative actions and matters for consideration by the General Assembly.
    (f) (Blank).
    (g) (Blank).
(Source: P.A. 89-15, eff. 5-30-95; 89-698, eff. 1-14-97.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-14) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-14)
    Sec. 34-14. Section 34-15 Not limited by Sections 34-6 To 34-13.
    Nothing contained in Sections 34-6, 34-7, 34-8, 34-9, 34-10, 34-11, 34-12, or 34-13 of this Act shall in any wise be construed to limit the scope, effect and applicability of Section 34-15 of this Act.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-15) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-15)
    Sec. 34-15. Other officers and employees. The board may appoint, or provide for the appointment of, such other officers and employees as it deems necessary.
(Source: P.A. 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-15a) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-15a)
    Sec. 34-15a. Active military service. Any certificated or non-certificated employee of the Board of Education who is a member of any reserve component of the United States Armed Services, including the Illinois National Guard, and who is mobilized to active military duty on or after August 1, 1990, shall for each pay period beginning on or after August 1, 1990 continue to receive the same regular compensation that he receives or was receiving as an employee of the Board of Education at the time he is or was so mobilized to active military duty, plus any health insurance and other benefits he is or was receiving or accruing at that time, minus the amount of his base pay for military service, for the duration of his active military service. Such active military duty shall not result in the loss or diminishment of any employment benefit, service credit, or status accrued at the time the duty commenced if the duty commenced on or after September 1, 2001.
    In the event any provision of a collective bargaining agreement or any board of education or district policy covering any employee so ordered to active duty is more generous than the provisions contained in this Section, the collective bargaining agreement or board of education or district policy shall be controlling.
(Source: P.A. 92-660, eff. 7-16-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-16) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-16)
    Sec. 34-16. Powers of board respecting officers and employees.
    The board shall, subject to the limitations in this Article, prescribe the duties, compensation and terms of office of its officers and the duties, compensation and terms of employment of its employees and determine which of its officers and employees shall give bond, on what conditions, and in what amount.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-17) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-17)
    Sec. 34-17. Powers not exercised by city council.
    No power vested in the board or in any of its officers, agents or employees shall be exercised by the city council.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-18)
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-12)
    Sec. 34-18. Powers of the board. The board shall exercise general supervision and jurisdiction over the public education and the public school system of the city, and, except as otherwise provided by this Article, shall have power:
        1. To make suitable provision for the establishment
    	
and maintenance throughout the year or for such portion thereof as it may direct, not less than 9 months and in compliance with Section 10-19.05, of schools of all grades and kinds, including normal schools, high schools, night schools, schools for defectives and delinquents, parental and truant schools, schools for the blind, the deaf and persons with physical disabilities, schools or classes in manual training, constructural and vocational teaching, domestic arts and physical culture, vocation and extension schools and lecture courses, and all other educational courses and facilities, including establishing, equipping, maintaining and operating playgrounds and recreational programs, when such programs are conducted in, adjacent to, or connected with any public school under the general supervision and jurisdiction of the board; provided that the calendar for the school term and any changes must be submitted to and approved by the State Board of Education before the calendar or changes may take effect, and provided that in allocating funds from year to year for the operation of all attendance centers within the district, the board shall ensure that supplemental general State aid or supplemental grant funds are allocated and applied in accordance with Section 18-8, 18-8.05, or 18-8.15. To admit to such schools without charge foreign exchange students who are participants in an organized exchange student program which is authorized by the board. The board shall permit all students to enroll in apprenticeship programs in trade schools operated by the board, whether those programs are union-sponsored or not. No student shall be refused admission into or be excluded from any course of instruction offered in the common schools by reason of that student's sex. No student shall be denied equal access to physical education and interscholastic athletic programs supported from school district funds or denied participation in comparable physical education and athletic programs solely by reason of the student's sex. Equal access to programs supported from school district funds and comparable programs will be defined in rules promulgated by the State Board of Education in consultation with the Illinois High School Association. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article, neither the board of education nor any local school council or other school official shall recommend that children with disabilities be placed into regular education classrooms unless those children with disabilities are provided with supplementary services to assist them so that they benefit from the regular classroom instruction and are included on the teacher's regular education class register;
        2. To furnish lunches to pupils, to make a reasonable
    	
charge therefor, and to use school funds for the payment of such expenses as the board may determine are necessary in conducting the school lunch program;
        3. To co-operate with the circuit court;
        4. To make arrangements with the public or
    	
quasi-public libraries and museums for the use of their facilities by teachers and pupils of the public schools;
        5. To employ dentists and prescribe their duties for
    	
the purpose of treating the pupils in the schools, but accepting such treatment shall be optional with parents or guardians;
        6. To grant the use of assembly halls and classrooms
    	
when not otherwise needed, including light, heat, and attendants, for free public lectures, concerts, and other educational and social interests, free of charge, under such provisions and control as the principal of the affected attendance center may prescribe;
        7. To apportion the pupils to the several schools;
    	
provided that no pupil shall be excluded from or segregated in any such school on account of his color, race, sex, or nationality. The board shall take into consideration the prevention of segregation and the elimination of separation of children in public schools because of color, race, sex, or nationality. Except that children may be committed to or attend parental and social adjustment schools established and maintained either for boys or girls only. All records pertaining to the creation, alteration or revision of attendance areas shall be open to the public. Nothing herein shall limit the board's authority to establish multi-area attendance centers or other student assignment systems for desegregation purposes or otherwise, and to apportion the pupils to the several schools. Furthermore, beginning in school year 1994-95, pursuant to a board plan adopted by October 1, 1993, the board shall offer, commencing on a phased-in basis, the opportunity for families within the school district to apply for enrollment of their children in any attendance center within the school district which does not have selective admission requirements approved by the board. The appropriate geographical area in which such open enrollment may be exercised shall be determined by the board of education. Such children may be admitted to any such attendance center on a space available basis after all children residing within such attendance center's area have been accommodated. If the number of applicants from outside the attendance area exceed the space available, then successful applicants shall be selected by lottery. The board of education's open enrollment plan must include provisions that allow low income students to have access to transportation needed to exercise school choice. Open enrollment shall be in compliance with the provisions of the Consent Decree and Desegregation Plan cited in Section 34-1.01;
        8. To approve programs and policies for providing
    	
transportation services to students. Nothing herein shall be construed to permit or empower the State Board of Education to order, mandate, or require busing or other transportation of pupils for the purpose of achieving racial balance in any school;
        9. Subject to the limitations in this Article, to
    	
establish and approve system-wide curriculum objectives and standards, including graduation standards, which reflect the multi-cultural diversity in the city and are consistent with State law, provided that for all purposes of this Article courses or proficiency in American Sign Language shall be deemed to constitute courses or proficiency in a foreign language; and to employ principals and teachers, appointed as provided in this Article, and fix their compensation. The board shall prepare such reports related to minimal competency testing as may be requested by the State Board of Education, and in addition shall monitor and approve special education and bilingual education programs and policies within the district to assure that appropriate services are provided in accordance with applicable State and federal laws to children requiring services and education in those areas;
        10. To employ non-teaching personnel or utilize
    	
volunteer personnel for: (i) non-teaching duties not requiring instructional judgment or evaluation of pupils, including library duties; and (ii) supervising study halls, long distance teaching reception areas used incident to instructional programs transmitted by electronic media such as computers, video, and audio, detention and discipline areas, and school-sponsored extracurricular activities. The board may further utilize volunteer non-certificated personnel or employ non-certificated personnel to assist in the instruction of pupils under the immediate supervision of a teacher holding a valid certificate, directly engaged in teaching subject matter or conducting activities; provided that the teacher shall be continuously aware of the non-certificated persons' activities and shall be able to control or modify them. The general superintendent shall determine qualifications of such personnel and shall prescribe rules for determining the duties and activities to be assigned to such personnel;
        10.5. To utilize volunteer personnel from a regional
    	
School Crisis Assistance Team (S.C.A.T.), created as part of the Safe to Learn Program established pursuant to Section 25 of the Illinois Violence Prevention Act of 1995, to provide assistance to schools in times of violence or other traumatic incidents within a school community by providing crisis intervention services to lessen the effects of emotional trauma on individuals and the community; the School Crisis Assistance Team Steering Committee shall determine the qualifications for volunteers;
        11. To provide television studio facilities in not to
    	
exceed one school building and to provide programs for educational purposes, provided, however, that the board shall not construct, acquire, operate, or maintain a television transmitter; to grant the use of its studio facilities to a licensed television station located in the school district; and to maintain and operate not to exceed one school radio transmitting station and provide programs for educational purposes;
        12. To offer, if deemed appropriate, outdoor
    	
education courses, including field trips within the State of Illinois, or adjacent states, and to use school educational funds for the expense of the said outdoor educational programs, whether within the school district or not;
        13. During that period of the calendar year not
    	
embraced within the regular school term, to provide and conduct courses in subject matters normally embraced in the program of the schools during the regular school term and to give regular school credit for satisfactory completion by the student of such courses as may be approved for credit by the State Board of Education;
        14. To insure against any loss or liability of the
    	
board, the former School Board Nominating Commission, Local School Councils, the Chicago Schools Academic Accountability Council, or the former Subdistrict Councils or of any member, officer, agent or employee thereof, resulting from alleged violations of civil rights arising from incidents occurring on or after September 5, 1967 or from the wrongful or negligent act or omission of any such person whether occurring within or without the school premises, provided the officer, agent or employee was, at the time of the alleged violation of civil rights or wrongful act or omission, acting within the scope of his employment or under direction of the board, the former School Board Nominating Commission, the Chicago Schools Academic Accountability Council, Local School Councils, or the former Subdistrict Councils; and to provide for or participate in insurance plans for its officers and employees, including but not limited to retirement annuities, medical, surgical and hospitalization benefits in such types and amounts as may be determined by the board; provided, however, that the board shall contract for such insurance only with an insurance company authorized to do business in this State. Such insurance may include provision for employees who rely on treatment by prayer or spiritual means alone for healing, in accordance with the tenets and practice of a recognized religious denomination;
        15. To contract with the corporate authorities of any
    	
municipality or the county board of any county, as the case may be, to provide for the regulation of traffic in parking areas of property used for school purposes, in such manner as is provided by Section 11-209 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, approved September 29, 1969, as amended;
        16. (a) To provide, on an equal basis, access to a
    	
high school campus and student directory information to the official recruiting representatives of the armed forces of Illinois and the United States for the purposes of informing students of the educational and career opportunities available in the military if the board has provided such access to persons or groups whose purpose is to acquaint students with educational or occupational opportunities available to them. The board is not required to give greater notice regarding the right of access to recruiting representatives than is given to other persons and groups. In this paragraph 16, "directory information" means a high school student's name, address, and telephone number.
        (b) If a student or his or her parent or guardian
    	
submits a signed, written request to the high school before the end of the student's sophomore year (or if the student is a transfer student, by another time set by the high school) that indicates that the student or his or her parent or guardian does not want the student's directory information to be provided to official recruiting representatives under subsection (a) of this Section, the high school may not provide access to the student's directory information to these recruiting representatives. The high school shall notify its students and their parents or guardians of the provisions of this subsection (b).
        (c) A high school may require official recruiting
    	
representatives of the armed forces of Illinois and the United States to pay a fee for copying and mailing a student's directory information in an amount that is not more than the actual costs incurred by the high school.
        (d) Information received by an official recruiting
    	
representative under this Section may be used only to provide information to students concerning educational and career opportunities available in the military and may not be released to a person who is not involved in recruiting students for the armed forces of Illinois or the United States;
        17. (a) To sell or market any computer program
    	
developed by an employee of the school district, provided that such employee developed the computer program as a direct result of his or her duties with the school district or through the utilization of the school district resources or facilities. The employee who developed the computer program shall be entitled to share in the proceeds of such sale or marketing of the computer program. The distribution of such proceeds between the employee and the school district shall be as agreed upon by the employee and the school district, except that neither the employee nor the school district may receive more than 90% of such proceeds. The negotiation for an employee who is represented by an exclusive bargaining representative may be conducted by such bargaining representative at the employee's request.
        (b) For the purpose of this paragraph 17:
            (1) "Computer" means an internally programmed,
        	
general purpose digital device capable of automatically accepting data, processing data and supplying the results of the operation.
            (2) "Computer program" means a series of coded
        	
instructions or statements in a form acceptable to a computer, which causes the computer to process data in order to achieve a certain result.
            (3) "Proceeds" means profits derived from
        	
marketing or sale of a product after deducting the expenses of developing and marketing such product;
        18. To delegate to the general superintendent of
    	
schools, by resolution, the authority to approve contracts and expenditures in amounts of $10,000 or less;
        19. Upon the written request of an employee, to
    	
withhold from the compensation of that employee any dues, payments or contributions payable by such employee to any labor organization as defined in the Illinois Educational Labor Relations Act. Under such arrangement, an amount shall be withheld from each regular payroll period which is equal to the pro rata share of the annual dues plus any payments or contributions, and the board shall transmit such withholdings to the specified labor organization within 10 working days from the time of the withholding;
        19a. Upon receipt of notice from the comptroller of a
    	
municipality with a population of 500,000 or more, a county with a population of 3,000,000 or more, the Cook County Forest Preserve District, the Chicago Park District, the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District, the Chicago Transit Authority, or a housing authority of a municipality with a population of 500,000 or more that a debt is due and owing the municipality, the county, the Cook County Forest Preserve District, the Chicago Park District, the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District, the Chicago Transit Authority, or the housing authority by an employee of the Chicago Board of Education, to withhold, from the compensation of that employee, the amount of the debt that is due and owing and pay the amount withheld to the municipality, the county, the Cook County Forest Preserve District, the Chicago Park District, the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District, the Chicago Transit Authority, or the housing authority; provided, however, that the amount deducted from any one salary or wage payment shall not exceed 25% of the net amount of the payment. Before the Board deducts any amount from any salary or wage of an employee under this paragraph, the municipality, the county, the Cook County Forest Preserve District, the Chicago Park District, the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District, the Chicago Transit Authority, or the housing authority shall certify that (i) the employee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing to dispute the debt that is due and owing the municipality, the county, the Cook County Forest Preserve District, the Chicago Park District, the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District, the Chicago Transit Authority, or the housing authority and (ii) the employee has received notice of a wage deduction order and has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing to object to the order. For purposes of this paragraph, "net amount" means that part of the salary or wage payment remaining after the deduction of any amounts required by law to be deducted and "debt due and owing" means (i) a specified sum of money owed to the municipality, the county, the Cook County Forest Preserve District, the Chicago Park District, the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District, the Chicago Transit Authority, or the housing authority for services, work, or goods, after the period granted for payment has expired, or (ii) a specified sum of money owed to the municipality, the county, the Cook County Forest Preserve District, the Chicago Park District, the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District, the Chicago Transit Authority, or the housing authority pursuant to a court order or order of an administrative hearing officer after the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, judicial review;
        20. The board is encouraged to employ a sufficient
    	
number of certified school counselors to maintain a student/counselor ratio of 250 to 1 by July 1, 1990. Each counselor shall spend at least 75% of his work time in direct contact with students and shall maintain a record of such time;
        21. To make available to students vocational and
    	
career counseling and to establish 5 special career counseling days for students and parents. On these days representatives of local businesses and industries shall be invited to the school campus and shall inform students of career opportunities available to them in the various businesses and industries. Special consideration shall be given to counseling minority students as to career opportunities available to them in various fields. For the purposes of this paragraph, minority student means a person who is any of the following:
        (a) American Indian or Alaska Native (a person having
    	
origins in any of the original peoples of North and South America, including Central America, and who maintains tribal affiliation or community attachment).
        (b) Asian (a person having origins in any of the
    	
original peoples of the Far East, Southeast Asia, or the Indian subcontinent, including, but not limited to, Cambodia, China, India, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, the Philippine Islands, Thailand, and Vietnam).
        (c) Black or African American (a person having
    	
origins in any of the black racial groups of Africa). Terms such as "Haitian" or "Negro" can be used in addition to "Black or African American".
        (d) Hispanic or Latino (a person of Cuban, Mexican,
    	
Puerto Rican, South or Central American, or other Spanish culture or origin, regardless of race).
        (e) Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander (a
    	
person having origins in any of the original peoples of Hawaii, Guam, Samoa, or other Pacific Islands).
        Counseling days shall not be in lieu of regular
    	
school days;
        22. To report to the State Board of Education the
    	
annual student dropout rate and number of students who graduate from, transfer from or otherwise leave bilingual programs;
        23. Except as otherwise provided in the Abused and
    	
Neglected Child Reporting Act or other applicable State or federal law, to permit school officials to withhold, from any person, information on the whereabouts of any child removed from school premises when the child has been taken into protective custody as a victim of suspected child abuse. School officials shall direct such person to the Department of Children and Family Services, or to the local law enforcement agency if appropriate;
        24. To develop a policy, based on the current state
    	
of existing school facilities, projected enrollment and efficient utilization of available resources, for capital improvement of schools and school buildings within the district, addressing in that policy both the relative priority for major repairs, renovations and additions to school facilities, and the advisability or necessity of building new school facilities or closing existing schools to meet current or projected demographic patterns within the district;
        25. To make available to the students in every high
    	
school attendance center the ability to take all courses necessary to comply with the Board of Higher Education's college entrance criteria effective in 1993;
        26. To encourage mid-career changes into the teaching
    	
profession, whereby qualified professionals become certified teachers, by allowing credit for professional employment in related fields when determining point of entry on teacher pay scale;
        27. To provide or contract out training programs for
    	
administrative personnel and principals with revised or expanded duties pursuant to this Act in order to assure they have the knowledge and skills to perform their duties;
        28. To establish a fund for the prioritized special
    	
needs programs, and to allocate such funds and other lump sum amounts to each attendance center in a manner consistent with the provisions of part 4 of Section 34-2.3. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to require any additional appropriations of State funds for this purpose;
        29. (Blank);
        30. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act
    	
or any other law to the contrary, to contract with third parties for services otherwise performed by employees, including those in a bargaining unit, and to layoff those employees upon 14 days written notice to the affected employees. Those contracts may be for a period not to exceed 5 years and may be awarded on a system-wide basis. The board may not operate more than 30 contract schools, provided that the board may operate an additional 5 contract turnaround schools pursuant to item (5.5) of subsection (d) of Section 34-8.3 of this Code;
        31. To promulgate rules establishing procedures
    	
governing the layoff or reduction in force of employees and the recall of such employees, including, but not limited to, criteria for such layoffs, reductions in force or recall rights of such employees and the weight to be given to any particular criterion. Such criteria shall take into account factors including, but not be limited to, qualifications, certifications, experience, performance ratings or evaluations, and any other factors relating to an employee's job performance;
        32. To develop a policy to prevent nepotism in the
    	
hiring of personnel or the selection of contractors;
        33. (Blank); and
        34. To establish a Labor Management Council to the
    	
board comprised of representatives of the board, the chief executive officer, and those labor organizations that are the exclusive representatives of employees of the board and to promulgate policies and procedures for the operation of the Council.
    The specifications of the powers herein granted are not to be construed as exclusive but the board shall also exercise all other powers that they may be requisite or proper for the maintenance and the development of a public school system, not inconsistent with the other provisions of this Article or provisions of this Code which apply to all school districts.
    In addition to the powers herein granted and authorized to be exercised by the board, it shall be the duty of the board to review or to direct independent reviews of special education expenditures and services. The board shall file a report of such review with the General Assembly on or before May 1, 1990.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17; 100-1046, eff. 8-23-18; 101-12, eff. 7-1-19.)
 
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-88)
    Sec. 34-18. Powers of the board. The board shall exercise general supervision and jurisdiction over the public education and the public school system of the city, and, except as otherwise provided by this Article, shall have power:
        1. To make suitable provision for the establishment
    	
and maintenance throughout the year or for such portion thereof as it may direct, not less than 9 months, of schools of all grades and kinds, including normal schools, high schools, night schools, schools for defectives and delinquents, parental and truant schools, schools for the blind, the deaf and persons with physical disabilities, schools or classes in manual training, constructural and vocational teaching, domestic arts and physical culture, vocation and extension schools and lecture courses, and all other educational courses and facilities, including establishing, equipping, maintaining and operating playgrounds and recreational programs, when such programs are conducted in, adjacent to, or connected with any public school under the general supervision and jurisdiction of the board; provided that the calendar for the school term and any changes must be submitted to and approved by the State Board of Education before the calendar or changes may take effect, and provided that in allocating funds from year to year for the operation of all attendance centers within the district, the board shall ensure that supplemental general State aid or supplemental grant funds are allocated and applied in accordance with Section 18-8, 18-8.05, or 18-8.15. To admit to such schools without charge foreign exchange students who are participants in an organized exchange student program which is authorized by the board. The board shall permit all students to enroll in apprenticeship programs in trade schools operated by the board, whether those programs are union-sponsored or not. No student shall be refused admission into or be excluded from any course of instruction offered in the common schools by reason of that student's sex. No student shall be denied equal access to physical education and interscholastic athletic programs supported from school district funds or denied participation in comparable physical education and athletic programs solely by reason of the student's sex. Equal access to programs supported from school district funds and comparable programs will be defined in rules promulgated by the State Board of Education in consultation with the Illinois High School Association. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article, neither the board of education nor any local school council or other school official shall recommend that children with disabilities be placed into regular education classrooms unless those children with disabilities are provided with supplementary services to assist them so that they benefit from the regular classroom instruction and are included on the teacher's regular education class register;
        2. To furnish lunches to pupils, to make a reasonable
    	
charge therefor, and to use school funds for the payment of such expenses as the board may determine are necessary in conducting the school lunch program;
        3. To co-operate with the circuit court;
        4. To make arrangements with the public or
    	
quasi-public libraries and museums for the use of their facilities by teachers and pupils of the public schools;
        5. To employ dentists and prescribe their duties for
    	
the purpose of treating the pupils in the schools, but accepting such treatment shall be optional with parents or guardians;
        6. To grant the use of assembly halls and classrooms
    	
when not otherwise needed, including light, heat, and attendants, for free public lectures, concerts, and other educational and social interests, free of charge, under such provisions and control as the principal of the affected attendance center may prescribe;
        7. To apportion the pupils to the several schools;
    	
provided that no pupil shall be excluded from or segregated in any such school on account of his color, race, sex, or nationality. The board shall take into consideration the prevention of segregation and the elimination of separation of children in public schools because of color, race, sex, or nationality. Except that children may be committed to or attend parental and social adjustment schools established and maintained either for boys or girls only. All records pertaining to the creation, alteration or revision of attendance areas shall be open to the public. Nothing herein shall limit the board's authority to establish multi-area attendance centers or other student assignment systems for desegregation purposes or otherwise, and to apportion the pupils to the several schools. Furthermore, beginning in school year 1994-95, pursuant to a board plan adopted by October 1, 1993, the board shall offer, commencing on a phased-in basis, the opportunity for families within the school district to apply for enrollment of their children in any attendance center within the school district which does not have selective admission requirements approved by the board. The appropriate geographical area in which such open enrollment may be exercised shall be determined by the board of education. Such children may be admitted to any such attendance center on a space available basis after all children residing within such attendance center's area have been accommodated. If the number of applicants from outside the attendance area exceed the space available, then successful applicants shall be selected by lottery. The board of education's open enrollment plan must include provisions that allow low income students to have access to transportation needed to exercise school choice. Open enrollment shall be in compliance with the provisions of the Consent Decree and Desegregation Plan cited in Section 34-1.01;
        8. To approve programs and policies for providing
    	
transportation services to students. Nothing herein shall be construed to permit or empower the State Board of Education to order, mandate, or require busing or other transportation of pupils for the purpose of achieving racial balance in any school;
        9. Subject to the limitations in this Article, to
    	
establish and approve system-wide curriculum objectives and standards, including graduation standards, which reflect the multi-cultural diversity in the city and are consistent with State law, provided that for all purposes of this Article courses or proficiency in American Sign Language shall be deemed to constitute courses or proficiency in a foreign language; and to employ principals and teachers, appointed as provided in this Article, and fix their compensation. The board shall prepare such reports related to minimal competency testing as may be requested by the State Board of Education, and in addition shall monitor and approve special education and bilingual education programs and policies within the district to assure that appropriate services are provided in accordance with applicable State and federal laws to children requiring services and education in those areas;
        10. To employ non-teaching personnel or utilize
    	
volunteer personnel for: (i) non-teaching duties not requiring instructional judgment or evaluation of pupils, including library duties; and (ii) supervising study halls, long distance teaching reception areas used incident to instructional programs transmitted by electronic media such as computers, video, and audio, detention and discipline areas, and school-sponsored extracurricular activities. The board may further utilize volunteer non-certificated personnel or employ non-certificated personnel to assist in the instruction of pupils under the immediate supervision of a teacher holding a valid certificate, directly engaged in teaching subject matter or conducting activities; provided that the teacher shall be continuously aware of the non-certificated persons' activities and shall be able to control or modify them. The general superintendent shall determine qualifications of such personnel and shall prescribe rules for determining the duties and activities to be assigned to such personnel;
        10.5. To utilize volunteer personnel from a regional
    	
School Crisis Assistance Team (S.C.A.T.), created as part of the Safe to Learn Program established pursuant to Section 25 of the Illinois Violence Prevention Act of 1995, to provide assistance to schools in times of violence or other traumatic incidents within a school community by providing crisis intervention services to lessen the effects of emotional trauma on individuals and the community; the School Crisis Assistance Team Steering Committee shall determine the qualifications for volunteers;
        11. To provide television studio facilities in not to
    	
exceed one school building and to provide programs for educational purposes, provided, however, that the board shall not construct, acquire, operate, or maintain a television transmitter; to grant the use of its studio facilities to a licensed television station located in the school district; and to maintain and operate not to exceed one school radio transmitting station and provide programs for educational purposes;
        12. To offer, if deemed appropriate, outdoor
    	
education courses, including field trips within the State of Illinois, or adjacent states, and to use school educational funds for the expense of the said outdoor educational programs, whether within the school district or not;
        13. During that period of the calendar year not
    	
embraced within the regular school term, to provide and conduct courses in subject matters normally embraced in the program of the schools during the regular school term and to give regular school credit for satisfactory completion by the student of such courses as may be approved for credit by the State Board of Education;
        14. To insure against any loss or liability of the
    	
board, the former School Board Nominating Commission, Local School Councils, the Chicago Schools Academic Accountability Council, or the former Subdistrict Councils or of any member, officer, agent or employee thereof, resulting from alleged violations of civil rights arising from incidents occurring on or after September 5, 1967 or from the wrongful or negligent act or omission of any such person whether occurring within or without the school premises, provided the officer, agent or employee was, at the time of the alleged violation of civil rights or wrongful act or omission, acting within the scope of his employment or under direction of the board, the former School Board Nominating Commission, the Chicago Schools Academic Accountability Council, Local School Councils, or the former Subdistrict Councils; and to provide for or participate in insurance plans for its officers and employees, including but not limited to retirement annuities, medical, surgical and hospitalization benefits in such types and amounts as may be determined by the board; provided, however, that the board shall contract for such insurance only with an insurance company authorized to do business in this State. Such insurance may include provision for employees who rely on treatment by prayer or spiritual means alone for healing, in accordance with the tenets and practice of a recognized religious denomination;
        15. To contract with the corporate authorities of any
    	
municipality or the county board of any county, as the case may be, to provide for the regulation of traffic in parking areas of property used for school purposes, in such manner as is provided by Section 11-209 of The Illinois Vehicle Code, approved September 29, 1969, as amended;
        16. (a) To provide, on an equal basis, access to a
    	
high school campus and student directory information to the official recruiting representatives of the armed forces of Illinois and the United States for the purposes of informing students of the educational and career opportunities available in the military if the board has provided such access to persons or groups whose purpose is to acquaint students with educational or occupational opportunities available to them. The board is not required to give greater notice regarding the right of access to recruiting representatives than is given to other persons and groups. In this paragraph 16, "directory information" means a high school student's name, address, and telephone number.
        (b) If a student or his or her parent or guardian
    	
submits a signed, written request to the high school before the end of the student's sophomore year (or if the student is a transfer student, by another time set by the high school) that indicates that the student or his or her parent or guardian does not want the student's directory information to be provided to official recruiting representatives under subsection (a) of this Section, the high school may not provide access to the student's directory information to these recruiting representatives. The high school shall notify its students and their parents or guardians of the provisions of this subsection (b).
        (c) A high school may require official recruiting
    	
representatives of the armed forces of Illinois and the United States to pay a fee for copying and mailing a student's directory information in an amount that is not more than the actual costs incurred by the high school.
        (d) Information received by an official recruiting
    	
representative under this Section may be used only to provide information to students concerning educational and career opportunities available in the military and may not be released to a person who is not involved in recruiting students for the armed forces of Illinois or the United States;
        17. (a) To sell or market any computer program
    	
developed by an employee of the school district, provided that such employee developed the computer program as a direct result of his or her duties with the school district or through the utilization of the school district resources or facilities. The employee who developed the computer program shall be entitled to share in the proceeds of such sale or marketing of the computer program. The distribution of such proceeds between the employee and the school district shall be as agreed upon by the employee and the school district, except that neither the employee nor the school district may receive more than 90% of such proceeds. The negotiation for an employee who is represented by an exclusive bargaining representative may be conducted by such bargaining representative at the employee's request.
        (b) For the purpose of this paragraph 17:
            (1) "Computer" means an internally programmed,
        	
general purpose digital device capable of automatically accepting data, processing data and supplying the results of the operation.
            (2) "Computer program" means a series of coded
        	
instructions or statements in a form acceptable to a computer, which causes the computer to process data in order to achieve a certain result.
            (3) "Proceeds" means profits derived from
        	
marketing or sale of a product after deducting the expenses of developing and marketing such product;
        18. To delegate to the general superintendent of
    	
schools, by resolution, the authority to approve contracts and expenditures in amounts of $10,000 or less;
        19. Upon the written request of an employee, to
    	
withhold from the compensation of that employee any dues, payments or contributions payable by such employee to any labor organization as defined in the Illinois Educational Labor Relations Act. Under such arrangement, an amount shall be withheld from each regular payroll period which is equal to the pro rata share of the annual dues plus any payments or contributions, and the board shall transmit such withholdings to the specified labor organization within 10 working days from the time of the withholding;
        19a. Upon receipt of notice from the comptroller of a
    	
municipality with a population of 500,000 or more, a county with a population of 3,000,000 or more, the Cook County Forest Preserve District, the Chicago Park District, the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District, the Chicago Transit Authority, or a housing authority of a municipality with a population of 500,000 or more that a debt is due and owing the municipality, the county, the Cook County Forest Preserve District, the Chicago Park District, the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District, the Chicago Transit Authority, or the housing authority by an employee of the Chicago Board of Education, to withhold, from the compensation of that employee, the amount of the debt that is due and owing and pay the amount withheld to the municipality, the county, the Cook County Forest Preserve District, the Chicago Park District, the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District, the Chicago Transit Authority, or the housing authority; provided, however, that the amount deducted from any one salary or wage payment shall not exceed 25% of the net amount of the payment. Before the Board deducts any amount from any salary or wage of an employee under this paragraph, the municipality, the county, the Cook County Forest Preserve District, the Chicago Park District, the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District, the Chicago Transit Authority, or the housing authority shall certify that (i) the employee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing to dispute the debt that is due and owing the municipality, the county, the Cook County Forest Preserve District, the Chicago Park District, the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District, the Chicago Transit Authority, or the housing authority and (ii) the employee has received notice of a wage deduction order and has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing to object to the order. For purposes of this paragraph, "net amount" means that part of the salary or wage payment remaining after the deduction of any amounts required by law to be deducted and "debt due and owing" means (i) a specified sum of money owed to the municipality, the county, the Cook County Forest Preserve District, the Chicago Park District, the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District, the Chicago Transit Authority, or the housing authority for services, work, or goods, after the period granted for payment has expired, or (ii) a specified sum of money owed to the municipality, the county, the Cook County Forest Preserve District, the Chicago Park District, the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District, the Chicago Transit Authority, or the housing authority pursuant to a court order or order of an administrative hearing officer after the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, judicial review;
        20. The board is encouraged to employ a sufficient
    	
number of certified school counselors to maintain a student/counselor ratio of 250 to 1 by July 1, 1990. Each counselor shall spend at least 75% of his work time in direct contact with students and shall maintain a record of such time;
        21. To make available to students vocational and
    	
career counseling and to establish 5 special career counseling days for students and parents. On these days representatives of local businesses and industries shall be invited to the school campus and shall inform students of career opportunities available to them in the various businesses and industries. Special consideration shall be given to counseling minority students as to career opportunities available to them in various fields. For the purposes of this paragraph, minority student means a person who is any of the following:
        (a) American Indian or Alaska Native (a person having
    	
origins in any of the original peoples of North and South America, including Central America, and who maintains tribal affiliation or community attachment).
        (b) Asian (a person having origins in any of the
    	
original peoples of the Far East, Southeast Asia, or the Indian subcontinent, including, but not limited to, Cambodia, China, India, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, the Philippine Islands, Thailand, and Vietnam).
        (c) Black or African American (a person having
    	
origins in any of the black racial groups of Africa). Terms such as "Haitian" or "Negro" can be used in addition to "Black or African American".
        (d) Hispanic or Latino (a person of Cuban, Mexican,
    	
Puerto Rican, South or Central American, or other Spanish culture or origin, regardless of race).
        (e) Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander (a
    	
person having origins in any of the original peoples of Hawaii, Guam, Samoa, or other Pacific Islands).
        Counseling days shall not be in lieu of regular
    	
school days;
        22. To report to the State Board of Education the
    	
annual student dropout rate and number of students who graduate from, transfer from or otherwise leave bilingual programs;
        23. Except as otherwise provided in the Abused and
    	
Neglected Child Reporting Act or other applicable State or federal law, to permit school officials to withhold, from any person, information on the whereabouts of any child removed from school premises when the child has been taken into protective custody as a victim of suspected child abuse. School officials shall direct such person to the Department of Children and Family Services, or to the local law enforcement agency if appropriate;
        24. To develop a policy, based on the current state
    	
of existing school facilities, projected enrollment and efficient utilization of available resources, for capital improvement of schools and school buildings within the district, addressing in that policy both the relative priority for major repairs, renovations and additions to school facilities, and the advisability or necessity of building new school facilities or closing existing schools to meet current or projected demographic patterns within the district;
        25. To make available to the students in every high
    	
school attendance center the ability to take all courses necessary to comply with the Board of Higher Education's college entrance criteria effective in 1993;
        26. To encourage mid-career changes into the teaching
    	
profession, whereby qualified professionals become certified teachers, by allowing credit for professional employment in related fields when determining point of entry on teacher pay scale;
        27. To provide or contract out training programs for
    	
administrative personnel and principals with revised or expanded duties pursuant to this Act in order to assure they have the knowledge and skills to perform their duties;
        28. To establish a fund for the prioritized special
    	
needs programs, and to allocate such funds and other lump sum amounts to each attendance center in a manner consistent with the provisions of part 4 of Section 34-2.3. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to require any additional appropriations of State funds for this purpose;
        29. (Blank);
        30. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act
    	
or any other law to the contrary, to contract with third parties for services otherwise performed by employees, including those in a bargaining unit, and to layoff those employees upon 14 days written notice to the affected employees. Those contracts may be for a period not to exceed 5 years and may be awarded on a system-wide basis. The board may not operate more than 30 contract schools, provided that the board may operate an additional 5 contract turnaround schools pursuant to item (5.5) of subsection (d) of Section 34-8.3 of this Code, and the governing bodies of contract schools are subject to the Freedom of Information Act and Open Meetings Act;
        31. To promulgate rules establishing procedures
    	
governing the layoff or reduction in force of employees and the recall of such employees, including, but not limited to, criteria for such layoffs, reductions in force or recall rights of such employees and the weight to be given to any particular criterion. Such criteria shall take into account factors including, but not be limited to, qualifications, certifications, experience, performance ratings or evaluations, and any other factors relating to an employee's job performance;
        32. To develop a policy to prevent nepotism in the
    	
hiring of personnel or the selection of contractors;
        33. (Blank); and
        34. To establish a Labor Management Council to the
    	
board comprised of representatives of the board, the chief executive officer, and those labor organizations that are the exclusive representatives of employees of the board and to promulgate policies and procedures for the operation of the Council.
    The specifications of the powers herein granted are not to be construed as exclusive but the board shall also exercise all other powers that they may be requisite or proper for the maintenance and the development of a public school system, not inconsistent with the other provisions of this Article or provisions of this Code which apply to all school districts.
    In addition to the powers herein granted and authorized to be exercised by the board, it shall be the duty of the board to review or to direct independent reviews of special education expenditures and services. The board shall file a report of such review with the General Assembly on or before May 1, 1990.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17; 100-1046, eff. 8-23-18; 101-88, eff. 1-1-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-18.1)
    Sec. 34-18.1. Protection from suit. The board shall insure or indemnify and protect the board, Chicago Schools Academic Accountability Council, former School Board Nominating Commission, Local School Councils, or former Subdistrict Councils, any member of the board, Chicago Schools Accountability Council, former School Board Nominating Commission, Local School Council, or former Subdistrict Council, or any agent, employee, teacher, student teacher, officer, or member of the supervisory staff of the school district against financial loss and expense, including reasonable legal fees and costs arising out of any claim, demand, suit, or judgment by reason of alleged negligence, alleged violation of civil rights occurring on or after September 5, 1967, or alleged wrongful act resulting in death or bodily injury to any person or accidental damage to or destruction of property, within or without the school premises, provided such board member, agent, employee, teacher, student teacher, officer or member of the supervisory staff, at the time of the occurrence was acting under the direction of the board within the course or scope of his duties.
(Source: P.A. 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-18.2)
    Sec. 34-18.2. Bilingual programs. The Board of Education may provide programs in a language other than English for those children whose first language is other than English. Such programs are subject to the approval of the State Board of Education pursuant to Article 14C of The School Code. Upon approval of the program the Board shall be entitled to payment from the State of Illinois for the services and materials required.
(Source: P.A. 81-1508.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-18.3)
    Sec. 34-18.3. The Board of Education is authorized to establish and implement peer assistance, tutorial programs whereby qualified, able students assist less able students with their studies and course work. As a part of such program the Board shall award appropriate recognition to students furnishing such tutorial services. In addition, the Board is authorized to cooperate with institutions of higher education and may accept tutorial services provided by qualified students of such institutions under the Educational Partnership Act, as now or hereafter amended.
(Source: P.A. 84-712.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.4) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-18.4)
    Sec. 34-18.4. Before and after school programs. The Board of Education may develop and maintain before school and after school programs for students in kindergarten through the 6th grade. Such programs may include time for homework, physical exercise, afternoon nutritional snacks and educational offerings which are in addition to those offered during the regular school day. The chief administrator in each district shall be a certified teacher or a person who meets the requirements for supervising a day care center under the Child Care Act of 1969. Individual programs shall be coordinated by certified teachers or by persons who meet the requirements for supervising a day care center under the Child Care Act of 1969. Additional employees who are not so qualified may also be employed for such programs.
    The schedule of these programs may follow the work calendar of the local community rather than the regular school calendar. Parents or guardians of the participating students shall be responsible for providing transportation for the students to and from the programs. The school board may charge parents of participating students a fee, not to exceed the actual cost of such before and after school programs.
(Source: P.A. 83-639.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.5) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-18.5)
    Sec. 34-18.5. Criminal history records checks and checks of the Statewide Sex Offender Database and Statewide Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth Database.
    (a) Licensed and nonlicensed applicants for employment with the school district are required as a condition of employment to authorize a fingerprint-based criminal history records check to determine if such applicants have been convicted of any disqualifying, enumerated criminal or drug offense in subsection (c) of this Section or have been convicted, within 7 years of the application for employment with the school district, of any other felony under the laws of this State or of any offense committed or attempted in any other state or against the laws of the United States that, if committed or attempted in this State, would have been punishable as a felony under the laws of this State. Authorization for the check shall be furnished by the applicant to the school district, except that if the applicant is a substitute teacher seeking employment in more than one school district, or a teacher seeking concurrent part-time employment positions with more than one school district (as a reading specialist, special education teacher or otherwise), or an educational support personnel employee seeking employment positions with more than one district, any such district may require the applicant to furnish authorization for the check to the regional superintendent of the educational service region in which are located the school districts in which the applicant is seeking employment as a substitute or concurrent part-time teacher or concurrent educational support personnel employee. Upon receipt of this authorization, the school district or the appropriate regional superintendent, as the case may be, shall submit the applicant's name, sex, race, date of birth, social security number, fingerprint images, and other identifiers, as prescribed by the Department of State Police, to the Department. The regional superintendent submitting the requisite information to the Department of State Police shall promptly notify the school districts in which the applicant is seeking employment as a substitute or concurrent part-time teacher or concurrent educational support personnel employee that the check of the applicant has been requested. The Department of State Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation shall furnish, pursuant to a fingerprint-based criminal history records check, records of convictions, forever and hereinafter, until expunged, to the president of the school board for the school district that requested the check, or to the regional superintendent who requested the check. The Department shall charge the school district or the appropriate regional superintendent a fee for conducting such check, which fee shall be deposited in the State Police Services Fund and shall not exceed the cost of the inquiry; and the applicant shall not be charged a fee for such check by the school district or by the regional superintendent. Subject to appropriations for these purposes, the State Superintendent of Education shall reimburse the school district and regional superintendent for fees paid to obtain criminal history records checks under this Section.
    (a-5) The school district or regional superintendent shall further perform a check of the Statewide Sex Offender Database, as authorized by the Sex Offender Community Notification Law, for each applicant. The check of the Statewide Sex Offender Database must be conducted by the school district or regional superintendent once for every 5 years that an applicant remains employed by the school district.
    (a-6) The school district or regional superintendent shall further perform a check of the Statewide Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth Database, as authorized by the Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth Community Notification Law, for each applicant. The check of the Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth Database must be conducted by the school district or regional superintendent once for every 5 years that an applicant remains employed by the school district.
    (b) Any information concerning the record of convictions obtained by the president of the board of education or the regional superintendent shall be confidential and may only be transmitted to the general superintendent of the school district or his designee, the appropriate regional superintendent if the check was requested by the board of education for the school district, the presidents of the appropriate board of education or school boards if the check was requested from the Department of State Police by the regional superintendent, the State Board of Education and the school district as authorized under subsection (b-5), the State Superintendent of Education, the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board or any other person necessary to the decision of hiring the applicant for employment. A copy of the record of convictions obtained from the Department of State Police shall be provided to the applicant for employment. Upon the check of the Statewide Sex Offender Database or Statewide Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth Database, the school district or regional superintendent shall notify an applicant as to whether or not the applicant has been identified in the Database. If a check of an applicant for employment as a substitute or concurrent part-time teacher or concurrent educational support personnel employee in more than one school district was requested by the regional superintendent, and the Department of State Police upon a check ascertains that the applicant has not been convicted of any of the enumerated criminal or drug offenses in subsection (c) of this Section or has not been convicted, within 7 years of the application for employment with the school district, of any other felony under the laws of this State or of any offense committed or attempted in any other state or against the laws of the United States that, if committed or attempted in this State, would have been punishable as a felony under the laws of this State and so notifies the regional superintendent and if the regional superintendent upon a check ascertains that the applicant has not been identified in the Sex Offender Database or Statewide Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth Database, then the regional superintendent shall issue to the applicant a certificate evidencing that as of the date specified by the Department of State Police the applicant has not been convicted of any of the enumerated criminal or drug offenses in subsection (c) of this Section or has not been convicted, within 7 years of the application for employment with the school district, of any other felony under the laws of this State or of any offense committed or attempted in any other state or against the laws of the United States that, if committed or attempted in this State, would have been punishable as a felony under the laws of this State and evidencing that as of the date that the regional superintendent conducted a check of the Statewide Sex Offender Database or Statewide Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth Database, the applicant has not been identified in the Database. The school board of any school district may rely on the certificate issued by any regional superintendent to that substitute teacher, concurrent part-time teacher, or concurrent educational support personnel employee or may initiate its own criminal history records check of the applicant through the Department of State Police and its own check of the Statewide Sex Offender Database or Statewide Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth Database as provided in this Section. Any unauthorized release of confidential information may be a violation of Section 7 of the Criminal Identification Act.
    (b-5) If a criminal history records check or check of the Statewide Sex Offender Database or Statewide Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth Database is performed by a regional superintendent for an applicant seeking employment as a substitute teacher with the school district, the regional superintendent may disclose to the State Board of Education whether the applicant has been issued a certificate under subsection (b) based on those checks. If the State Board receives information on an applicant under this subsection, then it must indicate in the Educator Licensure Information System for a 90-day period that the applicant has been issued or has not been issued a certificate.
    (c) The board of education shall not knowingly employ a person who has been convicted of any offense that would subject him or her to license suspension or revocation pursuant to Section 21B-80 of this Code, except as provided under subsection (b) of 21B-80. Further, the board of education shall not knowingly employ a person who has been found to be the perpetrator of sexual or physical abuse of any minor under 18 years of age pursuant to proceedings under Article II of the Juvenile Court Act of 1987. As a condition of employment, the board of education must consider the status of a person who has been issued an indicated finding of abuse or neglect of a child by the Department of Children and Family Services under the Abused and Neglected Child Reporting Act or by a child welfare agency of another jurisdiction.
    (d) The board of education shall not knowingly employ a person for whom a criminal history records check and a Statewide Sex Offender Database check have not been initiated.
    (e) Within 10 days after the general superintendent of schools, a regional office of education, or an entity that provides background checks of license holders to public schools receives information of a pending criminal charge against a license holder for an offense set forth in Section 21B-80 of this Code, the superintendent, regional office of education, or entity must notify the State Superintendent of Education of the pending criminal charge.
    No later than 15 business days after receipt of a record of conviction or of checking the Statewide Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth Database or the Statewide Sex Offender Database and finding a registration, the general superintendent of schools or the applicable regional superintendent shall, in writing, notify the State Superintendent of Education of any license holder who has been convicted of a crime set forth in Section 21B-80 of this Code. Upon receipt of the record of a conviction of or a finding of child abuse by a holder of any license issued pursuant to Article 21B or Section 34-8.1 or 34-83 of this Code, the State Superintendent of Education may initiate licensure suspension and revocation proceedings as authorized by law. If the receipt of the record of conviction or finding of child abuse is received within 6 months after the initial grant of or renewal of a license, the State Superintendent of Education may rescind the license holder's license.
    (e-5) The general superintendent of schools shall, in writing, notify the State Superintendent of Education of any license holder whom he or she has reasonable cause to believe has committed an intentional act of abuse or neglect with the result of making a child an abused child or a neglected child, as defined in Section 3 of the Abused and Neglected Child Reporting Act, and that act resulted in the license holder's dismissal or resignation from the school district. This notification must be submitted within 30 days after the dismissal or resignation. The license holder must also be contemporaneously sent a copy of the notice by the superintendent. All correspondence, documentation, and other information so received by the State Superintendent of Education, the State Board of Education, or the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board under this subsection (e-5) is confidential and must not be disclosed to third parties, except (i) as necessary for the State Superintendent of Education or his or her designee to investigate and prosecute pursuant to Article 21B of this Code, (ii) pursuant to a court order, (iii) for disclosure to the license holder or his or her representative, or (iv) as otherwise provided in this Article and provided that any such information admitted into evidence in a hearing is exempt from this confidentiality and non-disclosure requirement. Except for an act of willful or wanton misconduct, any superintendent who provides notification as required in this subsection (e-5) shall have immunity from any liability, whether civil or criminal or that otherwise might result by reason of such action.
    (f) After March 19, 1990, the provisions of this Section shall apply to all employees of persons or firms holding contracts with any school district including, but not limited to, food service workers, school bus drivers and other transportation employees, who have direct, daily contact with the pupils of any school in such district. For purposes of criminal history records checks and checks of the Statewide Sex Offender Database on employees of persons or firms holding contracts with more than one school district and assigned to more than one school district, the regional superintendent of the educational service region in which the contracting school districts are located may, at the request of any such school district, be responsible for receiving the authorization for a criminal history records check prepared by each such employee and submitting the same to the Department of State Police and for conducting a check of the Statewide Sex Offender Database for each employee. Any information concerning the record of conviction and identification as a sex offender of any such employee obtained by the regional superintendent shall be promptly reported to the president of the appropriate school board or school boards.
    (f-5) Upon request of a school or school district, any information obtained by the school district pursuant to subsection (f) of this Section within the last year must be made available to the requesting school or school district.
    (g) Prior to the commencement of any student teaching experience or required internship (which is referred to as student teaching in this Section) in the public schools, a student teacher is required to authorize a fingerprint-based criminal history records check. Authorization for and payment of the costs of the check must be furnished by the student teacher to the school district. Upon receipt of this authorization and payment, the school district shall submit the student teacher's name, sex, race, date of birth, social security number, fingerprint images, and other identifiers, as prescribed by the Department of State Police, to the Department of State Police. The Department of State Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation shall furnish, pursuant to a fingerprint-based criminal history records check, records of convictions, forever and hereinafter, until expunged, to the president of the board. The Department shall charge the school district a fee for conducting the check, which fee must not exceed the cost of the inquiry and must be deposited into the State Police Services Fund. The school district shall further perform a check of the Statewide Sex Offender Database, as authorized by the Sex Offender Community Notification Law, and of the Statewide Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth Database, as authorized by the Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth Registration Act, for each student teacher. The board may not knowingly allow a person to student teach for whom a criminal history records check, a Statewide Sex Offender Database check, and a Statewide Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth Database check have not been completed and reviewed by the district.
    A copy of the record of convictions obtained from the Department of State Police must be provided to the student teacher. Any information concerning the record of convictions obtained by the president of the board is confidential and may only be transmitted to the general superintendent of schools or his or her designee, the State Superintendent of Education, the State Educator Preparation and Licensure Board, or, for clarification purposes, the Department of State Police or the Statewide Sex Offender Database or Statewide Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth Database. Any unauthorized release of confidential information may be a violation of Section 7 of the Criminal Identification Act.
    The board may not knowingly allow a person to student teach who has been convicted of any offense that would subject him or her to license suspension or revocation pursuant to subsection (c) of Section 21B-80 of this Code, except as provided under subsection (b) of Section 21B-80. Further, the board may not allow a person to student teach if he or she has been found to be the perpetrator of sexual or physical abuse of a minor under 18 years of age pursuant to proceedings under Article II of the Juvenile Court Act of 1987. The board must consider the status of a person to student teach who has been issued an indicated finding of abuse or neglect of a child by the Department of Children and Family Services under the Abused and Neglected Child Reporting Act or by a child welfare agency of another jurisdiction.
    (h) (Blank).
(Source: P.A. 101-72, eff. 7-12-19; 101-531, eff. 8-23-19; 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.6) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-18.6)
    Sec. 34-18.6. Child abuse and neglect; detection, reporting, and prevention; willful or negligent failure to report.
    (a) The Board of Education may provide staff development for local school site personnel who work with pupils in grades kindergarten through 8 in the detection, reporting, and prevention of child abuse and neglect.
    (b) The Department of Children and Family Services may, in cooperation with school officials, distribute appropriate materials in school buildings listing the toll-free telephone number established in Section 7.6 of the Abused and Neglected Child Reporting Act, including methods of making a report under Section 7 of the Abused and Neglected Child Reporting Act, to be displayed in a clearly visible location in each school building.
    (c) Except for an employee licensed under Article 21B of this Code, if the board determines that any school district employee has willfully or negligently failed to report an instance of suspected child abuse or neglect, as required by the Abused and Neglected Child Reporting Act, then the board may dismiss that employee immediately upon that determination. For purposes of this subsection (c), negligent failure to report an instance of suspected child abuse or neglect occurs when a school district employee personally observes an instance of suspected child abuse or neglect and reasonably believes, in his or her professional or official capacity, that the instance constitutes an act of child abuse or neglect under the Abused and Neglected Child Reporting Act, and he or she, without willful intent, fails to immediately report or cause a report to be made of the suspected abuse or neglect to the Department of Children and Family Services, as required by the Abused and Neglected Child Reporting Act.
(Source: P.A. 100-413, eff. 1-1-18; 100-468, eff. 6-1-18; 101-531, eff. 8-23-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.6a) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-18.6a)
    Sec. 34-18.6a. Orders of protection. The board of education may prohibit the disclosure by any school employee to any person against whom the school district has received a certified copy of an order of protection the location or address of the petitioner for the order of protection or the identity of the schools in the district in which the petitioner's child or children are enrolled. The school district shall maintain the copy of the order of protection in the records of the child or children enrolled in the district whose parent is the petitioner of an order of protection.
(Source: P.A. 87-437.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.7) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-18.7)
    Sec. 34-18.7. Youth mental illness and suicide detection and intervention. At least once every 2 years, licensed school personnel and administrators who work with pupils in kindergarten through grade 12 shall be trained to identify the warning signs of mental illness and suicidal behavior in youth and shall be taught various intervention techniques. The school district may utilize the Illinois Mental Health First Aid training program, established under the Illinois Mental Health First Aid Training Act and administered by certified instructors trained by a national association recognized as an authority in behavioral health, to provide the training and meet the requirements under this Section. If licensed school personnel or an administrator obtains mental health first aid training outside of an in-service training program, he or she may present a certificate of successful completion of the training to the school district to satisfy the requirements of this Section. The training shall be provided within the framework of existing in-service training programs offered by the Board or as part of the professional development activities required under Section 21-14 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 100-903, eff. 1-1-19; 101-350, eff. 1-1-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.8) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-18.8)
    Sec. 34-18.8. AIDS training. School guidance counselors, nurses, teachers and other school personnel who work with pupils may be trained to have a basic knowledge of matters relating to acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), including the nature of the disease, its causes and effects, the means of detecting it and preventing its transmission, the availability of appropriate sources of counseling and referral, and any other information that may be appropriate considering the age and grade level of such pupils. The Board of Education shall supervise such training. The State Board of Education and the Department of Public Health shall jointly develop standards for such training.
(Source: P.A. 86-900.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.9) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-18.9)
    Sec. 34-18.9. Electronic paging devices on school property.
    (a) The General Assembly finds and declares that the educational development of all persons to the limits of their capacities is a fundamental goal of the people of this State, that to achieve such goal it is essential to provide a safe and secure learning environment within the public schools, and that the unrestricted and unregulated use by students of pocket pagers and similar electronic paging devices on school grounds or in school buildings which are owned, occupied or leased by the board of education for school purposes and activities adversely affects the educational environment, welfare and safety of students enrolled in the public schools, in that pocket pagers and similar electronic paging devices are being regularly used for the conduct of unlawful activities during school hours and on school property, including activities directly related to the unlawful possession, sale, delivery or other trafficking in drugs or other substances which constitute a "controlled substance" as that term is defined in the Illinois Controlled Substances Act. It is the purpose and intention of the General Assembly, in enacting this legislation, to reduce or eliminate the occurrence of such unlawful activities during school hours and on school property by restricting and regulating student use or possession of pocket pagers and similar electronic paging devices as provided in this Section, and by providing for the imposition of appropriate discipline and sanctions for any violation of the provisions of this Section.
    (b) No student shall use or have in his or her possession any pocket pager or similar electronic paging device while in any school building or on any school property, during regular school hours or at any other time, unless the use or possession of such device by such student has first been expressly authorized by the principal acting in accordance with standards developed as provided in subsection (c) for the granting of approved exceptions to the general prohibition of this Section against such use or possession.
    (c) The board of education shall develop and promulgate written standards, which shall be furnished by the board of education to each principal, under which a principal:
        (1) may authorize the use or possession of a pocket
    	
pager or similar electronic paging device by a student while in a school building or on school property as an approved exception to the general prohibition of this Section against such use or possession; and
        (2) may impose appropriate discipline or other
    	
sanctions against any student who violates any provision of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 86-791.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.10) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-18.10)
    Sec. 34-18.10. Minority recruitment policy. The board of education shall, by 1991, develop and implement a policy of recruitment and hiring of minority teachers, other certificated employees and non-certificated employees, including custodians, lunch room staff and teacher aides.
(Source: P.A. 86-227; 86-1028.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.10a) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-18.10a)
    Sec. 34-18.10a. Transfer of employees. The employment of an employee of the Illinois Chapter I 89-313 special education program transferred from the DuPage County Superintendent of Education to the Chicago Board of Education shall be considered continuous employment.
(Source: P.A. 87-1107.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.11) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-18.11)
    Sec. 34-18.11. Tobacco prohibition. The Board of Education shall prohibit the use of tobacco on school property when such property is being used for any school purposes. Neither the board nor the local school council may authorize or permit any exception to or exemption from the prohibition at any place or at any time, including without limitation outside of school buildings or before or after the regular school day or on days when school is not in session. "School purposes" include but are not limited to all events or activities or other use of school property that the school board or school officials authorize or permit on school property, including without limitation all interscholastic or extracurricular athletic, academic or other events sponsored by the school board or in which pupils of the district participate. For purposes of this Section "tobacco" shall mean cigarette, cigar, or tobacco in any other form, including smokeless tobacco which is any loose, cut, shredded, ground, powdered, compressed or leaf tobacco that is intended to be placed in the mouth without being smoked.
(Source: P.A. 89-181, eff. 7-19-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.12) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-18.12)
    Sec. 34-18.12. Inspection for drugs. The Board of Education is empowered to authorize school officials to request the assistance of law enforcement officials for the purpose of conducting reasonable searches of school grounds and lockers for illegal drugs, including searches conducted through the use of specially trained dogs.
(Source: P.A. 86-850; 86-1028.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.13) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-18.13)
    Sec. 34-18.13. Infectious disease policies and rules. The Board of Education shall develop policies and adopt rules relating to the appropriate manner of managing children with chronic infectious diseases, not inconsistent with guidelines published by the State Board of Education and the Illinois Department of Public Health. Such policies and rules must include evaluation of students with a chronic infectious disease on an individual case-by-case basis, and may include different provisions for different age groups, classes of instruction, types of educational institution, and other reasonable classifications, as the Board may find appropriate.
(Source: P.A. 86-890; 86-1028.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.14) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-18.14)
    Sec. 34-18.14. Cellular radio telecommunication devices.
    (a) The General Assembly finds and declares that the educational development of all persons to the limits of their capacities is a fundamental goal of the people of this State and that to achieve such goal it is essential to provide a safe and secure learning environment within the public schools. While recognizing that cellular radio telecommunication devices may be used for inappropriate activities during school hours and on school property and may, on occasion, cause disruption to the classroom environment, the General Assembly also recognizes that the use of cellular radio telecommunication devices can decrease the response time of officials to emergency situations. In addition, cellular radio telecommunication devices allow parents an additional and timely method of contacting their children should an emergency situation arise. Therefore, it is the purpose and intention of the General Assembly in enacting this legislation to (i) reduce the occurrence of inappropriate and disruptive activities during school hours and on school property occurring through the use of cellular radio telecommunication devices and (ii) increase the safety of students and school personnel during school hours and on school property.
    (b) The board may establish appropriate rules and disciplinary procedures governing the use or possession of cellular radio telecommunication devices by a student while in a school or on school property, during regular school hours, or at any other time.
(Source: P.A. 92-793, eff. 8-9-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.15) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-18.15)
    Sec. 34-18.15. Recycled paper and paper products and solid waste management.
    (a) Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated, unless the context otherwise requires:
    "Deinked stock" means paper that has been processed to remove inks, clays, coatings, binders and other contaminants.
    "High grade printing and writing papers" includes offset printing paper, duplicator paper, writing paper (stationery), tablet paper, office paper, note pads, xerographic paper, envelopes, form bond including computer paper and carbonless forms, book papers, bond papers, ledger paper, book stock and cotton fiber papers.
    "Paper and paper products" means high grade printing and writing papers, tissue products, newsprint, unbleached packaging and recycled paperboard.
    "Postconsumer material" means only those products generated by a business or consumer which have served their intended end uses, and which have been separated or diverted from solid waste; wastes generated during the production of an end product are excluded.
    "Recovered paper material" means paper waste generated after the completion of the papermaking process, such as postconsumer materials, envelope cuttings, bindery trimmings, printing waste, cutting and other converting waste, butt rolls, and mill wrappers, obsolete inventories, and rejected unused stock. "Recovered paper material", however, does not include fibrous waste generated during the manufacturing process as fibers recovered from waste water or trimmings of paper machine rolls (mill broke), or fibrous byproducts of harvesting, extraction or woodcutting processes, or forest residues such as bark.
    "Recycled paperboard" includes paperboard products, folding cartons and pad backings.
    "Tissue products" includes toilet tissue, paper towels, paper napkins, facial tissue, paper doilies, industrial wipers, paper bags and brown papers. These products shall also be unscented and shall not be colored.
    "Unbleached packaging" includes corrugated and fiber storage boxes.
    (a-5) The school district shall periodically review its procurement procedures and specifications related to the purchase of products and supplies. Those procedures and specifications must be modified as necessary to require the school district to seek out products and supplies that contain recycled materials and to ensure that purchased products and supplies are reusable, durable, or made from recycled materials, if economically and practically feasible. In selecting products and supplies that contain recycled material, preference must be given to products and supplies that contain the highest amount of recycled material and that are consistent with the effective use of the product or supply, if economically and practically feasible.
    (b) Wherever economically and practically feasible, as determined by the board of education, the board of education, all public schools and attendance centers within the school district, and their school supply stores shall procure recycled paper and paper products as follows:
        (1) Beginning July 1, 2008, at least 10% of the total
    	
dollar value of paper and paper products purchased by the board of education, public schools and attendance centers, and their school supply stores shall be recycled paper and paper products.
        (2) Beginning July 1, 2011, at least 25% of the total
    	
dollar value of paper and paper products purchased by the board of education, public schools and attendance centers, and their school supply stores shall be recycled paper and paper products.
        (3) Beginning July 1, 2014, at least 50% of the total
    	
dollar value of paper and paper products purchased by the board of education, public schools and attendance centers, and their school supply stores shall be recycled paper and paper products.
        (4) Beginning July 1, 2020, at least 75% of the total
    	
dollar value of paper and paper products purchased by the board of education, public schools and attendance centers, and their school supply stores shall be recycled paper and paper products.
        (5) Beginning upon the effective date of this
    	
amendatory Act of 1992, all paper purchased by the board of education, public schools and attendance centers for publication of student newspapers shall be recycled newsprint. The amount purchased shall not be included in calculating the amounts specified in paragraphs (1) through (4).
    (c) Paper and paper products purchased from private sector vendors pursuant to printing contracts are not considered paper and paper products for the purposes of subsection (b), unless purchased under contract for the printing of student newspapers.
    (d)(1) Wherever economically and practically feasible, the recycled paper and paper products referred to in subsection (b) shall contain postconsumer or recovered paper materials as specified by paper category in this subsection:
        (i) Recycled high grade printing and writing paper
    	
shall contain at least 50% recovered paper material. Such recovered paper material, until July 1, 2008, shall consist of at least 20% deinked stock or postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 2008, shall consist of at least 25% deinked stock or postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 2010, shall consist of at least 30% deinked stock or postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 2012, shall consist of at least 40% deinked stock or postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 2014, shall consist of at least 50% deinked stock or postconsumer material.
        (ii) Recycled tissue products, until July 1, 1994,
    	
shall contain at least 25% postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 1994, shall contain at least 30% postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 1996, shall contain at least 35% postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 1998, shall contain at least 40% postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 2000, shall contain at least 45% postconsumer material.
        (iii) Recycled newsprint, until July 1, 1994, shall
    	
contain at least 40% postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 1994, shall contain at least 50% postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 1996, shall contain at least 60% postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 1998, shall contain at least 70% postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 2000, shall contain at least 80% postconsumer material.
        (iv) Recycled unbleached packaging, until July 1,
    	
1994, shall contain at least 35% postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 1994, shall contain at least 40% postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 1996, shall contain at least 45% postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 1998, shall contain at least 50% postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 2000, shall contain at least 55% postconsumer material.
        (v) Recycled paperboard, until July 1, 1994, shall
    	
contain at least 80% postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 1994, shall contain at least 85% postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 1996, shall contain at least 90% postconsumer material; and beginning July 1, 1998, shall contain at least 95% postconsumer material.
        (2) For the purposes of this Section, "postconsumer
    	
material" includes:
            (i) paper, paperboard, and fibrous waste from
        	
retail stores, office buildings, homes and so forth, after the waste has passed through its end usage as a consumer item, including used corrugated boxes, old newspapers, mixed waste paper, tabulating cards, and used cordage; and
            (ii) all paper, paperboard, and fibrous wastes
        	
that are diverted or separated from the municipal waste stream.
        (3) For the purpose of this Section, "recovered paper
    	
material" includes:
            (i) postconsumer material;
            (ii) dry paper and paperboard waste generated
        	
after completion of the papermaking process (that is, those manufacturing operations up to and including the cutting and trimming of the paper machine reel into smaller rolls or rough sheets), including envelope cuttings, bindery trimmings, and other paper and paperboard waste resulting from printing, cutting, forming and other converting operations, or from bag, box and carton manufacturing, and butt rolls, mill wrappers, and rejected unused stock; and
            (iii) finished paper and paperboard from obsolete
        	
inventories of paper and paperboard manufacturers, merchants, wholesalers, dealers, printers, converters or others.
    (e) Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to apply to art materials, nor to any newspapers, magazines, text books, library books or other copyrighted publications which are purchased or used by the board of education or any public school or attendance center within the school district, or which are sold in any school supply store operated by or within any such school or attendance center, other than newspapers written, edited or produced by students enrolled in the school district, public school or attendance center.
    (e-5) The school district shall periodically review its procedures on solid waste reduction regarding the management of solid waste generated by academic, administrative, and other institutional functions. Those waste reduction procedures must be designed to, when economically and practically feasible, recycle the school district's waste stream, including without limitation landscape waste, computer paper, and white office paper. The school district is encouraged to have procedures that provide for the investigation of potential markets for other recyclable materials that are present in the school district's waste stream. The waste reduction procedures must be designed to achieve, before July 1, 2020, at least a 50% reduction in the amount of solid waste that is generated by the school district.
    (f) The State Board of Education, in coordination with the Departments of Central Management Services and Commerce and Economic Opportunity, may adopt such rules and regulations as it deems necessary to assist districts in carrying out the provisions of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 94-793, eff. 5-19-06; 95-741, eff. 7-18-08.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.16) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-18.16)
    Sec. 34-18.16. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.17)
    Sec. 34-18.17. No pass-no play policy. Beginning with the 1998-99 school year, the board of education shall establish, implement, and enforce a uniform and consistent policy under which a student in any of grades 9 through 12 who fails to maintain a specified minimum grade point average or a specified minimum grade in each course in which the student is enrolled or both is suspended from further participation in any school-sponsored or school-supported athletic or extracurricular activities for a specified period or until a specified minimum grade point average or minimum grade or both are earned by the student. The board of education shall adopt a policy as required by this Section not later than one year after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1997 and shall concurrently file a copy of that policy with the State Board of Education. After the policy has been in effect for one year, the board of education shall file a report with the State Board of Education setting forth the number and length of suspensions imposed under the policy during the period covered by the report. If the board of education already has a policy that is consistent with the requirements of this Section in effect on the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1997, it shall file a copy of that policy with the State Board of Education within 90 days after the effective date of this amendatory Act and shall file the annual report required under this Section 12 months thereafter.
(Source: P.A. 90-548, eff. 1-1-98.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.18)
    Sec. 34-18.18. Occupational standards. The Board shall not require a student to meet occupational standards for grade level promotion or graduation unless that student is voluntarily enrolled in a job training program.
(Source: P.A. 91-175, eff. 1-1-00; 92-16, eff. 6-28-01.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.19)
    Sec. 34-18.19. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 92-16, eff. 6-28-01. Repealed by P.A. 94-600, eff. 8-16-05.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.20)
    Sec. 34-18.20. Time out and physical restraint. Until rules are adopted under Section 2-3.130 of this Code, the use of any of the following rooms or enclosures for time out purposes is prohibited:
        (1) a locked room other than one with a locking
    	
mechanism that engages only when a key or handle is being held by a person;
        (2) a confining space such as a closet or box;
        (3) a room where the student cannot be continually
    	
observed; or
        (4) any other room or enclosure or time out procedure
    	
that is contrary to current guidelines of the State Board of Education.
    The use of physical restraints is prohibited except when (i) the student poses a physical risk to himself, herself, or others, (ii) there is no medical contraindication to its use, and (iii) the staff applying the restraint have been trained in its safe application. For the purposes of this Section, "restraint" does not include momentary periods of physical restriction by direct person-to-person contact, without the aid of material or mechanical devices, accomplished with limited force and that are designed (i) to prevent a student from completing an act that would result in potential physical harm to himself, herself, or another or damage to property or (ii) to remove a disruptive student who is unwilling to voluntarily leave the area. The use of physical restraints that meet the requirements of this Section may be included in a student's individualized education plan where deemed appropriate by the student's individualized education plan team. Whenever physical restraints are used, school personnel shall fully document the incident, including the events leading up to the incident, the type of restraint used, the length of time the student is restrained, and the staff involved. The parents or guardian of a student shall be informed whenever physical restraints are used.
(Source: P.A. 91-600, eff. 8-14-99; 92-16, eff. 6-28-01.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.21)
    Sec. 34-18.21. Medicaid-eligible children; health care resources. As authorized by federal law, the school district may access federally funded health care resources if the school district provides early periodic screening and diagnostic testing services, including screening and diagnostic services, health care and treatment, preventive health care, or any other measure, to correct or improve health impairments of Medicaid-eligible children.
(Source: P.A. 91-842, eff. 6-22-00.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.22)
    Sec. 34-18.22. Unfilled teaching positions list. The school district must post a current list of all unfilled teaching positions in the district on its Internet web site. The State Board of Education's Internet web site must provide a link to this list.
(Source: P.A. 92-41, eff. 7-1-01.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.23)
    Sec. 34-18.23. Medical information form for bus drivers and emergency medical technicians. The school district is encouraged to create and use an emergency medical information form for bus drivers and emergency medical technicians for those students with special needs or medical conditions. The form may include without limitation information to be provided by the student's parent or legal guardian concerning the student's relevant medical conditions, medications that the student is taking, the student's communication skills, and how a bus driver or an emergency medical technician is to respond to certain behaviors of the student. If the form is used, the school district is encouraged to notify parents and legal guardians of the availability of the form. The parent or legal guardian of the student may fill out the form and submit it to the school that the student is attending. The school district is encouraged to keep one copy of the form on file at the school and another copy on the student's school bus in a secure location.
(Source: P.A. 95-331, eff. 8-21-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.24)
    Sec. 34-18.24. Transfer of students.
    (a) The board shall establish and implement a policy governing the transfer of a student from one attendance center to another within the school district upon the request of the student's parent or guardian. A student may not transfer to any of the following attendance centers, except by change in residence if the policy authorizes enrollment based on residence in an attendance area or unless approved by the board on an individual basis:
        (1) An attendance center that exceeds or as a result
    	
of the transfer would exceed its attendance capacity.
        (2) An attendance center for which the board has
    	
established academic criteria for enrollment if the student does not meet the criteria.
        (3) Any attendance center if the transfer would
    	
prevent the school district from meeting its obligations under a State or federal law, court order, or consent decree applicable to the school district.
(b) The board shall establish and implement a policy governing the transfer of students within the school district from a persistently dangerous attendance center to another attendance center in that district that is not deemed to be persistently dangerous. In order to be considered a persistently dangerous attendance center, the attendance center must meet all of the following criteria for 2 consecutive years:
        (1) Have greater than 3% of the students enrolled in
    	
the attendance center expelled for violence-related conduct.
        (2) Have one or more students expelled for bringing a
    	
firearm to school as defined in 18 U.S.C. 921.
        (3) Have at least 3% of the students enrolled in the
    	
attendance center exercise the individual option to transfer attendance centers pursuant to subsection (c) of this Section.
    (c) A student may transfer from one attendance center to another attendance center within the district if the student is a victim of a violent crime as defined in Section 3 of the Rights of Crime Victims and Witnesses Act. The violent crime must have occurred on school grounds during regular school hours or during a school-sponsored event.
    (d) (Blank).
(Source: P.A. 100-1046, eff. 8-23-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.25)
    Sec. 34-18.25. Psychotropic or psychostimulant medication; disciplinary action.
    (a) In this Section:
    "Psychostimulant medication" means medication that produces increased levels of mental and physical energy and alertness and an elevated mood by stimulating the central nervous system.
    "Psychotropic medication" means psychotropic medication as defined in Section 1-121.1 of the Mental Health and Developmental Disabilities Code.
    (b) The board must adopt and implement a policy that prohibits any disciplinary action that is based totally or in part on the refusal of a student's parent or guardian to administer or consent to the administration of psychotropic or psychostimulant medication to the student.
    The policy must require that, at least once every 2 years, the in-service training of certified school personnel and administrators include training on current best practices regarding the identification and treatment of attention deficit disorder and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, the application of non-aversive behavioral interventions in the school environment, and the use of psychotropic or psychostimulant medication for school-age children.
    (c) This Section does not prohibit school medical staff, an individualized educational program team, or a professional worker (as defined in Section 14-1.10 of this Code) from recommending that a student be evaluated by an appropriate medical practitioner or prohibit school personnel from consulting with the practitioner with the consent of the student's parents or guardian.
(Source: P.A. 95-331, eff. 8-21-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.26)
    Sec. 34-18.26. Sharing information on school lunch applicants. The board shall, whenever requested by the Department of Healthcare and Family Services (formerly Department of Public Aid), agree in writing with the Department of Healthcare and Family Services (as the State agency that administers the State Medical Assistance Program as provided in Title XIX of the federal Social Security Act and the State Children's Health Insurance Program as provided in Title XXI of the federal Social Security Act) to share with the Department of Healthcare and Family Services information on applicants for free or reduced-price lunches. The board shall, whenever requested by the Department of Healthcare and Family Services (formerly Department of Public Aid), require each of its schools to agree in writing with the Department of Healthcare and Family Services to share with the Department of Healthcare and Family Services information on applicants for free or reduced-price lunches. This sharing of information shall be for the sole purpose of helping the Department of Healthcare and Family Services identify and enroll children in the State Medical Assistance Program or the State Children's Health Insurance Program or both as allowed under 42 U.S.C. Sec. 1758(b)(2)(C)(iii)(IV) and under the restrictions set forth in 42 U.S.C. Sec. 1758(b)(2)(C)(vi) and (vii).
(Source: P.A. 95-331, eff. 8-21-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.27)
    Sec. 34-18.27. Summer kindergarten. The board may establish, maintain, and operate, in connection with the kindergarten program of the school district, a summer kindergarten program that begins 2 months before the beginning of the regular school year and a summer kindergarten program for grade one readiness for those pupils making unsatisfactory progress during the regular kindergarten session that will continue for 2 months after the regular school year. The summer kindergarten program may be held within the school district or, pursuant to a contract that must be approved by the State Board of Education, may be operated by 2 or more adjacent school districts or by a public or private university or college. Transportation for students attending the summer kindergarten program shall be the responsibility of the school district. The expense of establishing, maintaining, and operating the summer kindergarten program may be paid from funds contributed or otherwise made available to the school district for that purpose by federal or State appropriation.
(Source: P.A. 95-331, eff. 8-21-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.28)
    Sec. 34-18.28. Prison tour pilot program. The board shall establish a pilot program to prevent crime by developing guidelines to identify students at risk of committing crimes. "Students at risk of committing crimes" shall be limited to those students who have engaged in serious acts of misconduct in violation of the board's policy on discipline. This program, in cooperation with the Department of Corrections, shall include a guided tour of a prison for each student so identified in order to discourage criminal behavior. The touring of a prison under this Section shall be subject to approval, in writing, of a student's parent or guardian.
(Source: P.A. 95-331, eff. 8-21-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.29)
    Sec. 34-18.29. Provision of student information prohibited. The school district, including its agents, employees, student or alumni associations, or any affiliates, may not provide a student's name, address, telephone number, social security number, e-mail address, or other personal identifying information to a business organization or financial institution that issues credit or debit cards.
(Source: P.A. 95-331, eff. 8-21-07; 96-261, eff. 1-1-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.30)
    Sec. 34-18.30. Dependents of military personnel; no tuition charge. If, at the time of enrollment, a dependent of United States military personnel is housed in temporary housing located outside of the school district, but will be living within the district within 60 days after the time of initial enrollment, the dependent must be allowed to enroll, subject to the requirements of this Section, and must not be charged tuition. Any United States military personnel attempting to enroll a dependent under this Section shall provide proof that the dependent will be living within the district within 60 days after the time of initial enrollment. Proof of residency may include, but is not limited to, postmarked mail addressed to the military personnel and sent to an address located within the district, a lease agreement for occupancy of a residence located within the district, or proof of ownership of a residence located within the district. Non-resident dependents of United States military personnel attending school on a tuition-free basis may be counted for the purposes of determining the apportionment of State aid provided under Section 18-8.05 or 18-8.15 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.31)
    Sec. 34-18.31. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 95-331, eff. 8-21-07. Repealed by P.A. 100-1046, eff. 8-23-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.32)
    Sec. 34-18.32. Healthy Kids - Healthy Minds Expanded Vision Program. Because 80% of a child's learning is felt to be through the visual system, the board shall establish a program to identify students who are in need of basic vision care, yet are not covered by insurance or public assistance or do not have the financial ability to pay for services and therefore are not receiving appropriate vision care, to be known as the Healthy Kids - Healthy Minds Expanded Vision Program. Through this program, subject to appropriation, the district, in cooperation with health care providers, shall serve students at a minimum or no cost to the students. The program may provide, but is not limited to, vision examinations and glasses. Eligibility for services must be determined by prioritization of students based on both physical and financial need.
(Source: P.A. 94-137, eff. 1-1-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.33)
    Sec. 34-18.33. Principal mentoring program. Beginning on July 1, 2007, and subject to an annual appropriation by the General Assembly, the school district shall develop a principal mentoring program. The school district shall submit a copy of its principal mentoring program to the State Board of Education for its review and public comment. Whenever a substantive change has been made by the school district to its principal mentoring program, these changes must be submitted to the State Board of Education for review and comment.
(Source: P.A. 94-1039, eff. 7-20-06.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.34)
    Sec. 34-18.34. Student biometric information.
    (a) For the purposes of this Section, "biometric information" means any information that is collected through an identification process for individuals based on their unique behavioral or physiological characteristics, including fingerprint, hand geometry, voice, or facial recognition or iris or retinal scans.
    (b) If the school district collects biometric information from students, the district shall adopt a policy that requires, at a minimum, all of the following:
        (1) Written permission from the individual who has
    	
legal custody of the student, as defined in Section 10-20.12b of this Code, or from the student if he or she has reached the age of 18.
        (2) The discontinuation of use of a student's
    	
biometric information under either of the following conditions:
            (A) upon the student's graduation or withdrawal
        	
from the school district; or
            (B) upon receipt in writing of a request for
        	
discontinuation by the individual having legal custody of the student or by the student if he or she has reached the age of 18.
        (3) The destruction of all of a student's biometric
    	
information within 30 days after the use of the biometric information is discontinued in accordance with item (2) of this subsection (b).
        (4) The use of biometric information solely for
    	
identification or fraud prevention.
        (5) A prohibition on the sale, lease, or other
    	
disclosure of biometric information to another person or entity, unless:
            (A) the individual who has legal custody of the
        	
student or the student, if he or she has reached the age of 18, consents to the disclosure; or
            (B) the disclosure is required by court order.
        (6) The storage, transmittal, and protection of all
    	
biometric information from disclosure.
    (c) Failure to provide written consent under item (1) of subsection (b) of this Section by the individual who has legal custody of the student or by the student, if he or she has reached the age of 18, must not be the basis for refusal of any services otherwise available to the student.
    (d) Student biometric information may be destroyed without notification to or the approval of a local records commission under the Local Records Act if destroyed within 30 days after the use of the biometric information is discontinued in accordance with item (2) of subsection (b) of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 95-232, eff. 8-16-07; 95-793, eff. 1-1-09; 95-876, eff. 8-21-08.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.35)
    Sec. 34-18.35. Use of facilities by community organizations. The board is encouraged to allow community organizations to use school facilities during non-school hours. If the board allows a community organization to use school facilities during non-school hours, the board must adopt a formal policy governing the use of school facilities by community organizations during non-school hours. The policy shall prohibit such use if it interferes with any school functions or the safety of students or school personnel or affects the property or liability of the school district.
(Source: P.A. 95-308, eff. 8-20-07; 95-876, eff. 8-21-08.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.36)
    Sec. 34-18.36. Wind and solar farms. The school district may own and operate a wind or solar generation turbine farm, either individually or jointly with a unit of local government, school district, or community college district that is authorized to own and operate a wind or solar generation turbine farm, that directly or indirectly reduces the energy or other operating costs of the school district. The school district may ask for the assistance of any State agency, including without limitation the State Board of Education, the Illinois Power Agency, or the Environmental Protection Agency, in obtaining financing options for a wind or solar generation turbine farm.
(Source: P.A. 95-390, eff. 8-23-07; 95-805, eff. 8-12-08; 95-876, eff. 8-21-08; 96-725, eff. 8-25-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.37)
    Sec. 34-18.37. Veterans' Day; moment of silence. If a school holds any type of event at the school on November 11, Veterans' Day, the board shall require a moment of silence at that event to recognize Veterans' Day.
(Source: P.A. 96-84, eff. 7-27-09; 96-1000, eff. 7-2-10; 97-333, eff. 8-12-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.38)
    Sec. 34-18.38. Administrator and teacher salary and benefits; report. The board shall report to the State Board of Education, on or before October 1 of each year, the base salary and benefits of the general superintendent of schools or chief executive officer and all administrators and teachers employed by the school district. For the purposes of this Section, "benefits" includes without limitation vacation days, sick days, bonuses, annuities, and retirement enhancements.
    Prior to this annual reporting to the State Board of Education, the information must be presented at a regular board meeting, subject to applicable notice requirements, and then posted on the Internet website of the school district, if any.
(Source: P.A. 96-266, eff. 1-1-10; 96-1000, eff. 7-2-10; 97-256, eff. 1-1-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.39)
    Sec. 34-18.39. Radon testing.
    (a) It is recommended that every occupied school building of the school district be tested every 5 years for radon pursuant to rules established by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency (IEMA).
    (b) It is recommended that new schools of the school district be built using radon resistant new construction techniques, as shown in the United States Environmental Protection Agency document, Radon Prevention in the Design and Construction of Schools and Other Large Buildings.
    (c) The school district may maintain, make available for review, and notify parents and faculty of test results under this Section. The district shall report radon test results to the State Board of Education, which shall prepare a report every 2 years of the results from all schools that have performed tests, to be submitted to the General Assembly and the Governor.
    (d) If IEMA exempts an individual from being required to be a licensed radon professional, the individual does not need to be a licensed radon professional in order to perform screening tests under this Section. The school district may elect to have one or more employees from the district attend an IEMA-approved, Internet-based training course on school testing in order to receive an exemption to conduct testing in the school district. These school district employees must perform the measurements in accordance with procedures approved by IEMA. If an exemption from IEMA is not received, the school district must use a licensed radon professional to conduct measurements.
    (e) If the results of a radon screening test under this Section are found to be 4.0 pCi/L or above, the school district may hire a licensed radon professional to perform measurements before any mitigation decisions are made. If radon levels of 4.0 pCi/L or above are found, it is recommended that affected areas be mitigated by a licensed radon mitigation professional with respect to both design and installation. IEMA may provide the school district with a list of licensed radon mitigation professionals.
    (f) A screening test under this Section may be done with a test kit found in a hardware store, department store, or home improvement store or with a kit ordered through the mail or over the Internet. However, the kit must be provided by a laboratory licensed in accordance with the Radon Industry Licensing Act.
(Source: P.A. 96-417, eff. 1-1-10; 96-1000, eff. 7-2-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.40)
    Sec. 34-18.40. Compliance with Chemical Safety Acts. The Board of Education must adopt a procedure to comply with the requirements of the Lawn Care Products Application and Notice Act and the Structural Pest Control Act. The superintendent must designate a staff person who is responsible for compliance with the requirements of these Acts.
(Source: P.A. 96-424, eff. 8-13-09; 96-1000, eff. 7-2-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.41)
    Sec. 34-18.41. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 96-1000, eff. 7-2-10. Repealed by P.A. 97-256, eff. 1-1-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.42)
    Sec. 34-18.42. Press boxes; accessibility. The board does not have to comply with the Illinois Accessibility Code (71 Ill. Adm. Code 400) with respect to accessibility to press boxes that are on school property if the press boxes were constructed before the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 96th General Assembly.
(Source: P.A. 96-674, eff. 8-25-09; 96-1000, eff. 7-2-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.43)
    Sec. 34-18.43. Establishing an equitable and effective school facility development process.
    (a) The General Assembly finds all of the following:
        (1) The Illinois Constitution recognizes that a
    	
"fundamental goal of the People of the State is the educational development of all persons to the limits of their capacities".
        (2) Quality educational facilities are essential for
    	
fostering the maximum educational development of all persons through their educational experience from pre-kindergarten through high school.
        (3) The public school is a major institution in our
    	
communities. Public schools offer resources and opportunities for the children of this State who seek and deserve quality education, but also benefit the entire community that seeks improvement through access to education.
        (4) The equitable and efficient use of available
    	
facilities-related resources among different schools and among racial, ethnic, income, and disability groups is essential to maximize the development of quality public educational facilities for all children, youth, and adults. The factors that impact the equitable and efficient use of facility-related resources vary according to the needs of each school community. Therefore, decisions that impact school facilities should include the input of the school community to the greatest extent possible.
        (5) School openings, school closings, school
    	
consolidations, school turnarounds, school phase-outs, school construction, school repairs, school modernizations, school boundary changes, and other related school facility decisions often have a profound impact on education in a community. In order to minimize the negative impact of school facility decisions on the community, these decisions should be implemented according to a clear system-wide criteria and with the significant involvement of local school councils, parents, educators, and the community in decision-making.
        (6) The General Assembly has previously stated that
    	
it intended to make the individual school in the City of Chicago the essential unit for educational governance and improvement and to place the primary responsibility for school governance and improvement in the hands of parents, teachers, and community residents at each school. A school facility policy must be consistent with these principles.
    (b) In order to ensure that school facility-related decisions are made with the input of the community and reflect educationally sound and fiscally responsible criteria, a Chicago Educational Facilities Task Force shall be established within 15 days after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 96th General Assembly.
    (c) The Chicago Educational Facilities Task Force shall consist of all of the following members:
        (1) Two members of the House of Representatives
    	
appointed by the Speaker of the House, at least one of whom shall be a member of the Elementary & Secondary Education Committee.
        (2) Two members of the House of Representatives
    	
appointed by the Minority Leader of the House, at least one of whom shall be a member of the Elementary & Secondary Education Committee.
        (3) Two members of the Senate appointed by the
    	
President of the Senate, at least one of whom shall be a member of the Education Committee.
        (4) Two members of the Senate appointed by the
    	
Minority Leader of the Senate, at least one of whom shall be a member of the Education Committee.
        (5) Two representatives of school community
    	
organizations with past involvement in school facility issues appointed by the Speaker of the House.
        (6) Two representatives of school community
    	
organizations with past involvement in school facility issues appointed by the President of the Senate.
        (7) The chief executive officer of the school
    	
district or his or her designee.
        (8) The president of the union representing teachers
    	
in the schools of the district or his or her designee.
        (9) The president of the association representing
    	
principals in the schools of the district or his or her designee.
    (d) The Speaker of the House shall appoint one of the appointed House members as a co-chairperson of the Chicago Educational Facilities Task Force. The President of the Senate shall appoint one of the appointed Senate members as a co-chairperson of the Chicago Educational Facilities Task Force. Members appointed by the legislative leaders shall be appointed for the duration of the Chicago Educational Facilities Task Force; in the event of a vacancy, the appointment to fill the vacancy shall be made by the legislative leader of the same chamber and party as the leader who made the original appointment.
    (e) The Chicago Educational Facilities Task Force shall call on independent experts, as needed, to gather and analyze pertinent information on a pro bono basis, provided that these experts have no previous or on-going financial interest in school facility issues related to the school district. The Chicago Educational Facilities Task Force shall secure pro bono expert assistance within 15 days after the establishment of the Chicago Educational Facilities Task Force.
    (f) The Chicago Educational Facilities Task Force shall be empowered to gather further evidence in the form of testimony or documents or other materials.
    (g) The Chicago Educational Facilities Task Force, with the help of the independent experts, shall analyze past Chicago experiences and data with respect to school openings, school closings, school consolidations, school turnarounds, school phase-outs, school construction, school repairs, school modernizations, school boundary changes, and other related school facility decisions on students. The Chicago Educational Facilities Task Force shall consult widely with stakeholders, including public officials, about these facility issues and their related costs and shall examine relevant best practices from other school systems for dealing with these issues systematically and equitably. These initial investigations shall include opportunities for input from local stakeholders through hearings, focus groups, and interviews.
    (h) The Chicago Educational Facilities Task Force shall prepare recommendations describing how the issues set forth in subsection (g) of this Section can be addressed effectively based upon educationally sound and fiscally responsible practices.
    (i) The Chicago Educational Facilities Task Force shall hold hearings in separate areas of the school district at times that shall maximize school community participation to obtain comments on draft recommendations. The final hearing shall take place no later than 15 days prior to the completion of the final recommendations.
    (j) The Chicago Educational Facilities Task Force shall prepare final proposed policy and legislative recommendations for the General Assembly, the Governor, and the school district. The recommendations may address issues, standards, and procedures set forth in this Section. The final recommendations shall be made available to the public through posting on the school district's Internet website and other forms of publication and distribution in the school district at least 7 days before the recommendations are submitted to the General Assembly, the Governor, and the school district.
    (k) The recommendations may address issues of system-wide criteria for ensuring clear priorities, equity, and efficiency.
    Without limitation, the final recommendations may propose significant decision-making roles for key stakeholders, including the individual school and community; recommend clear criteria or processes for establishing criteria for making school facility decisions; and include clear criteria for setting priorities with respect to school openings, school closings, school consolidations, school turnarounds, school phase-outs, school construction, school repairs, school modernizations, school boundary changes, and other related school facility decisions, including the encouragement of multiple community uses for school space.
    Without limitation, the recommendations may propose criteria for student mobility; the transferring of students to lower performing schools; teacher mobility; insufficient notice to and the lack of inclusion in decision-making of local school councils, parents, and community members about school facility decisions; and costly facilities-related expenditures due to poor educational and facilities planning.
    (l) The State Board of Education and the school district shall provide administrative support to the Chicago Educational Facilities Task Force.
    (m) After recommendations have been issued, the Chicago Educational Facilities Task Force shall meet at least once annually, upon the call of the chairs, for the purpose of reviewing Chicago public schools' compliance with the provisions of Sections 34-200 through 34-235 of this Code concerning school action and facility master planning. The Task Force shall prepare a report to the General Assembly, the Governor's Office, the Mayor of the City of Chicago, and the Chicago Board of Education indicating how the district has met the requirements of the provisions of Sections 34-200 through 34-235 of this Code concerning school action and facility master planning.
(Source: P.A. 96-803, eff. 10-30-09; 97-333, eff. 8-12-11; 97-473, eff. 1-1-12; 97-474, eff. 8-22-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.44)
    Sec. 34-18.44. American Sign Language courses. The school board is encouraged to implement American Sign Language courses into school foreign language curricula.
(Source: P.A. 96-843, eff. 6-1-10; 97-333, eff. 8-12-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.45)
    Sec. 34-18.45. Minimum reading instruction. The board shall promote 60 minutes of minimum reading opportunities daily for students in kindergarten through 3rd grade whose reading level is one grade level or lower than their current grade level according to current learning standards and the school district.
(Source: P.A. 97-88, eff. 7-8-11; 97-813, eff. 7-13-12; 98-463, eff. 8-16-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.46)
    Sec. 34-18.46. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 97-813, eff. 7-13-12. Repealed by P.A. 99-245, eff. 8-3-15.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.47)
    Sec. 34-18.47. Youth program. The board may develop a plan for implementing a program that seeks to establish common bonds between youth of various backgrounds and ethnicities, which may be similar to that of the Challenge Day organization.
(Source: P.A. 97-909, eff. 1-1-13; 98-463, eff. 8-16-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.48)
    Sec. 34-18.48. Bring Your Parents to School Day. The board may designate the first Monday in October of each year "Bring Your Parents to School Day" to promote parental involvement and student success. On this day, the board may permit the parents or guardians of students to attend class with their children and meet with teachers and administrators during the school day.
(Source: P.A. 98-304, eff. 1-1-14.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.49)
    Sec. 34-18.49. Carbon monoxide alarm required.
    (a) In this Section:
    "Approved carbon monoxide alarm" and "alarm" have the meaning ascribed to those terms in the Carbon Monoxide Alarm Detector Act.
    "Carbon monoxide detector" and "detector" mean a device having a sensor that responds to carbon monoxide gas and that is connected to an alarm control unit and approved in accordance with rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal.
    (b) The board shall require that each school under its authority be equipped with approved carbon monoxide alarms or carbon monoxide detectors. The alarms must be powered as follows:
        (1) For a school designed before January 1, 2016 (the
    	
effective date of Public Act 99-470), alarms powered by batteries are permitted. Alarms permanently powered by the building's electrical system and monitored by any required fire alarm system are also permitted.
        (2) For a school designed on or after January 1, 2016
    	
(the effective date of Public Act 99-470), alarms must be permanently powered by the building's electrical system or be an approved carbon monoxide detection system. An installation required in this subdivision (2) must be monitored by any required fire alarm system.
    Alarms or detectors must be located within 20 feet of a carbon monoxide emitting device. Alarms or detectors must be in operating condition and be inspected annually. A school is exempt from the requirements of this Section if it does not have or is not close to any sources of carbon monoxide. A school must require plans, protocols, and procedures in response to the activation of a carbon monoxide alarm or carbon monoxide detection system.
(Source: P.A. 99-470, eff. 1-1-16; 100-201, eff. 8-18-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.50)
    Sec. 34-18.50. Accelerate College pilot program. The district may enter into an Accelerate College educational partnership agreement as authorized under Section 3-42.4 of the Public Community College Act.
(Source: P.A. 99-611, eff. 7-22-16; 100-201, eff. 8-18-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.51)
    Sec. 34-18.51. Committee on the retention of students.
    (a) The board may create a committee on the retention of students. The committee shall consist of the general superintendent of schools or his or her designee, a district administrator who directs student instruction and curriculum, a principal from a school of the district, and a teacher from a school of the district.
    (b) Prior to retention in a grade, a school may submit, by a date as set by the committee on the retention of students, the names of all students determined by the school to not qualify for promotion to the next higher grade and the reason for that determination. The committee shall review the school's decision to retain with respect to each student and shall make a final decision regarding whether or not to retain a particular student. The committee shall take into consideration the relevant data and evidence gathered during the Response to Intervention process. The committee may vote to overturn a retention decision if the committee determines that the student should be promoted after examining the student's access to remedial assistance, performance, attendance, and participation and the resources and facilities provided by the school district or due to the student having an undiagnosed learning disability.
(Source: P.A. 99-592, eff. 7-22-16; 100-201, eff. 8-18-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.52)
    Sec. 34-18.52. DCFS liaison.
    (a) The board may appoint at least one employee to act as a liaison to facilitate the enrollment and transfer of records of students in the legal custody of the Department of Children and Family Services when enrolling in or changing schools. The board may appoint any employee of the school district who is licensed under Article 21B of this Code to act as a liaison; however, employees who meet any of the following criteria must be prioritized for appointment:
        (1) Employees who have worked with mobile student
    	
populations or students in foster care.
        (2) Employees who are familiar with enrollment,
    	
record transfers, existing community services, and student support services.
        (3) Employees who serve as a high-level administrator.
        (4) Employees who are counselors or have experience
    	
with student counseling.
        (5) Employees who are knowledgeable on child welfare
    	
policies.
        (6) Employees who serve as a school social worker.
    (b) Liaisons under this Section are encouraged to build capacity and infrastructure within the school district to support students in the legal custody of the Department of Children and Family Services. Liaison responsibilities may include the following:
        (1) streamlining the enrollment processes for
    	
students in foster care;
        (2) implementing student data tracking and monitoring
    	
mechanisms;
        (3) ensuring that students in the legal custody of
    	
the Department of Children and Family Services receive all school nutrition and meal programs available;
        (4) coordinating student withdrawal from a school,
    	
record transfers, and credit recovery;
        (5) becoming experts on the foster care system and
    	
State laws and policies in place that support children under the legal custody of the Department of Children and Family Services;
        (6) coordinating with child welfare partners;
        (7) providing foster care-related information and
    	
training to the school district;
        (8) working with the Department of Children and
    	
Family Services to help students maintain their school placement, if appropriate;
        (9) reviewing student schedules to ensure that
    	
students are on track to graduate;
        (10) encouraging a successful transition into
    	
adulthood and post-secondary opportunities;
        (11) encouraging involvement in extracurricular
    	
activities; and
        (12) knowing what support is available within the
    	
school district and community for students in the legal custody of the Department of Children and Family Services.
    (c) The school district is encouraged to designate a liaison by the beginning of the 2017-2018 school year.
    (d) Individuals licensed under Article 21B of this Code acting as a liaison under this Section shall perform the duties of a liaison in addition to existing contractual obligations.
(Source: P.A. 99-781, eff. 8-12-16; 100-201, eff. 8-18-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.53)
    Sec. 34-18.53. Breastfeeding accommodations for pupils.
    (a) Each public school shall provide reasonable accommodations to a lactating pupil on a school campus to express breast milk, breastfeed an infant child, or address other needs related to breastfeeding. Reasonable accommodations under this Section include, but are not limited to, all of the following:
        (1) Access to a private and secure room, other than a
    	
restroom, to express breast milk or breastfeed an infant child.
        (2) Permission to bring onto a school campus a breast
    	
pump and any other equipment used to express breast milk.
        (3) Access to a power source for a breast pump or any
    	
other equipment used to express breast milk.
        (4) Access to a place to store expressed breast milk
    	
safely.
    (b) A lactating pupil on a school campus must be provided a reasonable amount of time to accommodate her need to express breast milk or breastfeed an infant child.
    (c) A public school shall provide the reasonable accommodations specified in subsections (a) and (b) of this Section only if there is at least one lactating pupil on the school campus.
    (d) A public school may use an existing facility to meet the requirements specified in subsection (a) of this Section.
    (e) A pupil may not incur an academic penalty as a result of her use, during the school day, of the reasonable accommodations specified in this Section and must be provided the opportunity to make up any work missed due to such use.
    (f) In instances where a student files a complaint of noncompliance with the requirements of this Section, the public school shall implement the grievance procedure of 23 Ill. Adm. Code 200, including appeals procedures.
(Source: P.A. 100-29, eff. 1-1-18; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.54)
    Sec. 34-18.54. Implicit bias training.
    (a) The General Assembly makes the following findings:
        (1) implicit racial bias influences evaluations of
    	
and behavior toward those who are the subject of the bias;
        (2) understanding implicit racial bias is needed in
    	
order to reduce that bias;
        (3) marginalized students would benefit from having
    	
access to educators who have worked to reduce their biases; and
        (4) training that helps educators overcome implicit
    	
racial bias has implication for classroom interactions, student evaluation, and classroom engagement; it also affects student academic self-concept.
    (b) The board shall require in-service training for school personnel to include training to develop cultural competency, including understanding and reducing implicit racial bias.
    (c) As used in this Section, "implicit racial bias" means a preference, positive or negative, for a racial or ethnic group that operates outside of awareness. This bias has 3 different components: affective, behavioral, and cognitive.
(Source: P.A. 100-14, eff. 7-1-17; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.55)
    Sec. 34-18.55. Dual enrollment and dual credit notification. The board shall require the district's high schools to inform all 11th and 12th grade students of dual enrollment and dual credit opportunities at public community colleges for qualified students.
(Source: P.A. 100-133, eff. 1-1-18; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.56)
    Sec. 34-18.56. Availability of feminine hygiene products.
    (a) The General Assembly finds the following:
        (1) Feminine hygiene products are a health care
    	
necessity and not an item that can be foregone or substituted easily.
        (2) Access to feminine hygiene products is a serious
    	
and ongoing need in this State.
        (3) When students do not have access to affordable
    	
feminine hygiene products, they may miss multiple days of school every month.
        (4) When students have access to quality feminine
    	
hygiene products, they are able to continue with their daily lives with minimal interruption.
    (b) In this Section:
    "Feminine hygiene products" means tampons and sanitary napkins for use in connection with the menstrual cycle.
    "School building" means any facility (i) that is owned or leased by the school district or over which the board has care, custody, and control and (ii) in which there is a public school serving students in grades 6 through 12.
    (c) The school district shall make feminine hygiene products available, at no cost to students, in the bathrooms of school buildings.
(Source: P.A. 100-163, eff. 1-1-18; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.57)
    Sec. 34-18.57. Booking stations on school grounds.
    (a) There shall be no student booking station established or maintained on the grounds of any school.
    (b) This prohibition shall be applied to student booking stations only, as defined in this Section. The prohibition does not prohibit or affect the establishment or maintenance of any place operated by or under the control of law enforcement personnel, school resource officers, or other security personnel that does not also qualify as a student booking station as defined in paragraph (2) of subsection (d) of this Section. The prohibition does not affect or limit the powers afforded law enforcement officers to perform their duties within schools as otherwise prescribed by law.
    (c) When the underlying suspected or alleged criminal act is an act of violence, and isolation of a student or students is deemed necessary to the interest of public safety, and no other location is adequate for secure isolation of the student or students, offices as described in paragraph (1) of subsection (d) of this Section may be employed to detain students for a period no longer than that required to alleviate that threat to public safety.
    (d) As used in this Section, "student booking station" means a building, office, room, or any indefinitely established space or site, mobile or fixed, which operates concurrently as:
        (1) predominantly or regularly a place of operation
    	
for a municipal police department, county sheriff department, or other law enforcement agency, or under the primary control thereof; and
        (2) a site at which students are detained in
    	
connection with criminal charges or allegations against those students, taken into custody, or engaged with law enforcement personnel in any process that creates a law enforcement record of that contact with law enforcement personnel or processes.
(Source: P.A. 100-204, eff. 8-18-17; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.58)
    Sec. 34-18.58. School social worker. The board may employ school social workers who have graduated with a master's or higher degree in social work from an accredited graduate school of social work and have such additional qualifications as may be required by the State Board of Education and who hold a Professional Educator License with a school support personnel endorsement for school social work pursuant to Section 21B-25 of this Code. Only persons so licensed and endorsed may use the title "school social worker". A school social worker may provide individual and group services to the general student population and to students with disabilities pursuant to Article 14 of this Code and rules set forth in 23 Ill. Adm. Code 226, Special Education, adopted by the State Board of Education and may provide support and consultation to administrators, teachers, and other school personnel consistent with their professional qualifications and the provisions of this Code and other applicable laws. The school district may employ a sufficient number of school social workers to address the needs of their students and schools and may maintain the nationally recommended student-to-school social worker ratio of 250 to 1. A school social worker may not provide such services outside his or her employment to any student in the district or districts that employ the school social worker.
(Source: P.A. 100-356, eff. 8-25-17; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.59)
    Sec. 34-18.59. School-grown produce. The school district may serve students produce grown and harvested by students in school-owned facilities utilizing hydroponics or aeroponics or in school-owned or community gardens if the soil and compost in which the produce is grown meets the standards adopted in 35 Ill. Adm. Code 830.503, if applicable, and the produce is served in accordance with the standards adopted in 77 Ill. Adm. Code 750.
(Source: P.A. 100-505, eff. 6-1-18; 100-863, eff. 8-14-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.60)
    (Section scheduled to be repealed on July 1, 2023)
    Sec. 34-18.60. Short-term substitute teacher training.
    (a) The board shall, in collaboration with its teachers or, if applicable, the exclusive bargaining representative of its teachers, jointly develop a short-term substitute teacher training program that provides individuals who hold a Short-Term Substitute Teaching License under Section 21B-20 of this Code with information on curriculum, classroom management techniques, school safety, and district and building operations. The State Board of Education may develop a model short-term substitute teacher training program for use by the board under this subsection (a) if the board and its teachers or, if applicable, the exclusive bargaining representative of its teachers agree to use the State Board's model. If the board has a substitute teacher training program in place before the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 100th General Assembly, it may utilize that program to satisfy the requirements of this subsection (a).
    (b) Nothing in this Section prohibits the board from offering substitute training to substitute teachers licensed under paragraph (3) of Section 21B-20 of this Code or to substitute teachers holding a Professional Educator License.
    (c) This Section is repealed on July 1, 2023.
(Source: P.A. 100-596, eff. 7-1-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.61)
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-205)
    Sec. 34-18.61. Self-administrating medication.
    (a) In this Section, "asthma action plan" has the meaning given to that term under Section 22-30.
    (b) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the school district must allow any student with an asthma action plan, an Individual Health Care Action Plan, an Illinois Food Allergy Emergency Action Plan and Treatment Authorization Form, a plan pursuant to Section 504 of the federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973, or a plan pursuant to the federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Act to self-administer any medication required under those plans if the student's parent or guardian provides the school district with (i) written permission for the student's self-administration of medication and (ii) written authorization from the student's physician, physician assistant, or advanced practice registered nurse for the student to self-administer the medication. A parent or guardian must also provide to the school district the prescription label for the medication, which must contain the name of the medication, the prescribed dosage, and the time or times at which or the circumstances under which the medication is to be administered. Information received by the school district under this subsection shall be kept on file in the office of the school nurse or, in the absence of a school nurse, the school's administrator.
    (c) The school district must adopt an emergency action plan for a student who self-administers medication under subsection (b). The plan must include both of the following:
        (1) A plan of action in the event a student is unable
    	
to self-administer medication.
        (2) The situations in which a school must call 9-1-1.
    (d) The school district and its employees and agents shall incur no liability, except for willful and wanton conduct, as a result of any injury arising from the self-administration of medication by a student under subsection (b). The student's parent or guardian must sign a statement to this effect, which must acknowledge that the parent or guardian must indemnify and hold harmless the school district and its employees and agents against any claims, except a claim based on willful and wanton conduct, arising out of the self-administration of medication by a student.
(Source: P.A. 101-205, eff. 1-1-20.)
 
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-418)
    Sec. 34-18.61. Policy on sexual harassment. The school district must create, maintain, and implement an age-appropriate policy on sexual harassment that must be posted on the school district's website and, if applicable, any other area where policies, rules, and standards of conduct are currently posted in each school and must also be included in the school district's student code of conduct handbook.
(Source: P.A. 101-418, eff. 1-1-20.)
 
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-451)
    Sec. 34-18.61. Class size reporting. No later than November 16, 2020, and annually thereafter, the school district must report to the State Board of Education information on the school district described under subsection (b) of Section 2-3.136a and must make that information available on its website.
(Source: P.A. 101-451, eff. 1-1-20.)
 
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-531)
    Sec. 34-18.61. Sexual abuse investigations at schools. Every 2 years, the school district must review all existing policies and procedures concerning sexual abuse investigations at schools to ensure consistency with Section 22-85.
(Source: P.A. 101-531, eff. 8-23-19.)
 
    (Text of Section from P.A. 101-548)
    Sec. 34-18.61. Door security locking means.
    (a) In this Section, "door security locking means" means a door locking means intended for use by a trained school district employee in a school building for the purpose of preventing ingress through a door of the building.
    (b) The school district may install a door security locking means on a door of a school building to prevent unwanted entry through the door if all of the following requirements are met:
        (1) The door security locking means can be engaged
    	
without opening the door.
        (2) The unlocking and unlatching of the door security
    	
locking means from the occupied side of the door can be accomplished without the use of a key or tool.
        (3) The door security locking means complies with all
    	
applicable State and federal accessibility requirements.
        (4) Locks, if remotely engaged, can be unlocked from
    	
the occupied side.
        (5) The door security locking means is capable of
    	
being disengaged from the outside by school district employees, and school district employees may use a key or other credentials to unlock the door from the outside.
        (6) The door security locking means does not modify
    	
the door-closing hardware, panic hardware, or fire exit hardware.
        (7) Any bolts, stops, brackets, or pins employed by
    	
the door security locking means do not affect the fire rating of a fire door assembly.
        (8) School district employees are trained in the
    	
engagement and release of the door security locking means, from within and outside the room, as part of the emergency response plan.
        (9) For doors installed before July 1, 2019 only, the
    	
unlocking and unlatching of a door security locking means requires no more than 2 releasing operations. For doors installed on or after July 1, 2019, the unlocking and unlatching of a door security locking means requires no more than one releasing operation. If doors installed before July 1, 2019 are replaced on or after July 1, 2019, the unlocking and unlatching of a door security locking means on the replacement door requires no more than one releasing operation.
        (10) The door security locking means is no more than
    	
48 inches above the finished floor.
        (11) The door security locking means otherwise
    	
complies with the school building code prepared by the State Board of Education under Section 2-3.12.
    The school district may install a door security locking means that does not comply with paragraph (3) or (10) of this subsection if (i) the school district meets all other requirements under this subsection and (ii) prior to its installation, local law enforcement officials, the local fire department, and the board agree, in writing, to the installation and use of the door security locking means. The school district must keep the agreement on file and must, upon request, provide the agreement to the State Board of Education. The agreement must be included in the school district's filed school safety plan under the School Safety Drill Act.
    (c) The school district must include the location of any door security locking means and must address the use of the locking and unlocking means from within and outside the room in its filed school safety plan under the School Safety Drill Act. Local law enforcement officials and the local fire department must be notified of the location of any door security locking means and how to disengage it. Any specific tool needed to disengage the door security locking means from the outside of the room must, upon request, be made available to local law enforcement officials and the local fire department.
    (d) A door security locking means may be used only (i) by a school district employee trained under subsection (e), (ii) during an emergency that threatens the health and safety of students and employees or during an active shooter drill, and (iii) when local law enforcement officials and the local fire department have been notified of its installation prior to its use. The door security locking means must be engaged for a finite period of time in accordance with the school district's school safety plan adopted under the School Safety Drill Act.
    (e) If the school district installs a door security locking means, it must conduct an in-service training program for school district employees on the proper use of the door security locking means. The school district shall keep a file verifying the employees who have completed the program and must, upon request, provide the file to the local fire department and local law enforcement agency.
    (f) A door security locking means that requires 2 releasing operations must be discontinued from use when the door is replaced or is a part of new construction. Replacement and new construction door hardware must include mortise locks, compliant with the applicable building code, and must be lockable from the occupied side without opening the door. However, mortise locks are not required if panic hardware or fire exit hardware is required.
(Source: P.A. 101-548, eff. 8-23-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-18.66)
    Sec. 34-18.66. Remote and blended remote learning. This Section applies if the Governor has declared a disaster due to a public health emergency pursuant to Section 7 of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act.
        (1) If the Governor has declared a disaster due to a
    	
public health emergency pursuant to Section 7 of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, the State Superintendent of Education may declare a requirement to use remote learning days or blended remote learning days for the school district, multiple school districts, a region, or the entire State. During remote learning days, schools shall conduct instruction remotely. During blended remote learning days, schools may utilize hybrid models of in-person and remote instruction. Once declared, remote learning days or blended remote learning days shall be implemented in grades pre-kindergarten through 12 as days of attendance and shall be deemed pupil attendance days for calculation of the length of a school term under Section 10-19.
        (2) For purposes of this Section, a remote learning
    	
day or blended remote learning day may be met through the district's implementation of an e-learning program under Section 10-20.56.
        (3) If the district does not implement an e-learning
    	
program under Section 10-20.56, the district shall adopt a remote and blended remote learning day plan approved by the general superintendent of schools. The district may utilize remote and blended remote learning planning days, consecutively or in separate increments, to develop, review, or amend its remote and blended remote learning day plan or provide professional development to staff regarding remote education. Up to 5 remote and blended remote learning planning days may be deemed pupil attendance days for calculation of the length of a school term under Section 10-19.
        (4) Each remote and blended remote learning day plan
    	
shall address the following:
            (i) accessibility of the remote instruction to
        	
all students enrolled in the district;
            (ii) if applicable, a requirement that the remote
        	
learning day and blended remote learning day activities reflect State learning standards;
            (iii) a means for students to confer with an
        	
educator, as necessary;
            (iv) the unique needs of students in special
        	
populations, including, but not limited to, students eligible for special education under Article 14, students who are English learners as defined in Section 14C-2, and students experiencing homelessness under the Education for Homeless Children Act, or vulnerable student populations;
            (v) how the district will take attendance and
        	
monitor and verify each student's remote participation; and
            (vi) transitions from remote learning to on-site
        	
learning upon the State Superintendent's declaration that remote learning days or blended remote learning days are no longer deemed necessary.
        (5) The general superintendent of schools shall
    	
periodically review and amend the district's remote and blended remote learning day plan, as needed, to ensure the plan meets the needs of all students.
        (6) Each remote and blended remote learning day plan
    	
shall be posted on the district's Internet website where other policies, rules, and standards of conduct are posted and shall be provided to students and faculty.
        (7) This Section does not create any additional
    	
employee bargaining rights and does not remove any employee bargaining rights.
        (8) Statutory and regulatory curricular mandates and
    	
offerings may be administered via the district's remote and blended remote learning day plan, except that the district may not offer individual behind-the-wheel instruction required by Section 27-24.2 via the district's remote and blended remote learning day plan. This Section does not relieve schools and the district from completing all statutory and regulatory curricular mandates and offerings.
(Source: P.A. 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-19) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-19)
    Sec. 34-19. By-laws, rules and regulations; business transacted at regular meetings; voting; records. The board shall, subject to the limitations in this Article, establish by-laws, rules and regulations, which shall have the force of ordinances, for the proper maintenance of a uniform system of discipline for both employees and pupils, and for the entire management of the schools, and may fix the school age of pupils, the minimum of which in kindergartens shall not be under 4 years, except that, based upon an assessment of the child's readiness, children who have attended a non-public preschool and continued their education at that school through kindergarten, were taught in kindergarten by an appropriately certified teacher, and will attain the age of 6 years on or before December 31 of the year of the 2009-2010 school term and each school term thereafter may attend first grade upon commencement of such term, and in grade schools shall not be under 6 years. It may expel, suspend or, subject to the limitations of all policies established or adopted under Section 10-22.6 or 14-8.05, otherwise discipline any pupil found guilty of gross disobedience, misconduct, or other violation of the by-laws, rules, and regulations, including gross disobedience or misconduct perpetuated by electronic means. An expelled pupil may be immediately transferred to an alternative program in the manner provided in Article 13A or 13B of this Code. A pupil must not be denied transfer because of the expulsion, except in cases in which such transfer is deemed to cause a threat to the safety of students or staff in the alternative program. A pupil who is suspended in excess of 20 school days may be immediately transferred to an alternative program in the manner provided in Article 13A or 13B of this Code. A pupil must not be denied transfer because of the suspension, except in cases in which such transfer is deemed to cause a threat to the safety of students or staff in the alternative program. The bylaws, rules and regulations of the board shall be enacted, money shall be appropriated or expended, salaries shall be fixed or changed, and textbooks, electronic textbooks, and courses of instruction shall be adopted or changed only at the regular meetings of the board and by a vote of a majority of the full membership of the board; provided that notwithstanding any other provision of this Article or the School Code, neither the board or any local school council may purchase any textbook for use in any public school of the district from any textbook publisher that fails to furnish any computer diskettes as required under Section 28-21. Funds appropriated for textbook purchases must be available for electronic textbook purchases and the technological equipment necessary to gain access to and use electronic textbooks at the local school council's discretion. The board shall be further encouraged to provide opportunities for public hearing and testimony before the adoption of bylaws, rules and regulations. Upon all propositions requiring for their adoption at least a majority of all the members of the board the yeas and nays shall be taken and reported. The by-laws, rules and regulations of the board shall not be repealed, amended or added to, except by a vote of 2/3 of the full membership of the board. The board shall keep a record of all its proceedings. Such records and all by-laws, rules and regulations, or parts thereof, may be proved by a copy thereof certified to be such by the secretary of the board, but if they are printed in book or pamphlet form which are purported to be published by authority of the board they need not be otherwise published and the book or pamphlet shall be received as evidence, without further proof, of the records, by-laws, rules and regulations, or any part thereof, as of the dates thereof as shown in such book or pamphlet, in all courts and places where judicial proceedings are had.
    Notwithstanding any other provision in this Article or in the School Code, the board may delegate to the general superintendent or to the attorney the authorities granted to the board in the School Code, provided such delegation and appropriate oversight procedures are made pursuant to board by-laws, rules and regulations, adopted as herein provided, except that the board may not delegate its authorities and responsibilities regarding (1) budget approval obligations; (2) rule-making functions; (3) desegregation obligations; (4) real estate acquisition, sale or lease in excess of 10 years as provided in Section 34-21; (5) the levy of taxes; or (6) any mandates imposed upon the board by "An Act in relation to school reform in cities over 500,000, amending Acts herein named", approved December 12, 1988 (P.A. 85-1418).
(Source: P.A. 99-456, eff. 9-15-16.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-19.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-19.1)
    Sec. 34-19.1. Comment at meetings. At each regular and special meeting which is open to the public, members of the public and employees of the district shall be afforded time, subject to reasonable constraints, to comment to or ask questions of the board.
(Source: P.A. 84-1308.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-19.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-19.2)
    Sec. 34-19.2. Mailing list. To establish and maintain a mailing list of the names and addresses of persons who each year request inclusion thereon, and to mail to those persons copies of board agenda, school budgets, audits, and within 10 days of each board meeting, a copy of the approved meeting minutes. Annual subscription fees approximating the costs of reproducing and mailing the materials may be charged to the subscribers at the beginning of the subscription period.
(Source: P.A. 83-1362.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-20) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-20)
    Sec. 34-20. Acquisition of real estate-Condemnation proceedings-Title-Conveyances.
    The board may acquire by purchase, condemnation or otherwise, real estate for any school purposes. Condemnation proceedings shall be conducted in the name of the city, in trust for the use of schools. The title to all real estate held for the use and benefit of the schools shall be held in the name of the city, in trust for the use of schools. All conveyances of real estate shall be made to the city in trust for the use of schools.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-20.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-20.1)
    Sec. 34-20.1. Limitation on use for school purposes. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Article or this Act, no building or other structure owned by the Board of Education, or by the City as trustee for the use and benefit of the schools, which the Chicago Park District has occupied, and which at any time prior to such occupancy by the Chicago Park District was used as a public school house or other public school building of any attendance center within the school district, shall at any time be again used by the Board as a public school house or other public school building. However, the Board of Education shall have the authority to make and enter into a lease or other agreement with the Chicago Park District providing for their joint use of a public school house or other public school building of any attendance center if such facility contains more than 10 classrooms. For purposes of this Section, "joint use" shall include but not be limited to shared use by the Board and the Chicago Park District during daytime hours.
(Source: P.A. 85-1146.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-21) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-21)
    Sec. 34-21. Rentals and leases - Sale of real estate - Engagement of real estate broker - Indirect and participating ownership interest - Conveyance, payment and disclosure.
    (a) The board may:
        (1) enter into leases as lessee of buildings, rooms
    	
and grounds for the use of schools or for the purpose of school administration; or
        (2) enter into leases as lessor of property held by a
    	
city in trust for the use and benefit of schools for a term of not longer than 99 years from the date of the granting of the lease, but it shall not make or renew any lease for a term longer than 10 years nor alter the provisions of any lease whose unexpired term may exceed 10 years without the vote of 2/3 of the full membership of the board. The board may, in the case of such a lease, receive consideration in whole or in part in the form of an ownership interest in the entity leasing the property from the board, or in its assignee, or a participating interest in the revenues, profits or gains from the development, use, sublease or assignment of such property or interest therein; provided, however, that the board shall not make any further contribution to the capital of such entity. Furthermore, there shall be no diminution thereafter in the value of the board's interest in the entity or participating interest as a result of any subsequent capital contributions by any entity or other capital changes.
    (b) The board may sell real estate, or interest therein, held by a city in trust for the use and benefit of the schools subject to the provisions of this Section and approval by the board ordered by a vote of not less than 2/3 of its full membership, if the board determines (i) that such real estate has become unnecessary, unsuitable or inconvenient for the use of schools or for the purpose of school administration, (ii) that such real estate has become inappropriate or unprofitable for the purpose of deriving revenue to support the board's authorized purposes, or (iii) that, in the reasonable judgment of the board, a sale would constitute the best available use or disposition of such real estate for the purpose of deriving revenue to support the board's authorized purposes.
        (1) Any sale of such real estate having a fair market
    	
value of $25,000 or more shall be made in accordance with the following procedures:
            (A) Notice of intended sale shall be published
        	
once each week for 3 consecutive weeks in a daily or weekly newspaper published in the city.
            (B) The first such notice shall be published not
        	
less than 30 days before the day provided for the opening of bids with respect to the intended sale.
            (C) The notice shall contain pertinent
        	
information on the real estate available for sale, including the location of the real estate, a description of the property, the purpose for which it is used, any other terms for the sale of the real estate as determined by the board, and the dates on which bids will be opened, and on which bids will be considered, and the notice shall advertise for bids for such real estate. The notice may contain a minimum sale price.
            (D) The board may:
                (i) accept the highest responsible bid
            	
determined to be in the best interest of the board; or
                (ii) reject any and all bids; or
                (iii) if there is more than one responsible
            	
bid, negotiate separately with the 2 highest and best among such responsible bids and, upon tentative agreement with one or both bidders, one or both of such bids may be submitted to the board for acceptance of one or rejection of both. Such negotiations may not result in a diminution of the terms of the sale of the real estate and must result in an agreement which is, in the reasonable judgment of the board, equal to or higher in value than the highest responsible bid.
        The board may receive consideration for the sale of
    	
such real estate, in whole or in part, in the form of an ownership interest in the entity acquiring title to the property by such sale, or in its assignee, or a participating interest in the revenues, profits or gains from the development, use, sale, lease or assignment of such property or interest therein; provided, however, that the board shall not make any further contribution to the capital of such entity. The present value of the ownership or participating interest to be received by the board shall, in the reasonable judgement of the board, be at least as great as the value of the highest responsible cash bid for such property or the agreed cash price and terms of sale negotiated pursuant to this subsection, if any, whichever is higher. Furthermore, there shall be no diminution thereafter in the value of the board's interest in the entity or its participating interest in the property as a result of any subsequent capital contributions by any entity or other capital changes.
        (2) Any sale of such real estate having a fair market
    	
value of less than $25,000 may be negotiated and shall not require notice or competitive bids.
        (3) Any sale of such real estate having a fair market
    	
value of more than $25,000 which has been continuously leased by the same entity and used as a school attendance center for at least 10 years may be negotiated and shall not require notice or competitive bids.
    (c) The board may engage the services of a licensed real estate broker at a fair and reasonable commission in any case involving the sale or lease of real estate when by resolution the board determines such services to be in the best interest of the board; provided, however, that the commission to be paid may not exceed in the case of sale 7% of the sale price, and in the case of lease 7% of the first year's rent and 2% of the base rent of each lease year thereafter not to exceed 4 years. The above stated maximum ceilings on commissions may be raised by not less than a 3/4 vote of the board's full membership. Payment of the commission shall be contingent upon conveyance in accordance with the provisions of this Section and within a reasonable period of time thereafter as determined by the board at the time of the engagement of the real estate broker.
    (d) (1) Conveyance of real estate held in trust by the city for the use and benefit of schools shall be by action of the city council in its capacity as trustee upon notice by the board pursuant to resolution that a sale of real estate, or interest therein, has been made in accordance with the provisions of this Section.
    (2) Payment in consideration of a transfer of real estate, or interest therein, may be accepted by the board in cash, a combination of cash and securities or in another form described in subsections (a) or (b) of this Section. In any case where an instrument is accepted as part payment, the debt shall be adequately secured by mortgage, trust deed, or if by contract by retention of title, on the property transferred and any such security interest shall not be released until the debt is fully paid. Payments made after the date of sale shall include interest on the outstanding balance computed from the date of sale to the date of payment at rates to be determined by the board.
    (3) The board may not consummate any transaction involving the transfer of real estate, or interest therein, provided for in this Section in which there may be an undisclosed principal. Any conveyance of title or other interest in real estate in violation hereof shall be void and any consideration received by the board prior to the discovery of such violation shall be retained as liquidated damages.
(Source: P.A. 87-1168.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-21.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-21.1)
    Sec. 34-21.1. Additional powers. In addition to other powers and authority now possessed by it, the board shall have power:
        (1) To lease from any public building commission
    	
created pursuant to the provisions of the Public Building Commission Act, approved July 5, 1955, as heretofore or hereafter amended or from any individuals, partnerships or corporations, any real or personal property for the purpose of securing space for its school purposes or office or other space for its administrative functions for a period of time not exceeding 40 years.
        (2) To pay for the use of this leased property in
    	
accordance with the terms of the lease and with the provisions of the Public Building Commission Act, approved July 5, 1955, as heretofore or hereafter amended.
        (3) Such lease may be entered into without making a
    	
previous appropriation for the expense thereby incurred; provided, however, that if the board undertakes to pay all or any part of the costs of operating and maintaining the property of a public building commission as authorized in subparagraph (4) of this Section, such expenses of operation and maintenance shall be included in the annual budget of such board annually during the term of such undertaking.
        (4) In addition, the board may undertake, either in
    	
the lease with a public building commission or by separate agreement or contract with a public building commission, to pay all or any part of the costs of maintaining and operating the property of a public building commission for any period of time not exceeding 40 years.
        (5) To enter into agreements, including lease and
    	
lease purchase agreements having a term not longer than 40 years from the date on which such agreements are entered into, with private sector individuals, partnerships, or corporations for the construction of school buildings, school administrative offices, site development, and school support facilities. The board shall maintain exclusive possession of all schools, school administrative offices, and school facilities which it is occupying or acquiring pursuant to any such lease or lease purchase agreement, and in addition shall have and exercise complete control over the education program conducted at such schools, offices and facilities. The board's contribution under any such agreement shall be limited to the use of the real estate and existing improvements on a rental basis which shall be exempt from any form of leasehold tax or assessment, but the interests of the board may be subordinated to the interests of a mortgage holder or holders acquired as security for additional improvements made on the property.
        (6) To make payments on a lease or lease purchase
    	
agreement entered into pursuant to subparagraph (5) of this Section with an individual, partnership, or a corporation for school buildings, school administrative offices, and school support facilities constructed by such individual, partnership, or corporation.
        (7) To purchase the interests of an individual,
    	
partnership, or corporation pursuant to any lease or lease purchase agreement entered into by the board pursuant to subparagraph (5) of this Section, and to assume or retire any outstanding debt or obligation relating to such lease or lease purchase agreement for any school building, school administrative office, or school support facility.
        (8) Subject to the provisions of subparagraph (9) of
    	
this Section, to enter into agreements, including lease and lease purchase agreements, having a term not longer than 40 years from the date on which such agreements are entered into for the provision of school buildings and related property and facilities for an agricultural science school. The enrollment in such school shall be limited to 720 students, and no less than 50% of the total number of enrollment positions in each incoming class must be reserved for students who live within proximity to the school. "Proximity to the school" means all areas within the existing city limits of Chicago located south of 87th Street (8700 South) and west of Wood Street (1800 West). In addition to the other authorizations in this paragraph (8), a maximum of 80 additional students may be enrolled in the agricultural science school's significantly modified curriculum for diverse learners, commonly known as the special education cluster program. Under such agreements the board shall have exclusive possession of all such school buildings and related property and facilities which it is occupying or acquiring pursuant to any such agreements, and in addition shall have and exercise complete control over the educational program conducted at such school. Under such agreements the board also may lease to another party to such agreement real estate and existing improvements which are appropriate and available for use as part of the necessary school buildings and related property and facilities for an agricultural science school. Any interest created by such a lease shall be exempt from any form of leasehold tax or assessment, and the interests of the board as owner or lessor of property covered by such a lease may be subordinated to the interests of a mortgage holder or holders acquired as security for additional improvements made on the property. In addition, but subject to the provisions of subparagraph (9) of this Section, the board is authorized: (i) to pay for the use of school buildings and related property and facilities for an agricultural science school as provided for in an agreement entered into pursuant to this subparagraph (8) and to enter into any such agreement without making a previous appropriation for the expense thereby incurred; and (ii) to enter into agreements to purchase any ownership interests in any school buildings and related property and facilities subject to any agreement entered into by the board pursuant to this subparagraph (8) and to assume or retire any outstanding debt or obligation relating to such school buildings and related property and facilities.
        (9) Notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraph
    	
(8) of this Section or any other law, the board shall not at any time on or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1991 enter into any new lease or lease purchase agreement, or amend or modify any existing lease, lease purchase or other agreement entered into pursuant to subparagraph (8), covering all or any part of the property or facilities, consisting of 78.85 acres more or less, heretofore purchased or otherwise acquired by the board for an agricultural science school; nor shall the board enter into any agreement on or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1991 to sell, lease, transfer or otherwise convey all or any part of the property so purchased or acquired, nor any of the school buildings or related facilities thereon, but the same shall be held, used, occupied and maintained by the board solely for the purpose of conducting and operating an agricultural science school. The board shall not, on or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1991, enter into any contracts or agreements for the construction, alteration or modification of any new or existing school buildings or related facilities or structural improvements on any part of the 78.85 acres purchased or otherwise acquired by the board for agricultural science school purposes, excepting only those contracts or agreements that are entered into by the board for the construction, alteration or modification of such school buildings, related facilities or structural improvements that on the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1991 are either located upon, under construction upon or scheduled under existing plans and specifications to be constructed upon a parcel of land, consisting of 17.45 acres more or less and measuring approximately 880 feet along its northerly and southerly boundaries and 864 feet along its easterly and westerly boundaries, located in the northeast part of the 78.85 acres. Nothing in this subparagraph (9) shall be deemed or construed to alter, modify, impair or otherwise affect the terms and provisions of, nor the rights and obligations of the parties under any agreement or contract made and entered into by the board prior to the effective date of this amendatory Act (i) for the acquisition, lease or lease purchase of, or for the construction, alteration or modification of any school buildings, related facilities or structural improvements upon all or any part of the 78.85 acres purchased or acquired by the board for agricultural science school purposes, or (ii) for the lease by the board of an irregularly shaped parcel, consisting of 23.19 acres more or less, of that 78.85 acres for park board purposes.
(Source: P.A. 100-399, eff. 1-1-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-21.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-21.2)
    Sec. 34-21.2. Playgrounds.
    The board shall take control and management of all public playgrounds owned or acquired by the city which are adjacent to or connected with any public school in the city and may equip, maintain and operate them for the moral, intellectual and physical welfare of the children and persons using them. The title to all lands occupied as such playgrounds shall vest in and be held by such city in trust for the use of schools. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from owning and operating parks, bathing beaches, municipal piers and athletic fields as provided by law.
(Source: P.A. 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-21.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-21.3)
    Sec. 34-21.3. Contracts. The board shall by record vote let all contracts (other than those excepted by Section 10-20.21 of The School Code) for supplies, materials, work, and contracts with private carriers for transportation of pupils, involving an expenditure in excess of $25,000 or a lower amount as required by board policy by competitive bidding as provided in Section 10-20.21 of The School Code.
    The board may delegate to the general superintendent of schools, by resolution, the authority to approve contracts in amounts of $25,000 or less.
    For a period of one year from and after the expiration or other termination of his or her term of office as a member of the board: (i) the former board member shall not be eligible for employment nor be employed by the board, a local school council, an attendance center, or any other subdivision or agent of the board or the school district governed by the board, and (ii) neither the board nor the chief purchasing officer shall let or delegate authority to let any contract for services, employment, or other work to the former board member or to any corporation, partnership, association, sole proprietorship, or other entity other than publicly traded companies from which the former board member receives an annual income, dividends, or other compensation in excess of $1,500. Any contract that is entered into by or under a delegation of authority from the board or the chief purchasing officer shall contain a provision stating that the contract is not legally binding on the board if entered into in violation of the provisions of this paragraph.
    In addition, the State Board of Education, in consultation with the board, shall (i) review existing conflict of interest and disclosure laws or regulations that are applicable to the executive officers and governing boards of school districts organized under this Article and school districts generally, (ii) determine what additional disclosure and conflict of interest provisions would enhance the reputation and fiscal integrity of the board and the procedure under which contracts for goods and services are let, and (iii) develop appropriate reporting forms and procedures applicable to the executive officers, governing board, and other officials of the school district.
(Source: P.A. 95-990, eff. 10-3-08.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-21.4)
    Sec. 34-21.4. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 81-1508. Repealed by P.A. 101-149, eff. 7-26-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-21.5)
    Sec. 34-21.5. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 81-1221. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-21.6) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-21.6)
    Sec. 34-21.6. Waiver of fees.
    (a) The board shall waive all fees assessed by the district on children whose parents are unable to afford them, including but not limited to children living in households that meet the free lunch or breakfast eligibility guidelines established by the federal government pursuant to Section 1758 of the federal Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1758; 7 C.F.R. 245 et seq.), subject to verification as set forth in subsection (b) of this Section. The board shall develop written policies and procedures implementing this Section in accordance with regulations promulgated by the State Board of Education.
    (b) If the board participates in a federally funded, school-based child nutrition program and uses a student's application for, eligibility for, or participation in the federally funded, school-based child nutrition program (42 U.S.C. 1758; 7 C.F.R. 245 et seq.) as the basis for waiving fees assessed by the district, then the board must follow the verification requirements of the federally funded, school-based child nutrition program (42 U.S.C. 1758; 7 C.F.R. 245.6a).
    If the board establishes a process for the determination of eligibility for waiver of fees assessed by the district that is completely independent of a student's application for, eligibility for, or participation in a federally funded, school-based child nutrition program, the board may provide for fee waiver verification no more often than every 60 calendar days. Information obtained during the independent, fee waiver verification process indicating that the student does not meet free lunch or breakfast eligibility guidelines may be used to deny the waiver of the student's fees, provided that any information obtained through this independent process for determining or verifying eligibility for fee waivers shall not be used to determine or verify eligibility for any federally funded, school-based child nutrition program.
(Source: P.A. 96-360, eff. 9-1-09.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-21.7)
    Sec. 34-21.7. Racial reports. Beginning July 1, 1994, all forms used by school boards and school districts to collect information within racial categories and all reports used to present information within racial categories shall include a "Multiracial" category, if such information is collected and reported for State or local purposes only.
(Source: P.A. 88-71; 88-670, eff. 12-2-94.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-21.8)
    Sec. 34-21.8. Chicago public schools violence prevention hotline.
    (a) In consultation with the Chicago Police Department, the Board must establish a hotline for the purpose of receiving anonymous phone calls for information that may prevent violence.
    (b) Calls that are placed to the hotline must be answered by the Chicago Police Department.
    (c) Each call placed to the hotline must be recorded and investigated by the Chicago Police Department.
    (d) Prior to receiving any information, notice must be provided to the caller that the call is being recorded for investigation by the Chicago Police Department. The notice may be provided by a pre-recorded message or otherwise.
    (e) The hotline shall be known as the "CPS Violence Prevention Hotline" and its number and anonymous nature must be posted in all Chicago Public Schools.
(Source: P.A. 96-1425, eff. 1-1-11.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/prec. Sec. 34-22 heading)
BONDS AND TAX ANTICIPATION WARRANTS

    (105 ILCS 5/34-22) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-22)
    Sec. 34-22. Buildings. The board may erect, purchase or otherwise acquire buildings suitable for school houses, for school administration, and for deriving revenues from school lands, erect temporary school structures, erect additions to, repair, rehabilitate and replace existing school buildings and temporary school structures and may furnish and equip school buildings and temporary school structures and may purchase or otherwise acquire and improve sites therefor, the furnishing and equipping to include but not be limited to furniture, libraries, apparatus, building and architectural supplies, fixtures generally used in school buildings, including but not limited to heating and ventilating systems, mechanical equipment, seats and desks, blackboards, window shades and curtains, gymnasium and recreation apparatus and equipment, auditorium and lunchroom equipment, and all items incidental thereto. The board may use the proceeds of the sale of common school lands or any income from investments of such proceeds in its treasury for any authorized purpose and may deposit the proceeds into any district fund.
    In erecting, purchasing or otherwise acquiring buildings for school purposes, the board shall not do so in such a manner as to promote segregation and separation of children in public schools because of color, race or nationality.
(Source: P.A. 88-670, eff. 12-2-94.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-22.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-22.1)
    Sec. 34-22.1. Issuance of bonds. For the purpose of erecting, purchasing, or otherwise acquiring buildings suitable for school houses, erecting temporary school structures, erecting additions to, repairing, rehabilitating and replacing existing school buildings and temporary school structures, and furnishing and equipping school buildings and temporary school structures, and purchasing or otherwise acquiring and improving sites for such purposes, the board, with the consent of the city council expressed by ordinance, may incur an indebtedness and issue bonds therefor in an amount or amounts not to exceed in the aggregate $50,000,000. Provided, however, that not more than 25% of the aggregate amount of said bonds shall be issued in any calendar year. The bonds shall bear interest at the rate of not more than the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, and shall mature within not to exceed 20 years from their date, and may be made callable on any interest payment date at par and accrued interest, after notice has been given, at the time and in the manner provided in the bond resolution.
    These bonds shall not be issued until the question of authorizing such bonds has been submitted to the electors of the city constituting said school district at a regular scheduled election in accordance with the general election law and approved by a majority of the electors voting upon that question.
    The board shall adopt a resolution providing for submitting said question at such an election and certify the resolution and the proposition to the proper election authorities. In addition to the requirements of the general election law the notice of the referendum shall contain the amount of the bond issue, maximum rate of interest and purpose for which issued.
    This notice shall be published in accordance with the general election law.
    The proposition shall be in substantially the following form:
--------------------------------------------------------------
    Shall bonds in the amount of
$..... be issued by the board of
education of the City of.... for
the purpose of erecting, purchasing,
or otherwise acquiring buildings                YES
suitable for school houses, erecting
temporary school structures,
erecting additions to, repairing,
rehabilitating and replacing existing     --------------------
school buildings and temporary
school structures, and furnishing and
equipping school buildings and
temporary school structures, and                NO
purchasing or otherwise acquiring and
improving sites for such purposes,
bearing interest at the rate of not
to exceed the maximum rate authorized
by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended
at the time of the making of the contract?
--------------------------------------------------------------
    Whenever the board desires to issue bonds as herein authorized, it shall adopt a resolution designating the purpose for which the proceeds of the bonds are to be expended and fixing the amount of the bonds proposed to be issued, the maturity thereof, and optional provisions, if any, the rate of interest thereon, and the amount of taxes to be levied annually for the purpose of paying the interest upon and the principal of such bonds.
    Said bonds shall be issued in the corporate name of the school district. They shall be signed by the president and secretary of said board and countersigned by the mayor and the comptroller (or city clerk if there be no comptroller) of the city. They shall be sold upon such terms as may be approved by the board by the city comptroller (or city clerk if there be no comptroller) after advertisement for bids as ordered by and under the direction of the board, and the proceeds thereof shall be received by the city treasurer, as school treasurer, and expended by the board for the purposes provided in the bond resolution.
    Before or at the time of issuing any bonds herein authorized, the city council of such city, upon the demand and under the direction of the board shall, by ordinance, provide for the levy and collection of a direct annual tax upon all the taxable property of such school district sufficient to pay and discharge the principal thereof at maturity and to pay the interest thereon as it falls due. Such tax shall be levied and collected in like manner with the other taxes of such school district and shall be in addition to and exclusive of the maximum of all other taxes which such board or such city council is now, or may hereafter be, authorized by law to levy for any and all school purposes. Upon the filing in the office of the county clerk of the county wherein such school district is located of a duly certified copy of any such ordinance, it shall be the duty of such county clerk to extend the tax therein provided for, including an amount to cover loss and cost of collecting said taxes and also deferred collections thereof and abatements in the amounts of such taxes as extended upon the collector's books.
    With respect to instruments for the payment of money issued under this Section either before, on, or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1989, it is and always has been the intention of the General Assembly (i) that the Omnibus Bond Acts are and always have been supplementary grants of power to issue instruments in accordance with the Omnibus Bond Acts, regardless of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts, (ii) that the provisions of this Section are not a limitation on the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts, and (iii) that instruments issued under this Section within the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts are not invalid because of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts.
(Source: P.A. 86-4.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-22.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-22.2)
    Sec. 34-22.2. Issuance of bonds. For the purpose of erecting, purchasing, or otherwise acquiring buildings suitable for school houses, erecting temporary school structures, erecting additions to, repairing, rehabilitating and replacing existing school buildings and temporary school structures, and furnishing and equipping school buildings and temporary school structures, and purchasing or otherwise acquiring and improving sites for such purposes, the board, with the consent of the city council expressed by ordinance, may incur an indebtedness and issue bonds therefor in an amount or amounts not to exceed in the aggregate $50,000,000 in addition to the bonds authorized under Section 34-22.1. The bonds shall bear interest at the rate of not more than the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, and shall mature within not to exceed 20 years from their date, and may be made callable on any interest payment date at par and accrued interest, after notice has been given, at the time and in the manner provided in the bond resolution.
    These bonds shall not be issued until the question of authorizing such bonds has been submitted to the electors of the city constituting said school district at a regular scheduled election and approved by a majority of the electors voting upon that question. The board shall adopt a resolution providing for submitting said proposition at such an election and certify the resolution and proposition to the proper election authorities for submission to the electors in accordance with the general election law. In addition to the requirements of the general election law the notice of the referendum shall contain the amount of the bond issue, maximum rate of interest and purpose for which issued.
    The proposition shall be in substantially the following form:
--------------------------------------------------------------
    Shall bonds in the amount of
$..... be issued by the board of
education of the City of.... for the
purpose of erecting, purchasing,
or otherwise acquiring buildings                YES
suitable for school houses, erecting
temporary school structures,
erecting additions to, repairing,
rehabilitating and replacing existing       ------------------
school buildings and temporary
school structures, and furnishing and
equipping school buildings and
temporary school structures, and                NO
purchasing or otherwise acquiring and
improving sites for such purposes,
bearing interest at the rate of not
to exceed the maximum rate authorized
by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended
at the time of the making of the contract?
--------------------------------------------------------------
    Whenever the board desires to issue bonds as herein authorized, it shall adopt a resolution designating the purpose for which the proceeds of the bonds are to be expended and fixing the amount of the bonds proposed to be issued, the maturity thereof, and optional provisions, if any, the rate of interest thereon, and the amount of taxes to be levied annually for the purpose of paying the interest upon and the principal of such bonds.
    Said bonds shall be issued in the corporate name of the school district. They shall be signed by the president and secretary of said board and countersigned by the mayor and the comptroller (or city clerk if there be no comptroller) of the city. They shall be sold by the city comptroller (or city clerk if there be no comptroller) upon such terms as may be approved by the board after advertisement for bids as ordered by and under the direction of the board, and the proceeds thereof shall be received by the city treasurer, as school treasurer, and expended by the board for the purposes provided in the bond resolution.
    Before or at the time of issuing any bonds herein authorized, the city council of such city, upon the demand and under the direction of the board shall, by ordinance, provide for the levy and collection of a direct annual tax upon all the taxable property of such school district sufficient to pay and discharge the principal thereof at maturity and to pay the interest thereon as it falls due. Such tax shall be levied and collected in like manner with the other taxes of such school district and shall be in addition to an exclusive of the maximum of all other taxes which such board or such city council is now, or may hereafter be, authorized by law to levy for any and all school purposes. Upon the filing in the office of the county clerk of the county wherein such school district is located of a duly certified copy of any such ordinance, it shall be the duty of such county clerk to extend the tax therein provided for, including an amount to cover loss and cost of collecting said taxes and also deferred collections thereof and abatements in the amounts of such taxes as extended upon the collector's books.
    With respect to instruments for the payment of money issued under this Section either before, on, or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1989, it is and always has been the intention of the General Assembly (i) that the Omnibus Bond Acts are and always have been supplementary grants of power to issue instruments in accordance with the Omnibus Bond Acts, regardless of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts, (ii) that the provisions of this Section are not a limitation on the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts, and (iii) that instruments issued under this Section within the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts are not invalid because of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts.
(Source: P.A. 86-4.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-22.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-22.3)
    Sec. 34-22.3. Issuance of bonds. For the purpose of erecting, purchasing, or otherwise acquiring buildings suitable for school houses, erecting temporary school structures, erecting additions to, repairing, rehabilitating and replacing existing school buildings and temporary school structures, and furnishing and equipping school buildings and temporary school structures, and purchasing or otherwise acquiring and improving sites for such purposes, the board, with the consent of the city council expressed by ordinance, may incur an indebtedness and issue bonds therefor in an amount or amounts not to exceed in the aggregate $50,000,000 in addition to the bonds authorized under Sections 34-22.1 and 34-22.2. The bonds shall bear interest at the rate of not more than the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, and shall mature within not to exceed 20 years from their date, and may be made callable on any interest payment date at par and accrued interest, after notice has been given, at the time and in the manner provided in the bond resolution.
    These bonds shall not be issued until the question of authorizing such bonds has been submitted to the electors of the city constituting said school district at a regular scheduled election and approved by a majority of the electors voting upon that question.
    The board shall adopt a resolution providing for submitting said question at such an election and shall certify the resolution and the proposition to the proper election authorities for submission to the electors in accordance with the general election law. In addition to the requirements of the general election law the notice of the referendum shall contain the amount of the bond issue, maximum rate of interest and purpose for which issued.
    The proposition shall be in substantially the following form:
--------------------------------------------------------------
    Shall bonds in the amount of
$...... be issued by the board of
education of the City of.... for
the purpose of erecting, purchasing,
or otherwise acquiring buildings              YES
suitable for school houses, erecting
temporary school structures,
erecting additions to, repairing,
rehabilitating and replacing existing     --------------------
school buildings and temporary
school structures, and furnishing and
equipping school buildings and
temporary school structures, and              NO
purchasing or otherwise acquiring and
improving sites for such purposes,
bearing interest at the rate of not
to exceed the maximum rate authorized
by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended
at the time of the making of the contract?
--------------------------------------------------------------
    Whenever the board desires to issue bonds as herein authorized, it shall adopt a resolution designating the purpose for which the proceeds of the bonds are to be expended and fixing the amount of the bonds proposed to be issued, the maturity thereof, and optional provisions, if any, the rate of interest thereon, and the amount of taxes to be levied annually for the purpose of paying the interest upon and the principal of such bonds.
    Said bonds shall be issued in the corporate name of the school district. They shall be signed by the president and secretary of said board and countersigned by the mayor and the comptroller (or city clerk if there be no comptroller) of the city. They shall be sold by the city comptroller (or city clerk if there be no comptroller) upon such terms as may be approved by the board after advertisement for bids as ordered by and under the direction of the board, and the proceeds thereof shall be received by the city treasurer, as school treasurer, and expended by the board for the purposes provided in the bond resolution.
    Before or at the time of issuing any bonds herein authorized, the city council of such city, upon the demand and under the direction of the board shall, by ordinance, provide for the levy and collection of a direct annual tax upon all the taxable property of such school district sufficient to pay and discharge the principal thereof at maturity and to pay the interest thereon as it falls due. Such tax shall be levied and collected in like manner with the other taxes of such school district and shall be in addition to and exclusive of the maximum of all other taxes which such board or such city council is now, or may hereafter be, authorized by law to levy for any and all school purposes. Upon the filing in the office of the county clerk of the county wherein such school district is located of a duly certified copy of any such ordinance, it shall be the duty of such county clerk to extend the tax therein provided for, including an amount to cover loss and cost of collecting said taxes and also deferred collections thereof and abatements in the amounts of such taxes as extended upon the collector's books.
    With respect to instruments for the payment of money issued under this Section either before, on, or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1989, it is and always has been the intention of the General Assembly (i) that the Omnibus Bond Acts are and always have been supplementary grants of power to issue instruments in accordance with the Omnibus Bond Acts, regardless of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts, (ii) that the provisions of this Section are not a limitation on the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts, and (iii) that instruments issued under this Section within the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts are not invalid because of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts.
(Source: P.A. 86-4.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-22.4) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-22.4)
    Sec. 34-22.4. Issuance of bonds. For the purpose of erecting, purchasing, or otherwise acquiring buildings suitable for school houses, erecting temporary school structures, erecting additions to, repairing, rehabilitating, modernizing and replacing existing school buildings and temporary school structures, and furnishing and equipping school buildings and temporary school structures, and purchasing or otherwise acquiring and improving sites for such purposes, the board, with the consent of the city council expressed by ordinance, may incur an indebtedness and issue bonds therefor in an amount or amounts not to exceed in the aggregate $50,000,000 in addition to the bonds authorized under Sections 34-22.1, 34-22.2, and 34-22.3. The bonds shall bear interest at the rate of not more than the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, and shall mature within not to exceed 20 years from their date, and may be made callable on any interest payment date at par and accrued interest, after notice has been given, at the time and in the manner provided in the bond resolution.
    These bonds shall not be issued until the question of authorizing such bonds has been submitted to the electors of the city constituting said school district at a regular scheduled election and approved by a majority of the electors voting upon that question.
    The board shall adopt a resolution providing for submitting said question at such an election and shall certify the resolution and the proposition to the proper election authorities for submission in accordance with the general election law. In addition to the requirements of the general election law the notice of the referendum shall contain the amount of the bond issue, maximum rate of interest and purpose for which issued.
    The proposition shall be in substantially the following form:
--------------------------------------------------------------
    Shall bonds in the amount of
$...... be issued by the board of
education of the City of .... for
the purpose of erecting, purchasing,
or otherwise acquiring buildings                YES
suitable for school houses, erecting
temporary school structures,
erecting additions to, repairing,
rehabilitating, modernizing and            -------------------
replacing existing school buildings
and temporary school structures,
and furnishing and equipping school
buildings and temporary school                   NO
structures, and purchasing or otherwise
acquiring and improving sites for
such purposes, bearing interest at the
rate of not to exceed the maximum rate
authorized by the Bond Authorization Act,
as amended at the time of the making of
the contract?
--------------------------------------------------------------
    Whenever the board desires to issue bonds as herein authorized, it shall adopt a resolution designating the purpose for which the proceeds of the bonds are to be expended and fixing the amount of the bonds proposed to be issued, the maturity thereof, and optional provisions, if any, the rate of interest thereon, and the amount of taxes to be levied annually for the purpose of paying the interest upon and the principal of such bonds.
    Said bonds shall be issued in the corporate name of the school district. They shall be signed by the president and secretary of said board and countersigned by the mayor and the comptroller (or city clerk if there be no comptroller) of the city. They shall be sold by the city comptroller (or city clerk if there be no comptroller) upon such terms as may be approved by the board after advertisement for bids as ordered by and under the direction of the board, and the proceeds thereof shall be received by the city treasurer, as school treasurer, and expended by the board for the purposes provided in the bond resolution.
    Before or at the time of issuing any bonds herein authorized, the city council of such city, upon the demand and under the direction of the board shall, by ordinance, provide for the levy and collection of a direct annual tax upon all the taxable property of such school district sufficient to pay and discharge the principal thereof at maturity and to pay the interest thereon as it falls due. Such tax shall be levied and collected in like manner with the other taxes of such school district and shall be in addition to and exclusive of the maximum of all other taxes which such board of such city council is now, or may hereafter be, authorized by law to levy for any and all school purposes. Upon the filing in the office of the county clerk of the county wherein such school district is located of a duly certified copy of any such ordinance, it shall be the duty of such county clerk to extend the tax therein provided for, including an amount to cover loss and cost of collecting said taxes and also deferred collections thereof and abatements in the amounts of such taxes as extended upon the collector's books. The ordinance shall be in force upon its passage.
    With respect to instruments for the payment of money issued under this Section either before, on, or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1989, it is and always has been the intention of the General Assembly (i) that the Omnibus Bond Acts are and always have been supplementary grants of power to issue instruments in accordance with the Omnibus Bond Acts, regardless of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts, (ii) that the provisions of this Section are not a limitation on the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts, and (iii) that instruments issued under this Section within the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts are not invalid because of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts.
(Source: P.A. 86-4.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-22.5) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-22.5)
    Sec. 34-22.5. Issuance of bonds. For the purpose of erecting, purchasing, or otherwise acquiring buildings suitable for school houses, erecting temporary school structures, erecting additions to, repairing, rehabilitating, modernizing and replacing existing school buildings and temporary school structures, and furnishing and equipping school buildings and temporary school structures, and purchasing or otherwise acquiring and improving sites for such purposes, the board, with the consent of the city council expressed by ordinance, may incur an indebtedness and issue bonds therefor in an amount or amounts not to exceed in the aggregate Twenty-five Million Dollars ($25,000,000) in addition to the bonds authorized under Sections 34-22.1, 34-22.2, 34-22.3, and 34-22.4. The bonds shall bear interest at the rate of not more than the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, and shall mature within not to exceed twenty years from their date, and may be made callable on any interest payment date at par and accrued interest, after notice has been given, at the time and in the manner provided in the bond resolution.
    These bonds shall not be issued until the question of authorizing such bonds has been submitted to the electors of the city constituting said school district at a regular scheduled election and approved by a majority of the electors voting upon that question.
    The board shall adopt a resolution providing for submitting said proposition at such an election and certify the resolution and the proposition to the proper election authorities for submission in accordance with the general election law. In addition to the requirements of the general election law the notice of the referendum shall contain the amount of the bond issue, maximum rate of interest and purpose for which issued.
    The proposition shall be in substantially the following form:
--------------------------------------------------------------
    Shall bonds in the amount of
$...... be issued by the board of
education of the City of.... for
the purpose of erecting, purchasing,
or otherwise acquiring buildings                YES
suitable for school houses, erecting
temporary school structures,
erecting additions to, repairing,
rehabilitating, modernizing and             ------------------
replacing existing school buildings
and temporary school structures,
and furnishing and equipping school
buildings and temporary school                  NO
structures, and purchasing or otherwise
acquiring and improving sites for such
purposes, bearing interest at the
rate of not to exceed the maximum rate
authorized by the Bond Authorization Act,
as amended at the time of the making of
the contract?
--------------------------------------------------------------
    Whenever the board desires to issue bonds as herein authorized, it shall adopt a resolution designating the purpose for which the proceeds of the bonds are to be expended and fixing the amount of the bonds proposed to be issued, the maturity thereof, and optional provisions, if any, the rate of interest thereon, and the amount of taxes to be levied annually for the purpose of paying the interest upon and the principal of such bonds.
    Said bonds shall be issued in the corporate name of the school district. They shall be signed by the president and secretary of said board and countersigned by the mayor and the comptroller (or city clerk if there be no comptroller) of the city. They shall be sold by the city comptroller (or city clerk if there be no comptroller) upon such terms as may be approved by the board after advertisement for bids as ordered by and under the direction of the board, and the proceeds thereof shall be received by the city treasurer, as school treasurer, and expended by the board for the purposes provided in the bond resolution.
    Before or at the time of issuing any bonds herein authorized, the city council of such city, upon the demand and under the direction of the board shall, by ordinance, provide for the levy and collection of a direct annual tax upon all the taxable property of such school district sufficient to pay and discharge the principal thereof at maturity and to pay the interest thereon as it falls due. Such tax shall be levied and collected in like manner with the other taxes of such school district and shall be in addition to and exclusive of the maximum of all other taxes which such board or such city council is now, or may hereafter be, authorized by law to levy for any and all school purposes. Upon the filing in the office of the county clerk of the county wherein such school district is located of a duly certified copy of any such ordinance, it shall be the duty of such county clerk to extend the tax therein provided for, including an amount to cover loss and cost of collecting said taxes and also deferred collections thereof and abatements in the amounts of such taxes as extended upon the collector's books. The ordinance shall be in force upon its passage.
    With respect to instruments for the payment of money issued under this Section either before, on, or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1989, it is and always has been the intention of the General Assembly (i) that the Omnibus Bond Acts are and always have been supplementary grants of power to issue instruments in accordance with the Omnibus Bond Acts, regardless of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts, (ii) that the provisions of this Section are not a limitation on the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts, and (iii) that instruments issued under this Section within the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts are not invalid because of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts.
(Source: P.A. 86-4.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-22.6) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-22.6)
    Sec. 34-22.6. Issuance of bonds. For the purpose of erecting, purchasing, or otherwise acquiring buildings suitable for school houses, erecting temporary school structures, erecting additions to, repairing, rehabilitating, modernizing and replacing existing school buildings and temporary school structures, and furnishing and equipping school buildings and temporary school structures, and purchasing or otherwise acquiring and improving sites for such purposes, the board may incur an indebtedness and issue bonds therefor in an amount or amounts not to exceed in the aggregate $150,000,000 in addition to the bonds authorized under Sections 34-22.1, 34-22.2, 34-22.3, 34-22.4, 34-22.5 and 34-22.7. Bonds authorized under this Section may also be issued for the purposes of paying interest on such bonds, establishing reserves to secure such bonds and paying the costs of issuance of such bonds. In connection with the issuance of its bonds, the board may enter into arrangements to provide additional security and liquidity for the bonds. These may include, without limitation, municipal bond insurance, letters of credit, lines of credit by which the board may borrow funds to pay or redeem its bonds and purchase or remarketing arrangements for assuring the ability of owners of the board's bonds to sell or to have redeemed their bonds. The board may enter into contracts and may agree to pay fees to persons providing such arrangements, including from bond proceeds but only under circumstances in which the total interest paid or to be paid on the bonds, together with the fees for the arrangements (being treated as if interest), would not, taken together, cause the bonds to bear interest, calculated to their absolute maturity, at a rate in excess of the maximum rate allowed by law.
    The resolution of the board authorizing the issuance of its bonds may provide that interest rates may vary from time to time depending upon criteria established by the board, which may include, without limitation, a variation in interest rates as may be necessary to cause bonds to be remarketable from time to time at a price equal to their principal amount, and may provide for appointment of a national banking association, bank, trust company, investment banker or other financial institution to serve as a remarketing agent in that connection. The resolution of the board authorizing the issuance of its bonds may provide that alternative interest rates or provisions will apply during such times as the bonds are held by a person providing a letter of credit or other credit enhancement arrangement for those bonds. The Board may use proceeds of the sale of bonds authorized under this Section to pay the cost of obtaining such municipal bond insurance, letter of credit or other credit facilities. Bonds may also be issued under this Section to pay the cost of refunding any bonds issued under this Section, including prior to their maturity. The bonds shall bear interest at a rate or rates not to exceed the maximum annual rate provided for in Section 2 of "An Act to authorize public corporations to issue bonds, other evidences of indebtedness and tax anticipation warrants subject to interest rate limitations set forth therein", approved May 26, 1970, as now or hereafter amended, and if issued at such maximum annual rate shall be sold for not less than par and accrued interest. If any of the bonds are issued to bear interest at a rate of less than such maximum annual rate the minimum price at which they may be sold shall be such that the interest cost to the board on the proceeds of the bonds shall not exceed such maximum annual rate computed to stated maturity according to standard tables of bond values.
    Whenever the board desires to issue bonds as authorized in this Section, it shall adopt a resolution designating the purpose for which the proceeds of the bonds are to be expended and fixing the amount of the bonds proposed to be issued, the maturity or maturities thereof, and optional provisions, if any, the rate of interest thereon, and the amount of taxes to be levied annually for the purpose of paying the interest upon and the principal, whether due at maturity or upon sinking fund installment dates, of such bonds.
    Said bonds shall be issued in the corporate name of the school district. They shall be signed by the president and secretary of said board and countersigned by the mayor and the comptroller (or city clerk if there be no comptroller) of the city. They shall be sold by the city comptroller (or city clerk if there be no comptroller) upon such terms as may be approved by the board after advertisement for bids as ordered by and under the direction of the board, and the proceeds thereof shall be received by the city treasurer, as school treasurer, and expended by the board for the purposes provided in the bond resolution.
    Before or at the time of issuing any bonds authorized in this Section, the board shall provide for the levy and collection of a direct annual tax upon all the taxable property of such school district sufficient to pay and discharge the principal thereof at maturity, or upon sinking fund installment dates, and to pay the interest thereon as it falls due. Such tax shall be levied and collected in like manner with the other taxes of such school district and shall be in addition to and exclusive of the maximum of all other taxes which such board is now, or may hereafter be, authorized by law to levy for any and all school purposes. Upon the filing in the office of the county clerk of the county wherein such school district is located of a duly certified copy of any such ordinance, it shall be the duty of such county clerk to extend the tax therein provided for, including an amount to cover loss and cost of collecting said taxes and also deferred collections thereof and abatements in the amounts of such taxes as extended upon the collector's books. The ordinance shall be in force upon its passage.
(Source: P.A. 85-1418; 86-1477.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-22.7) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-22.7)
    Sec. 34-22.7. For the sole purpose of rehabilitating and accomplishing the deferred maintenance of present school buildings the board, with the consent of the city council expressed by ordinance, may incur an indebtedness and issue bonds therefor without referendum in an amount or amounts not to exceed in the aggregate $330,000,000. The bonds shall bear interest at a rate of not more than the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, and shall mature within not to exceed 20 years from their date, and may be made callable on any interest payment date at par and accrued interest, after notice has been given, at the time and in the manner provided in the bond resolution.
    Whenever the board desires to issue bonds as authorized in this Section, it shall adopt a resolution designating the purpose for which the proceeds of the bonds are to be expended and fixing the amount of the bonds proposed to be issued, the maturity thereof, and optional provisions, if any, the rate of interest thereon, and the amount of taxes to be levied annually for the purpose of paying the interest upon and the principal of such bonds.
    Said bonds shall be issued in the corporate name of the school district. They shall be signed by the president and secretary of said board and countersigned by the mayor and comptroller (or city clerk if there be no comptroller) of the city. They shall be sold by the city comptroller (or city clerk if there be no comptroller) upon such terms as may be approved by the board after advertisement for bids as ordered by and under the direction of the board, and the proceeds thereof shall be received by the city treasurer, as school treasurer, and expended by the board for the purpose provided in the bond resolution.
    Before or at the time of issuing any bonds herein authorized, the board shall provide for the levy and collection of a direct annual tax upon all the taxable property of such school district sufficient to pay and discharge the principal thereof at maturity and to pay the interest thereon as it falls due. Such tax shall be levied and collected in like manner with the other taxes of such school district and shall be in addition to and exclusive of the maximum of all other taxes which such board is now, or may hereafter be, authorized by law to levy for any and all school purposes. Upon the filing in the office of the county clerk of the county wherein such school district is located of a duly certified copy of any such ordinance, it shall be the duty of such county clerk to extend the tax therein provided for, including an amount to cover loss and cost of collecting said taxes and also deferred collections thereof and abatements in the amounts of such taxes as extended upon the collector's books. The ordinance shall be in force upon its passage.
    With respect to instruments for the payment of money issued under this Section either before, on, or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1989, it is and always has been the intention of the General Assembly (i) that the Omnibus Bond Acts are and always have been supplementary grants of power to issue instruments in accordance with the Omnibus Bond Acts, regardless of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts, (ii) that the provisions of this Section are not a limitation on the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts, and (iii) that instruments issued under this Section within the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts are not invalid because of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts.
(Source: P.A. 86-4; 86-1477.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-22.8)
    Sec. 34-22.8. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 78-200. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-22.9) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-22.9)
    Sec. 34-22.9. Termination of authority to issue bonds for rehabilitation and deferred maintenance of school buildings. Effective July 1, 1984, the board shall not subsequently issue any bonds therefor as provided by and authorized under Section 34-22.7; provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall effect the validity of any obligations of the board lawfully incurred, pursuant to authorization granted by that Section, and existing on or prior to July 1, 1984. All such obligations shall be discharged as provided pursuant to that authorization and the extension for collection of taxes of the board, pursuant to levies made in accordance with that authorization, shall in no way be impaired or restricted.
(Source: P.A. 83-1270.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-22.10) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-22.10)
    Sec. 34-22.10. Issuance of bonds. For the sole purpose of purchasing or otherwise acquiring school buildings and related property and facilities for an agricultural science school pursuant to an agreement entered into pursuant to subparagraph (7) of Section 34-21.1, the board may incur an indebtedness and issue bonds therefor in an amount or amounts not to exceed in the aggregate $20,000,000 in addition to the bonds authorized under Sections 34-22.1, 34-22.2, 34-22.3, 34-22.4, 34-22.5, 34-22.6 and 34-22.7. Bonds authorized under this Section may also be issued for the purposes of paying interest on such bonds, establishing reserves to secure such bonds and paying the costs of issuance of such bonds.
    In connection with the issuance of its bonds, the board may enter into arrangements to provide additional security and liquidity for the bonds. These may include, without limitation, municipal bond insurance, letters of credit, lines of credit by which the board may borrow funds to pay or redeem its bonds and purchase or remarketing arrangements for assuring the ability of owners of the board's bonds to sell or to have redeemed their bonds. The board may enter into contracts and may agree to pay fees to persons providing such arrangements, including from bond proceeds but only under circumstances in which the total interest paid or to be paid on the bonds, together with the fees for the arrangements (being treated as if interest), would not, taken together, cause the bonds to bear interest, calculated to their absolute maturity, at a rate in excess of the maximum rate allowed by law.
    The Board may use proceeds of the sale of bonds authorized under this Section to pay the cost of obtaining such municipal bond insurance, letter of credit or other credit facilities. Bonds may also be issued under this Section to pay the cost of refunding any bonds issued under this Section, including prior to their maturity. The bonds shall bear interest at a rate or rates not to exceed the maximum annual rate provided for in Section 2 of "An Act to authorize public corporations to issue bonds, other evidences of indebtedness and tax anticipation warrants subject to interest rate limitations set forth therein", approved May 26, 1970, as now or hereafter amended, and if issued at such maximum annual rate shall be sold for not less than par and accrued interest. If any of the bonds are issued to bear interest at a rate of less than such maximum annual rate the minimum price at which they may be sold shall be such that the interest cost to the board on the proceeds of the bonds shall not exceed such maximum annual rate computed to stated maturity according to standard tables of bond values. The resolution of the board authorizing the issuance of its bonds may provide that interest rates may vary from time to time depending upon criteria established by the board, which may include, without limitation, a variation in interest rates as may be necessary to cause bonds to be remarketable from time to time at a price equal to their principal amount, and may provide for appointment of a national banking association, bank, trust company, investment banker or other financial institution to serve as a remarketing agent in that connection. The resolution of the board authorizing the issuance of its bonds may provide that alternative interest rates or provisions will apply during such times as the bonds are held by a person providing a letter of credit or other credit enhancement arrangement for those bonds.
    Whenever the board desires to issue bonds as authorized in this Section, it shall adopt a resolution designating the purpose for which the proceeds of the bonds are to be expended and fixing the amount of the bonds proposed to be issued, the maturity or maturities thereof, and optional provisions, if any, the rate of interest thereon, and the amount of taxes to be levied annually for the purpose of paying the interest upon and the principal, whether due at maturity or upon sinking fund installment dates, of such bonds.
    Said bonds shall be issued in the corporate name of the school district. They shall be signed by the president and secretary of said board. They shall be sold upon such terms as may be approved by the board after advertisement for bids as ordered by and under the direction of the board, and the proceeds thereof shall be received by the city treasurer, as school treasurer, and expended by the board for the purposes provided in the bond resolution.
    Before or at the time of issuing any bonds authorized in this Section, the board shall, by resolution, provide for the levy and collection of a direct annual tax upon all the taxable property of such school district sufficient to pay and discharge the principal thereof at maturity, or upon sinking fund installment dates, and to pay the interest thereon as it falls due. Such tax shall be levied and collected in like manner with the other taxes of such school district and shall be in addition to and exclusive of the maximum of all other taxes which such board is now, or may hereafter be, authorized by law to levy for any and all school purposes. Upon the filing in the office of the county clerk of the county wherein such school district is located of a duly certified copy of any such resolution, it shall be the duty of such county clerk to extend the tax therein provided for, including an amount to cover loss and cost of collecting said taxes and also deferred collections thereof and abatements in the amounts of such taxes as extended upon the collector's books. The resolution shall be in force upon its passage.
(Source: P.A. 86-930.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-23) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-23)
    Sec. 34-23. Tax anticipation warrants. When there is not sufficient money in the treasury to meet the ordinary and necessary expenses for educational and for building purposes, and for the purpose of paying the principal of and interest on bonds to order issued warrants against and in anticipation of any taxes levied for the payment of the expenditures for educational and for building purposes, and for the purpose of paying the principal of and interest on bonds, to the extent of 85% of the total amount of the taxes levied for such purpose; provided, that whenever a working cash fund has been created pursuant to Sections 34-30 through 34-36 warrants shall at no time be drawn against any such taxes levied for educational purposes for such an amount that the aggregate of (a) the amount of such warrants, with the interest to accrue thereon, (b) the aggregate amount of warrants theretofore drawn against such taxes and the interest accrued and to accrue thereon, and (c) the aggregate amount of money theretofore transferred from the working cash fund to the educational purposes fund exceeds 90% of the actual or estimated amount of such taxes extended or to be extended by the county clerk upon the books of the collector or collectors of State and county taxes within the school districts. Warrants may, however, be issued against and in anticipation of any taxes levied for the expenditures for building purposes to the extent of 90% of the total amount of taxes levied for such purposes whenever and only if the board in connection with a grant of money from the federal government or a pledge to any agency, instrumentality, corporation, administration or bureau of the United States of America in connection with such grant, sells or pledges to the federal government or to any agency, instrumentality, corporation, administration or bureau of the United States of America, warrants issued in excess of 75% but not exceeding 90% of the total amount of taxes levied for the payment of the expenditures for building purposes.
(Source: P.A. 86-930.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-23.5)
    Sec. 34-23.5. Issuance of notes, bonds, or other obligations in lieu of tax anticipation warrants.
    (a) In lieu of issuing tax anticipation warrants in accordance with Section 34-23 of this Code, the board may issue notes, bonds, or other obligations (and in connection with that issuance, establish a line of credit with a bank) in an amount not to exceed 85% of the amount of property taxes most recently levied for educational and building purposes. Moneys thus borrowed shall be applied to the purposes for which they were obtained and no other purpose. All moneys so borrowed shall be repaid exclusively from property tax revenues within 60 days after the property tax revenues have been received by the board.
    (b) Borrowing authorized under subsection (a) of this Section shall bear interest at a rate not to exceed the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, from the date of issuance until paid.
    (c) Prior to the board borrowing or establishing a line of credit under this Section, the board shall authorize, by resolution, the borrowing or line of credit. The resolution shall set forth facts demonstrating the need for the borrowing or line of credit, state the amount to be borrowed, establish a maximum interest rate limit not to exceed that set forth in subsection (b) of this Section, and provide a date by which the borrowed funds shall be repaid. The resolution shall direct the relevant officials to make arrangements to set apart and hold the taxes, as received, that will be used to repay the borrowing. In addition, the resolution may authorize the relevant officials to make partial repayments of the borrowing as the taxes become available and may contain any other terms, restrictions, or limitations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 92-620, eff. 7-11-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-24) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-24)
    Sec. 34-24. Numbering of warrants - Setting apart taxes - Interest. Warrants drawn and issued under Section 34-23 shall be numbered consecutively in the order of their issuance and shall show upon their face that they are payable solely from said taxes when collected, and not otherwise, and that payment thereof will be made in the order of their issuance, beginning with the warrant having the lowest number, and shall be received by any collector of taxes in payment of taxes against which they are issued. Such taxes against which the warrants are drawn shall be set apart and held for their payment, as herein provided. Such warrants shall bear interest, payable out of the taxes against which they are drawn, at the rate of not to exceed the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, if issued before July 1, 1971 and if issued thereafter at the rate of not to exceed the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, from the date of their issuance until paid, or until notice is given by publication in a newspaper or otherwise that the money for their payment is available and that they will be paid on presentation.
    Reissued warrants shall bear the index numerical designation of the original warrant, shall be subnumbered consecutively in the order of reissuance, and shall be paid in the direct order of reissuance, beginning with the earliest subnumber. All warrants so reissued shall be paid prior to the payment of any warrant, or any reissuance thereof, issued subsequently to the date of issuance of such original warrant and in anticipation of the collection of the same tax.
    Any such outstanding warrants may be paid in the order of their issuance, beginning with the warrants having the lowest number.
    With respect to instruments for the payment of money issued under this Section either before, on, or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1989, it is and always has been the intention of the General Assembly (i) that the Omnibus Bond Acts are and always have been supplementary grants of power to issue instruments in accordance with the Omnibus Bond Acts, regardless of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts, (ii) that the provisions of this Section are not a limitation on the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts, and (iii) that instruments issued under this Section within the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts are not invalid because of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts.
(Source: P.A. 86-4.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-25) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-25)
    Sec. 34-25. Use of special funds to purchase tax anticipation warrants - Payment. Any board holding in its treasury any fund set aside for use for some particular purpose that is not immediately necessary for such purpose may by resolution adopted by a vote of a majority of the full membership of the board use the money in such fund, or in the aggregate of such funds if there may be more than one, in the purchase of tax anticipation warrants of the board ordered issued by the city council of such city at the request of said board of education. Such warrants shall bear interest not to exceed the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract. All interest on such warrants and all moneys paid in redemption or received from the resale thereof shall at once be credited to and placed in such fund so held by the board. No board, however, so using any of its own funds for the purchase of tax anticipation warrants shall apply to the payment thereof while so held by it any taxes against and in anticipation of which such warrants have been issued, unless and until all warrants and the interest thereon, issued by the board against and in anticipation of the same taxes and sold to other purchasers at public or private sale, and all bonds, together with interest thereon, issued pursuant to the provisions of this Act, have been first paid or moneys sufficient for the payment thereof have been deposited with the treasurer of the board as a special fund to be held and used solely for the purpose of paying such warrants and bonds with interest thereon when presented. This section does not prevent the resale or reissue of any warrants as provided in Section 34-26.
    With respect to instruments for the payment of money issued under this Section either before, on, or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1989, it is and always has been the intention of the General Assembly (i) that the Omnibus Bond Acts are and always have been supplementary grants of power to issue instruments in accordance with the Omnibus Bond Acts, regardless of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts, (ii) that the provisions of this Section are not a limitation on the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts, and (iii) that instruments issued under this Section within the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts are not invalid because of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts.
(Source: P.A. 86-4.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-26) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-26)
    Sec. 34-26. Resale of tax anticipation warrants-Sale of new warrants. If it is deemed necessary or expedient to convert into money any tax anticipation warrants issued and purchased by public funds pursuant to Section 34-25 before the receipt of taxes in anticipation of which the warrants were issued, the board by resolution adopted by a vote of a majority of its entire membership may authorize a resale of such warrants and adjust the interest rate thereon, or as permitted by statute may authorize the issuance and sale of a like principal amount of new warrants for the same purpose and in anticipation of the same taxes as the original warrants were issued and bearing any date subsequent to the date of the original tax anticipation warrants, the new tax anticipation warrants to be of the denomination and bear such interest not to exceed the statutory rate, all as may be authorized by such resolution. Upon the delivery of the new tax anticipation warrants, a like principal amount of such original warrants that were issued against the same tax that is anticipated by the new warrants shall be paid and cancelled and the proceeds of the sale of the new tax anticipation warrants shall be used first to restore to the funds so invested in the original tax anticipation warrants money equivalent to the par value and accrued interest of the original tax anticipation warrants and the balance, if any, shall revert to the fund for the creation of which the tax so anticipated was levied. Warrants so resold or reissued shall have the same incidence of priority with respect to payment and shall be paid in the same manner as other warrants issued in anticipation of the same tax and sold in the first instance to any purchaser other than the issuing board of education.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-27) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-27)
    Sec. 34-27. Use of special funds to purchase outstanding bonds.
    If the board has in its treasury any fund set aside for some particular purpose that is not immediately necessary for such purpose, it may by resolution adopted by a majority of its full membership use the money in such fund in the purchase of bonds issued by the board representing an obligation and pledging the credit of the board, and all interest upon such bonds and all moneys paid in redemption of the bonds or realized from the sale thereof shall at once be credited to and placed in such fund.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-28) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-28)
    Sec. 34-28. Investment of school funds. Investments of school funds shall be made by the board of education only in Federal Government, State or municipal securities the payment of which is protected by the power to levy taxes therefor or in certificates of deposit constituting direct obligations of any savings and loan association, or any bank as defined by the Illinois Banking Act, as heretofore and hereafter amended, provided, however, that such investments in certificates of deposit may be made only in those banks which are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or in withdrawable capital accounts or deposits of State or Federal chartered savings and loan associations which are insured by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation.
    No bank or savings and loan association shall receive public funds as permitted by this Section, unless it has complied with the requirements established pursuant to Section 6 of "An Act relating to certain investments of public funds by public agencies", approved July 23, 1943, as now or hereafter amended.
(Source: P.A. 86-1028.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-29) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-29)
    Sec. 34-29. Audit of accounts. The board shall for each fiscal year and may as often as necessary, appoint certified public accountants to examine the business methods and audit the accounts of the board as of December 31, 1972, as of December 31, 1973, as of August 31, 1974, as of August 31 of each year thereafter through August 31, 1996, as of June 30, 1997, and as of June 30 of each year thereafter, and a report thereof, together with any recommendations of such accountants as to changes in business methods of the board or any of its departments, officers or employees shall be made to the mayor, the city council, and the board and be filed in the records of the board. The board shall prepare and publish an annual report including in detail all receipts and expenditures, specifying the source of the receipts and the objects of the expenditures, and shall transmit it to the mayor and the city council. The board shall account for the expenses of each fiscal year but shall not be required to make any apportionment of such expenses between the two separate levies made during each calendar year.
(Source: P.A. 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-29.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-29.1)
    Sec. 34-29.1. General obligation notes - Limitations - Issuance - Tax levy - Tax rate - Reimbursement to working cash fund. The board may incur an indebtedness by the issuance of full faith and credit general obligation notes in an amount not to exceed 85% of the taxes levied for educational purposes, building purposes and the purchase of school grounds, free textbook purposes and for school playground and recreation purposes respectively, in the fiscal year in which said notes are issued, without the submission to the electors of the school district or city for approval of the question of the issuance of such notes, provided, however, no notes shall be issued when there are outstanding tax anticipation warrants issued or to be issued against such taxes, nor shall such full faith and credit general obligation notes, tax anticipation warrants, or amounts transferred from the working cash fund, in the aggregate, exceed 90% of the taxes levied for the aforesaid purposes. Such notes shall bear interest at a rate of not to exceed the greater of (i) the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, or (ii)8% per annum, and shall mature within 2 years from date.
    Whenever the board desires to issue such notes as herein authorized, it shall adopt a resolution designating the purposes for which the proceeds of the notes are to be expended and fixing the amount of the note proposed to be issued, the maturity thereof, and optional provisions, if any, the rate of interest thereon, and the amount of taxes to be levied annually for the purpose of paying the interest upon and the principal of said notes.
    Said notes shall be issued in the corporate name of the school district. They shall be signed by the president and secretary of said board. They shall be sold by the board upon such terms as may be approved by the board, and the proceeds thereof shall be received by the city treasurer, as school treasurer, and expended by the board for the purposes provided in the resolution authorizing any such notes.
    Before or at the time of issuing any notes herein authorized, the board shall, by resolution, provide for the levy and collection of a direct annual tax upon all the taxable property of such school district sufficient to pay and discharge the principal thereof at maturity and to pay the interest thereon as it falls due. Such tax shall be levied and collected in like manner with the other taxes of such school district and shall be in addition to and exclusive of the maximum of all other taxes which such board is now, or may hereafter be, authorized by law to levy for any and all school purposes. Upon the filing in the office of the county clerk of the county wherein such school district is located of a duly certified copy of any such resolution, it shall be the duty of such county clerk to extend the tax therein provided for, including an amount to cover loss and cost of collecting said taxes and also deferred collections thereof and abatements in the amounts of such taxes as extended upon the collector's books. The resolution shall be in force upon its passage.
    After any such notes have been issued and while such notes are outstanding, it shall be the duty of the county clerk wherein such school district is located in computing the several tax rates for the several purposes respectively for which the notes have been issued respectively to reduce said tax rates respectively levied for such purposes respectively by the amount levied to pay the principal of and interest on such notes respectively to maturity, provided the tax rate for educational purposes shall not be reduced beyond the amount necessary to reimburse any money borrowed from the working cash fund, and it shall be the duty of the secretary of the board annually, not less than thirty (30) days prior to the tax extension date, to certify to the county clerk of the county wherein such school district is located the amount of money borrowed from the working cash fund to be reimbursed from the educational purposes tax.
    No reimbursement shall be made to the working cash fund until there has been accumulated from the tax levy provided for the notes issued for educational purposes an amount sufficient to pay the principal of and interest on such notes as the same become due.
    With respect to instruments for the payment of money issued under this Section either before, on, or after the effective date of Public Act 86-4 (June 6, 1989), it is and always has been the intention of the General Assembly (i) that the Omnibus Bond Acts are and always have been supplementary grants of power to issue instruments in accordance with the Omnibus Bond Acts, regardless of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts, (ii) that the provisions of this Section are not a limitation on the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts, and (iii) that instruments issued under this Section within the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts are not invalid because of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts.
(Source: P.A. 86-4; 86-930; 86-1028.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-29.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-29.2)
    Sec. 34-29.2. Debt service funds for obligations.
    (a) The board shall establish debt service funds, each to be maintained by a corporate trustee (which may be any trust company or bank having the power of a trust company within the State) separate and segregated from all other funds and accounts of the board, for those issues of obligations of the board for the payment of which a separate tax has been or is to be levied, including, without limitation, a debt service fund for the general obligation bonds of the board, a debt service fund for the general obligation notes of the board and a debt service fund for the lease rentals payable by the board to the Public Building Commission of Chicago. Such funds shall be established for each such outstanding obligation of the board and also for each such obligation as shall be issued by the board after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1981. The trustee maintaining each such debt service fund shall account separately on its books and records for each such issue of such obligations.
    (b) The city treasurer, as ex officio treasurer of the board, shall, with respect to each collection of taxes levied on behalf of the board, allocate the amounts collected among the issues of such obligations and deliver a report of such allocation to the county collector of each county wherein the board is located. On the basis of such allocation, the county collector shall pay the proceeds of each separate tax levied for the payment of any issue of such obligations upon receipt directly to the corporate trustee maintaining the debt service fund for such obligations for deposit in such debt service fund. In addition, the board shall pay the amount of personal property tax replacement tax revenues applicable to each issue of such obligations upon receipt directly to the corporate trustee maintaining the debt service fund for such obligations for deposit in such debt service fund. Each such deposit shall be held in trust for the benefit of the party or parties to whom payment of such obligations is payable. All such proceeds of such taxes and revenues shall be applied solely for the payment of the related obligations and shall not be used for any other purpose until such obligations are paid in full. Each levy of such taxes shall be for the sole benefit of the party or parties to whom payment of such obligations is payable and such party or parties shall have a security interest in and lien upon all rights, claims and interest of the board arising pursuant to any such levy and all present and future proceeds of such levy until such obligations are paid in full. Such party or parties shall further have a security interest in and lien upon all personal property tax replacement tax revenues upon deposit in the appropriate debt service fund as above provided.
    (c) Any lien or security interest for the benefit of the party or parties to whom any such obligations are payable, made pursuant to this Act, shall be valid and binding from the effective date of the amendatory Act of 1980, and with respect to any obligations issued after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1981, shall be valid and binding from the date of issue of such obligations, in each case without any physical delivery or further act, and shall be valid and binding as against, and prior to any claims of, all other parties having claims of any kind in tort, contract or otherwise, against the board, irrespective of whether such parties have notice thereof.
    (d) Any monies on deposit in any such debt service fund and not necessary for immediate use may be invested or reinvested in Investment Obligations, as defined in Section 34A-103 of this Act. The board may from time to time withdraw from any such debt service fund, to the extent not prohibited by the resolution of the board authorizing issuance of such obligations, the amount of interest or other investment earnings in such funds but only to the extent that the total amounts in such fund after such withdrawal shall not be less than the requirements for that fund. Any amounts deposited in any such debt service fund not required for payment of principal of or interest on any obligation because that payment has been made or provided for may be withdrawn by the board from the fund at any time, but only to the extent that the total amount in the fund after the withdrawal is not less than the requirements for the fund. The board is not required to make any tax abatement with respect to any such amounts withdrawn or on account of any provision for payment of principal of or interest on obligations. Any amounts so withdrawn by the board may be used for any lawful purpose of the board.
(Source: P.A. 88-511.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-29.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-29.3)
    Sec. 34-29.3. Transfer of excess funds. When bonds are issued under Sections 34-22 through 34-22.7, and the purposes for which the bonds have been issued are accomplished and paid for in full and there remain funds on hand from the bonds so issued, the board by resolution may transfer such excess funds to the working cash fund.
(Source: P.A. 84-1334.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/prec. Sec. 34-30 heading)
WORKING CASH FUND

    (105 ILCS 5/34-30) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-30)
    Sec. 34-30. Establishment of fund authorized-Purpose.
    The board may, by resolution, establish a fund to be known as a "working cash fund" which shall be maintained and administered for the purpose of enabling the board to have in its treasury at all times sufficient money to meet demands thereon for ordinary and necessary expenditures for educational purposes.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-31) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-31)
    Sec. 34-31. Bond issue to increase fund. (a). Where the board has created and is maintaining such a working cash fund for the purposes above mentioned, it may, with the consent of the city council expressed by ordinance, incur an indebtedness for the purpose of increasing such fund and issue bonds therefor from time to time, in an amount or amounts not exceeding in the aggregate $75,000,000, exclusive of all bonded indebtedness authorized for that purpose prior to May 16, 1967, without the submission thereof to the electors of the school district or city for approval.
    (b). The board may incur an additional indebtedness for the purpose of further increasing such fund and issue additional bonds therefor, from time to time, in an amount or amounts not exceeding in the aggregate $20,000,000, exclusive of all bonded indebtedness authorized for that purpose prior to the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1971, without the submission thereof to the electors of the school district or city for approval.
    (c). The board may incur an additional indebtedness for the purpose of further increasing such fund and issue additional bonds therefor, from time to time, in an amount or amounts not exceeding in the aggregate $25,000,000, exclusive of all bonded indebtedness authorized for that purpose prior to the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1973, without the submission thereof to the electors of the school district or city for approval.
    (d). The board may incur an additional indebtedness for the purpose of further increasing such fund and issue additional bonds therefor, from time to time, in an amount or amounts not exceeding in the aggregate $31,000,000, exclusive of all bonded indebtedness authorized for that purpose prior to the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1977, without the submission thereof to the electors of the school district or city for approval.
    (e). Any bonds issued under paragraphs (a), (b), (c) or (d) of this Section shall bear interest at a rate of not more than the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, and shall mature within 20 years from date of issue. The authority herein granted in paragraphs (a), (b), (c) and (d) shall be considered exclusive of each other and as cumulative authority for the issuance of such bonds.
    With respect to instruments for the payment of money issued under this Section either before, on, or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1989, it is and always has been the intention of the General Assembly (i) that the Omnibus Bond Acts are and always have been supplementary grants of power to issue instruments in accordance with the Omnibus Bond Acts, regardless of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts, (ii) that the provisions of this Section are not a limitation on the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts, and (iii) that instruments issued under this Section within the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts are not invalid because of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts.
(Source: P.A. 86-4.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-32) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-32)
    Sec. 34-32. Resolution for bond issue-Signature-Sale.
    Before issuing any bonds under Section 34-31, as amended, the board shall adopt a resolution designating the purpose and fixing the amount of the bonds proposed to be issued, the maturity thereof, the rate of interest thereon and the amount of taxes to be levied annually for the purpose of paying the principal and interest.
    The bonds shall be issued in the corporate name of the school district. They shall be signed by the president and secretary of the board, and countersigned by the mayor and the comptroller (or city clerk if there be no comptroller) of the city. They shall be sold by the city comptroller (or city clerk if there be no comptroller) at not less than par upon such terms as may be approved by the board after advertisement for bids as ordered by and under the direction of the board and the proceeds thereof shall be received by the city treasurer, as school treasurer, for the uses herein provided.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 3226.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-33) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-33)
    Sec. 34-33. Tax for payment of bonds. Before or at the time of issuing bonds under Sections 34-31 and 34-32, as amended, the city council, upon the demand and under the direction of the board, shall, by ordinance, provide for the collection of a direct annual tax upon all the taxable property of the school district sufficient to pay and discharge the principal thereof at maturity and to pay the interest thereon as it falls due. Upon the filing in the office of the county clerk of the county wherein the school district is located of a certified copy of any such ordinance the county clerk shall extend the tax therein provided for. The ordinance shall be in force upon its passage.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 3226.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-34) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-34)
    Sec. 34-34. Bond moneys set apart-Use and reimbursement of fund. All moneys derived from the issuance of bonds under Sections 34-31 and 34-32, or from any tax levied pursuant to Section 34-57 when received by the city treasurer, as school treasurer, shall be set apart in the working cash fund. The moneys in such fund shall not be regarded as current assets available for appropriation and shall not be appropriated by the board in the annual school budget, but in order to provide moneys with which to meet ordinary and necessary disbursements for salaries and other educational purposes may be transferred, in whole or in part, to the educational purposes fund of the board and so disbursed therefrom (a) in anticipation of the collection of any taxes lawfully levied for educational purposes, (b) in anticipation of the receipt of moneys to be derived from the common school fund of the State and from State appropriations, or (c) in anticipation of such taxes, as by law now or hereafter enacted or amended, imposed by the General Assembly of the State of Illinois to replace revenue lost by units of local government and school districts as a result of the abolition of ad valorem personal property taxes, pursuant to Article IX, Section 5(c) of the Constitution of the State of Illinois. Moneys transferred to the educational purposes fund in anticipation of the collection of taxes shall be deemed to have been transferred in anticipation of the collection of that part of the taxes so levied or to be received which is in excess of the amount or amounts thereof required to pay any warrants, and the interest thereon, theretofore or thereafter issued under Sections 34-22 through 34-24, the amount estimated to be required to satisfy debt service and pension or retirement obligations as set forth in Section 12 of "An Act in relation to State revenue sharing with local government entities", approved July 31, 1969, as amended. Such taxes levied for educational purposes when collected shall be applied first to the payment of any such warrants or notes and the interest thereon and the amount estimated to be required to satisfy debt service and pension or retirement obligations, as set forth in Section 12 of "An Act in relation to State revenue sharing with local government entities", approved July 31, 1969, as amended, and then to the reimbursement of the working cash fund as hereinafter provided. Upon the receipt by the city treasurer, as school treasurer, of any taxes or other moneys, in anticipation of the collection or receipt whereof moneys of the working cash fund have been so transferred for disbursement, such fund shall immediately be reimbursed therefrom until the full amount so transferred has been re-transferred to said fund. If taxes in anticipation of the collection of which such transfers are made are not collected in sufficient amounts to effect a complete reimbursement of the working cash fund of the amounts transferred from the working cash fund to the educational purposes fund the deficiencies between the amounts thus transferred and the amounts repaid from collections shall be general obligations of the educational purposes fund until repaid either from taxes in anticipation of which transfers were made or from appropriations which may be made in annual school budgets of sums of money to apply on such general obligations or until repaid from both the taxes in anticipation of which such transfers were made and from appropriations which may be made in annual school budgets of sums of money to apply on such general obligations.
(Source: P.A. 81-1506.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-35) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-35)
    Sec. 34-35. Resolution for transfer from fund-Amount transferred. Moneys shall be transferred from the working cash fund to the educational purposes fund only upon the authority of the board, which shall by resolution direct the school treasurer to make such transfers. The resolution shall set forth (a) the taxes or other funds in anticipation of the collection or receipt of which the working cash fund is to be reimbursed, (b) the entire amount of taxes extended, or which the board shall estimate will be extended or received, for any year in anticipation of the collection of all or part of which such transfer is to be made, (c) the aggregate amount of warrants or notes theretofore issued in anticipation of the collection of such taxes under the provisions of Sections 34-22 through 34-24 together with the amount of interest accrued and which the board of education estimates will accrue thereon, (d) the amount of moneys which the board of education estimates will be derived for any year from the common school fund of the State and from State appropriations in anticipation of the receipt of all or part of which such transfer is to be made, (e) the aggregate amount of receipts from taxes imposed to replace revenue lost by units of local government and school districts as a result of the abolition of ad valorem personal property taxes, pursuant to Article IX, Section 5(c) of the Constitution of the State of Illinois, which the corporate authorities estimate will be set aside for the payment of the proportionate amount of debt service and pension or retirement obligations, as required by Section 12 of "An Act in relation to State Revenue Sharing with local government entities", approved July 31, 1969, as amended, and (f) the aggregate amount of moneys theretofore transferred from the working cash fund to the educational purposes fund in anticipation of the collection of such taxes or of the receipt of such other moneys from the State. The amount which the resolution shall direct the school treasurer so to transfer in anticipation of the collection of taxes levied or to be received for any year, together with the aggregate amount of such anticipation tax warrants or notes theretofore drawn against such taxes and the amount of the interest accrued and estimated to accrue thereon, the amount estimated to be required to satisfy debt service and pension or retirement obligations, as set forth in Section 12 of "An Act in relation to State revenue sharing with local government entities", approved July 31, 1969, as amended, and the aggregate amount of such transfers theretofore made in anticipation of the collection of such taxes shall not exceed 90% of the actual or estimated amount of such taxes extended or to be extended or to be received as set forth in the resolution. The amount which the resolution shall direct the school treasurer so to transfer in anticipation of the receipt of moneys to be derived for any year from the common school fund of the State or from any State appropriation, together with the aggregate amount theretofore transferred in anticipation of the receipt of any such moneys, shall not exceed the total amount which it is so estimated will be received from such source. When moneys are available in the working cash fund they shall be transferred to the educational purposes fund and disbursed for the payment of salaries and other educational expenses so as to avoid, whenever possible, the issuance of tax anticipation warrants or notes.
(Source: P.A. 81-1506.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-36) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-36)
    Sec. 34-36. Violations of provisions-Liability. Any member of the board or any officer thereof or of the city, or any other person holding any other trust or employment under the board or city, who is guilty of the wilful violation of any of the provisions of Sections 34-30 through 34-35, shall be guilty of a business offense and may be fined not exceeding $10,000 and shall forfeit his right to his office, trust or employment and shall be removed therefrom. Any such member, officer or person shall be liable for any sum that may be unlawfully diverted from the working cash fund or otherwise used, to be recovered by the board or by any taxpayer in the name and for the benefit of the board in an appropriate civil action. A taxpayer so suing shall file a bond for and shall be liable for all costs taxed against the board in such suit. Nothing herein shall bar any other remedies.
(Source: P.A. 79-1366.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-37) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-37)
    Sec. 34-37. Abolishment of working cash funds. The board may abolish its working cash fund, upon the adoption of a resolution so providing, and directing the transfer of any balance in such fund to the educational purposes fund, effective upon the adoption of such resolution. Thereafter, all outstanding taxes of such board levied pursuant to Section 34-57 of this Article shall be collected and paid into the educational fund. Any obligation incurred by such board pursuant to Section 34-31 of this Article shall be discharged as therein provided. Nothing contained herein shall affect the validity of any existing obligations of the board.
(Source: P.A. 81-1221.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-38) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-38)
    Sec. 34-38. Re-creation of working cash fund. Nothing in this Article prevents a board which has abolished its working cash fund from again creating a working cash fund in the manner provided in Section 34-30 of this Article; provided, however that should the working cash fund be so recreated, the board shall not thereby be authorized to issue working cash fund bonds in an amount greater than the amount authorized at the time of abolition of such fund, and no tax shall be levied for the recreated working cash fund pursuant to Section 34-57 of this Article.
(Source: P.A. 81-1221.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/prec. Sec. 34-42 heading)
BUDGET AND APPROPRIATIONS

    (105 ILCS 5/34-42) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-42)
    Sec. 34-42. Fiscal year. The period commencing January 1, 1974 and ending August 31, 1974 shall be a fiscal year. Beginning September 1, 1974, each fiscal year of the board through fiscal year 1996 shall commence on September 1 of each year and end on August 31 of the following year. The period commencing September 1, 1996 and ending June 30, 1997 shall be a fiscal year. Beginning July 1, 1997 and thereafter, the fiscal year of the board shall commence on July 1 of each year and end on June 30 of the following year.
(Source: P.A. 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-42.1)
    Sec. 34-42.1. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 77-2734. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-42.2)
    Sec. 34-42.2. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 78-497. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-43) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-43)
    Sec. 34-43. Adoption of budget and resolution. The board shall, within the first 60 days of each fiscal year, adopt a budget and pass a resolution to be termed the "annual school budget", hereinafter called the "budget", in and by which the board, subject to the limitations hereinafter contained, shall appropriate such sums of money as may be required to defray all of its estimated expenses and liabilities to be paid or incurred during the fiscal year.
    The budget shall be balanced in each year within standards established by the board, consistent with the provisions of this Article.
    The budget may provide for the accumulation of funds for educational purposes as the board may direct for capital improvements or in order to achieve a balanced budget in a future year within the 4-year period of the board's financial plan to begin in that budget year. The budget may also provide for a reserve in the educational fund to ensure uninterrupted services in the event of unfavorable budget variances.
    The changes made to this Section by this amendatory Act of 1996 apply to budgets and amended and supplemental budgets for fiscal years beginning in 1995 and subsequent years.
(Source: P.A. 89-636, eff. 8-9-96.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-43a)
    Sec. 34-43a. Post annual budget on web site. The school district shall post its current annual school budget, itemized by receipts and expenditures, on the district's Internet web site. The school district shall notify the parents or guardians of its students that the budget has been posted on the district's web site and what the web site's address is.
(Source: P.A. 92-438, eff. 1-1-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-43.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-43.1)
    Sec. 34-43.1. (A) Limitation of noninstructional costs. It is the purpose of this Section to establish for the Board of Education and the general superintendent of schools requirements and standards which maximize the proportion of school district resources in direct support of educational, program, and building maintenance and safety services for the pupils of the district, and which correspondingly minimize the amount and proportion of such resources associated with centralized administration, administrative support services, and other noninstructional services.
    For the 1989-90 school year and for all subsequent school years, the Board of Education shall undertake budgetary and expenditure control actions which limit the administrative expenditures of the Board of Education to levels, as provided for in this Section, which represent an average of the administrative expenses of all school districts in this State not subject to Article 34.
    (B) Certification of expenses by the State Superintendent of Education. The State Superintendent of Education shall annually certify, on or before May 1, to the Board of Education and the School Finance Authority, for the applicable school year, the following information:
        (1) the annual expenditures of all school districts
    	
of the State not subject to Article 34 properly attributable to expenditure functions defined by the rules and regulations of the State Board of Education as: 2210 (Improvement of Instructional Services); 2300 (Support Services - General Administration) excluding, however, 2320 (Executive Administrative Services); 2490 (Other Support Services - School Administration); 2500 (Support Services - Business); 2600 (Support Services - Central);
        (2) the total annual expenditures of all school
    	
districts not subject to Article 34 attributable to the Education Fund, the Operations, Building and Maintenance Fund, the Transportation Fund and the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund of the several districts, as defined by the rules and regulations of the State Board of Education; and
        (3) a ratio, to be called the statewide average of
    	
administrative expenditures, derived by dividing the expenditures certified pursuant to paragraph (B)(1) by the expenditures certified pursuant to paragraph (B)(2).
    For purposes of the annual certification of expenditures and ratios required by this Section, the "applicable year" of certification shall initially be the 1986-87 school year and, in sequent years, each succeeding school year.
    The State Superintendent of Education shall consult with the Board of Education to ascertain whether particular expenditure items allocable to the administrative functions enumerated in paragraph (B)(1) are appropriately or necessarily higher in the applicable school district than in the rest of the State due to noncomparable factors. The State Superintendent shall also review the relevant cost proportions in other large urban school districts. The State Superintendent shall also review the expenditure categories in paragraph (B)(1) to ascertain whether they contain school-level expenses. If he or she finds that adjustments to the formula are appropriate or necessary to establish a more fair and comparable standard for administrative cost for the Board of Education or to exclude school-level expenses, the State Superintendent shall recommend to the School Finance Authority rules and regulations adjusting particular subcategories in this subsection (B) or adjusting certain costs in determining the budget and expenditure items properly attributable to the functions or otherwise adjust the formula.
    (C) Administrative expenditure limitations. The annual budget of the Board of Education, as adopted and implemented, and the related annual expenditures for the school year, shall reflect a limitation on administrative outlays as required by the following provisions, taking into account any adjustments established by the State Superintendent of Education: (1) the budget and expenditures of the Board of Education for the 1989-90 school year shall reflect a ratio of administrative expenditures to total expenditures equal to or less than the statewide average of administrative expenditures for the 1986-87 school year as certified by the State Superintendent of Education pursuant to paragraph (B)(3); (2) for the 1990-91 school year and for all subsequent school years, the budget and expenditures of the Board of Education shall reflect a ratio of administrative expenditures to total expenditures equal to or less than the statewide average of administrative expenditures certified by the State Superintendent of Education for the applicable year pursuant to paragraph (B)(3); (3) if for any school year the budget of the Board of Education reflects a ratio of administrative expenditures to total expenditures which exceeds the applicable statewide average, the Board of Education shall reduce expenditure items allocable to the administrative functions enumerated in paragraph (B)(1) such that the Board of Education's ratio of administrative expenditures to total expenditures is equal to or less than the applicable statewide average ratio.
    For purposes of this Section, the ratio of administrative expenditures to the total expenditures of the Board of Education, as applied to the budget of the Board of Education, shall mean: the budgeted expenditure items of the Board of Education properly attributable to the expenditure functions identified in paragraph (B)(1) divided by the total budgeted expenditures of the Board of Education properly attributable to the Board of Education funds corresponding to those funds identified in paragraph (B)(2), exclusive of any monies budgeted for payment to the Public School Teachers' Pension and Retirement System, attributable to payments due from the General Funds of the State of Illinois.
    The annual expenditure of the Board of Education for 2320 (Executive Administrative Services) for the 1989-90 school year shall be no greater than the 2320 expenditure for the 1988-89 school year. The annual expenditure of the Board of Education for 2320 for the 1990-91 school year and each subsequent school year shall be no greater than the 2320 expenditure for the immediately preceding school year or the 1988-89 school year, whichever is less. This annual expenditure limitation may be adjusted in each year in an amount not to exceed any change effective during the applicable school year in salary to be paid under the collective bargaining agreement with instructional personnel to which the Board is a party and in benefit costs either required by law or such collective bargaining agreement.
    (D) Cost control measures. In undertaking actions to control or reduce expenditure items necessitated by the administrative expenditure limitations of this Section, the Board of Education shall give priority consideration to reductions or cost controls with the least effect upon direct services to students or instructional services for pupils, and upon the safety and well-being of pupils, and, as applicable, with the particular costs or functions to which the Board of Education is higher than the statewide average.
    For purposes of assuring that the cost control priorities of this subsection (D) are met, the State Superintendent of Education shall, with the assistance of the Board of Education, review the cost allocation practices of the Board of Education, and the State Superintendent of Education shall thereafter recommend to the School Finance Authority rules and regulations which define administrative areas which most impact upon the direct and instructional needs of students and upon the safety and well-being of the pupils of the district. No position closed shall be reopened using State or federal categorical funds.
    (E) Report of Audited Information. For the 1988-89 school year and for all subsequent school years, the Board of Education shall file with the State Board of Education the Annual Financial Report and its audit, as required by the rules of the State Board of Education. Such reports shall be filed no later than February 15 following the end of the school year of the Board of Education, beginning with the report to be filed no later than February 15, 1990 for the 1988-89 school year.
    As part of the required Annual Financial Report, the Board of Education shall provide a detailed accounting of the central level, district, bureau and department costs and personnel included within expenditure functions included in paragraph (B)(1). The nature and detail of the reporting required for these functions shall be prescribed by the State Board of Education in rules and regulations. A copy of this detailed accounting shall also be provided annually to the School Finance Authority and the public. This report shall contain a reconciliation to the board of education's adopted budget for that fiscal year, specifically delineating administrative functions.
    If the information required under this Section is not provided by the Board of Education in a timely manner, or is initially or subsequently determined by the State Superintendent of Education to be incomplete or inaccurate, the State Superintendent shall, in writing, notify the Board of Education of reporting deficiencies. The Board of Education shall, within 60 days of such notice, address the reporting deficiencies identified. If the State Superintendent of Education does not receive satisfactory response to these reporting deficiencies within 60 days, the next payment of general State aid or evidence-based funding due the Board of Education under Section 18-8 or Section 18-8.15, as applicable, and all subsequent payments, shall be withheld by the State Superintendent of Education until the enumerated deficiencies have been addressed.
    Utilizing the Annual Financial Report, the State Superintendent of Education shall certify on or before May 1 to the School Finance Authority the Board of Education's ratio of administrative expenditures to total expenditures for the 1988-89 school year and for each succeeding school year. Such certification shall indicate the extent to which the administrative expenditure ratio of the Board of Education conformed to the limitations required in subsection (C) of this Section, taking into account any adjustments of the limitations which may have been recommended by the State Superintendent of Education to the School Finance Authority. In deriving the administrative expenditure ratio of the Chicago Board of Education, the State Superintendent of Education shall utilize the definition of this ratio prescribed in subsection (C) of this Section, except that the actual expenditures of the Board of Education shall be substituted for budgeted expenditure items.
    (F) Approval and adjustments to administrative expenditure limitations. The School Finance Authority organized under Article 34A shall monitor the Board of Education's adherence to the requirements of this Section. As part of its responsibility the School Finance Authority shall determine whether the Board of Education's budget for the next school year, and the expenditures for a prior school year, comply with the limitation of administrative expenditures required by this Section. The Board of Education and the State Board of Education shall provide such information as is required by the School Finance Authority in order for the Authority to determine compliance with the provisions of this Section. If the Authority determines that the budget proposed by the Board of Education does not meet the cost control requirements of this Section, the Board of Education shall undertake budgetary reductions, consistent with the requirements of this Section, to bring the proposed budget into compliance with such cost control limitations.
    If, in formulating cost control and cost reduction alternatives, the Board of Education believes that meeting the cost control requirements of this Section related to the budget for the ensuing year would impair the education, safety, or well-being of the pupils of the school district, the Board of Education may request that the School Finance Authority make adjustments to the limitations required by this Section. The Board of Education shall specify the amount, nature, and reasons for the relief required and shall also identify cost reductions which can be made in expenditure functions not enumerated in paragraph (B)(1), which would serve the purposes of this Section.
    The School Finance Authority shall consult with the State Superintendent of Education concerning the reasonableness from an educational administration perspective of the adjustments sought by the Board of Education. The School Finance Authority shall provide an opportunity for the public to comment upon the reasonableness of the Board's request. If, after such consultation, the School Finance Authority determines that all or a portion of the adjustments sought by the Board of Education are reasonably appropriate or necessary, the Authority may grant such relief from the provisions of this Section which the Authority deems appropriate. Adjustments so granted apply only to the specific school year for which the request was made.
    In the event that the School Finance Authority determines that the Board of Education has failed to achieve the required administrative expenditure limitations for a prior school year, or if the Authority determines that the Board of Education has not met the requirements of subsection (F), the Authority shall make recommendations to the Board of Education concerning appropriate corrective actions. If the Board of Education fails to provide adequate assurance to the Authority that appropriate corrective actions have been or will be taken, the Authority may, within 60 days thereafter, require the board to adjust its current budget to correct for the prior year's shortage or may recommend to the members of the General Assembly and the Governor such sanctions or remedial actions as will serve to deter any further such failures on the part of the Board of Education.
    To assist the Authority in its monitoring responsibilities, the Board of Education shall provide such reports and information as are from time to time required by the Authority.
    (G) Independent reviews of administrative expenditures. The School Finance Authority may direct independent reviews of the administrative and administrative support expenditures and services and other non-instructional expenditure functions of the Board of Education. The Board of Education shall afford full cooperation to the School Finance Authority in such review activity. The purpose of such reviews shall be to verify specific targets for improved operating efficiencies of the Board of Education, to identify other areas of potential efficiencies, and to assure full and proper compliance by the Board of Education with all requirements of this Section.
    In the conduct of reviews under this subsection, the Authority may request the assistance and consultation of the State Superintendent of Education with regard to questions of efficiency and effectiveness in educational administration.
    (H) Reports to Governor and General Assembly. On or before May 1, 1991 and no less frequently than yearly thereafter, the School Finance Authority shall provide to the Governor, the State Board of Education, and the members of the General Assembly an annual report, as outlined in Section 34A-606, which includes the following information: (1) documenting the compliance or non-compliance of the Board of Education with the requirements of this Section; (2) summarizing the costs, findings, and recommendations of any reviews directed by the School Finance Authority, and the response to such recommendations made by the Board of Education; and (3) recommending sanctions or legislation necessary to fulfill the intent of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-44) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-44)
    Sec. 34-44. Budget estimates. The budget shall set forth estimates, by classes, of all current assets and liabilities of each fund of the board as of the beginning of the fiscal year, and the amounts of such assets estimated to be available for appropriation in such year, either for expenditures or charges to be made or incurred during such year or for liabilities unpaid at the beginning thereof. Estimates of taxes to be received from prior levies shall be net, after deducting amounts estimated to be sufficient to cover the loss and cost of collecting such taxes and also deferred collections thereof and abatements in the amount of such taxes extended or to be extended upon the collectors' books.
    Estimates of the liabilities of the respective funds shall include:
    1. All final judgments, including accrued interest thereon, entered against the board and unpaid at the beginning of such fiscal year;
    2. The principal of all general obligation notes or anticipation tax warrants and all temporary loans and all accrued interest thereon unpaid at the beginning of such fiscal year;
    3. Any amount for which the board is required to reimburse the working cash fund from the educational purposes fund pursuant to the provisions of Section 34-30 through 34-36 and
    4. The amount of all accounts payable including estimates of audited vouchers, participation certificates, inter fund loans and purchase orders payable.
    The budget shall also set forth detailed estimates of all accrued tax revenues recognized for such year and of all current revenues to be derived from sources other than taxes, including State contributions, rents, fees, perquisites and all other types of revenue, which will be applicable to expenditures or charges to be made or incurred during such year.
    All such estimates shall be so segregated and classified as to funds, and in such other manner as to give effect to the requirements of law relating to the respective purposes to which the assets and taxes and other current revenues are applicable, so that no expenditure shall be authorized or made for any purpose in excess of the money lawfully available therefor.
    The several estimates of assets, liabilities and expenditure requirements required or authorized to be made by this and the next succeeding section shall be made on the basis of information known to the board at the close of the preceding fiscal year and shall not be invalidated or otherwise subject to attack merely because after that time additional information is known to or could be discovered by the board that would require a different estimate, or because the board might have amended such estimates under any of the provisions of Section 34-47.
(Source: P.A. 84-1238.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-44.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-44.1)
    Sec. 34-44.1. Supplemental budget estimate. When the value of the taxable property in the school district is increased either by the establishment of a new multiplier by the Department of Revenue or the availability of a later assessment by virtue of additions to the tax rolls or increases in assessments made by the county assessor after the annual school budget has been adopted, the board of education may adopt, by a 2/3 vote of the full membership of the board, a supplemental budget to provide for the use of the added potential revenues in an amount that shall not exceed a sum equivalent to the product of the amount of the increase in the value of taxable property in the district multiplied by the maximum per cent or rate of tax which the board and the corporate authorities of the city are authorized by law to levy for the current fiscal year for educational, building, free textbook, agricultural science school, supervised playground outside school hours purposes (or supervised playground outside school hours and stadia, social center and summer swimming pool open to the public purposes, as the case may be) or special education purposes. With respect to any supplemental budget based upon an increase in the value of the taxable property in the school district, such supplemental budget shall be adopted within 60 days of the date of the final certification of the equalization rate by the Department of Revenue to the county clerk as provided in the Property Tax Code, regardless of whether the adoption occurs within or after the close of the fiscal year to which the increase applies, but shall not become effective unless approved in accordance with Article 34A of "The School Code".
(Source: P.A. 88-670, eff. 12-2-94.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-45) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-45)
    Sec. 34-45. Budget appropriations. The budget shall specify:
        1. the several organization units, purposes, and
    	
objects for which appropriations are made;
        2. the amount appropriated for each organization
    	
unit, purpose or object; and
        3. the fund from or to which each amount
    	
appropriated is to be paid or charged.
    The budget shall include appropriations for:
        1. all estimated current expenditures or charges to
    	
be made or incurred during such fiscal year, including interest to accrue on anticipation tax warrants and temporary loans;
        2. all final judgments, including accrued interest
    	
thereon, entered against the board and unpaid at the beginning of such fiscal year;
        3. any amount for which the board is required to
    	
reimburse the working cash fund from the educational purposes fund pursuant to Sections 34-30 through 34-36; and
        4. all other estimated liabilities, including the
    	
principal of all tax anticipation warrants and all temporary loans and all accrued interest thereon, incurred during prior years and unpaid at the beginning of such fiscal year.
(Source: P.A. 84-1238.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-45.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-45.1)
    Sec. 34-45.1. The amount appropriated in any annual, additional or supplemental school budget adopted pursuant to this Article and specified in such budget to be for workers' compensation, workers' occupational diseases compensation and unemployment compensation purposes shall include a sum estimated to be sufficient to cover the anticipated costs of operating and administering the workers' compensation, workers' occupational diseases compensation and unemployment compensation program for the purpose of which such amount was appropriated, including employee wages, salaries and the cost of legal services furnished in connection with the operation and administration of such program. Liabilities incurred for such operating and administrative costs, including employee wages and salaries and the cost of legal services, shall upon being vouchered, audited and approved by the board as provided in Section 34-51 be charged to and paid from the fund of moneys appropriated for such purpose.
(Source: P.A. 83-718.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-46) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-46)
    Sec. 34-46. Public participation. The budget shall be prepared in tentative form by the board and in such form shall be made available to public inspection for at least 15 days prior to final action thereon, by having at least 5 copies thereof on file in the office of the secretary of the board. Not less than 5 days after such copies are so placed on file and prior to final action thereon, the board shall hold at least 2 public hearings thereon, of which notice shall be given at least once by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the city at least 5 days prior to the time of the hearing. The board shall arrange for and hold such public hearing or hearings, provided that the final public hearing shall occur not less than 5 days prior to the Board's final action on the budget. The board shall cause its budget to be published in its proceedings within 30 days after its adoption.
(Source: P.A. 82-764.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-47) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-47)
    Sec. 34-47. Revision of items - Amendment - Publication. Subsequent to the public hearing provided for in Section 34-46 and before final action on the budget, the board may revise, alter, increase, or decrease the items contained therein, but the aggregate amount finally appropriated by the budget, including any subsequent amendment thereof, from any fund or for any purpose, including amounts appropriated for judgments and all other unpaid liabilities and all other purposes for which such authorities are herein or otherwise by law required to appropriate, shall not exceed the aggregate amount available in such fund or for such purpose, as shown by the estimates of the available assets thereof at the beginning of such fiscal year and of taxes and other current revenues set forth in the budget. If the appropriations from any fund as set forth in the budget as finally adopted exceed in the aggregate the maximum amount which the board is authorized to appropriate therefrom, all appropriations made from such fund by the budget shall be void and the several amounts appropriated in the budget of the last preceding fiscal year, so far as they relate to operation and maintenance expenses, shall be deemed to be appropriated for the current fiscal year for objects and purposes, respectively, as specified in said last budget and the several amounts so appropriated shall constitute lawful appropriations for the current fiscal year, but not in excess of amounts which will enable the Board to comply with the requirements of Section 34A-402.
    The board of education may amend the budget from time to time by the same procedure as is herein provided for the original adoption of the budget.
(Source: P.A. 82-1020.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-48) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-48)
    Sec. 34-48. Supplemental budgets - Emergencies. After the effectiveness of the budget (other than an interim budget), the board shall not make any other appropriations prior to the adoption or passage of the next succeeding budget. The board may not, either directly or indirectly, make any contract or do any act which shall add to its expenditures or liabilities, in any fiscal year, any thing or sum above the amount provided for in the budget for that fiscal year except that the board may, at any time after the adoption of the annual school budget, by a 2/3 vote of the full membership of the board, pass an additional or supplemental budget, thereby adding appropriations to those made in the annual school budget and such supplemental or additional school budget shall be regarded as an amendment of the annual school budget for that year; provided that any such additional or supplemental appropriations so made shall not exceed the amount of additional moneys which the board of education will have available for appropriation in that year from any source, including any fund balances not previously appropriated, over and above the amount of moneys which the board, at the time of the adoption of its annual budget for that year, estimated would be available for appropriation from such sources, or provided that the board, by a concurring vote of 2/3 of all the members thereof (said votes to be taken by yeas and nays and entered in the proceedings of the board) may make any expenditures and incur any liability rendered necessary to meet emergencies such as epidemics, fires, unforeseen damages or other catastrophes happening after the annual school budget has been passed or adopted. This section does not prevent the board from providing for and causing to be paid from its funds any charge imposed by law without the action of the board.
(Source: P.A. 82-765.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-49) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-49)
    Sec. 34-49. Contracts, expense and liabilities without appropriation. No contract shall be made or expense or liability incurred by the board, or any member or committee thereof, or by any person for or in its behalf, notwithstanding the expenditure may have been ordered by the board, unless an appropriation therefor has been previously made. Neither the board, nor any member or committee, officer, head of any department or bureau, or employee thereof shall during a fiscal year expend or contract to be expended any money, or incur any liability, or enter into any contract which by its terms involves the expenditure of money for any of the purposes for which provision is made in the budget, in excess of the amounts appropriated in the budget. Any contract, verbal or written, made in violation of this Section is void as to the board, and no moneys belonging thereto shall be paid thereon. Provided, however, that the board may lease from any Public Building Commission created pursuant to the provisions of the Public Building Commission Act, approved July 5, 1955, as heretofore or hereafter amended, or from any individuals, partnerships or corporations, any real or personal property for the purpose of securing space for its school purposes or office or other space for its administrative functions for any period of time not exceeding 40 years, and such lease may be made and the obligation or expense thereunder incurred without making a previous appropriation therefor, except as otherwise provided in Section 34-21.1 of this Act. Provided that the board may enter into agreements, including lease and lease purchase agreements having a term not longer than 40 years from the date on which such agreements are entered into, with individuals, partnerships, or corporations for the construction of school buildings, school administrative offices, site development, and school support facilities. The board shall maintain exclusive possession of all such schools, school administrative offices, and school facilities which it is occupying or acquiring pursuant to any such lease or lease purchase agreement, and in addition shall have and exercise complete control over the education program conducted at such schools, offices and facilities. The board's contribution under any such lease or lease purchase agreement shall be limited to the use of the real estate and existing improvements on a rental basis which shall be exempt from any form of leasehold tax or assessment, but the interests of the board may be subordinated to the interests of a mortgage holder or holders acquired as security for additional improvements made on the property. Provided that the board may enter into agreements, including lease and lease purchase agreements, having a term not longer than 40 years from the date on which such agreements are entered into for the provision of school buildings and related property and facilities for an agricultural science school pursuant to subparagraphs (8) through (10) of Section 34-21.1; and such agreements may be made and the obligations thereunder incurred without making a previous appropriation therefor. This Section does not prevent the making of lawful contracts for the construction of buildings, the purchase of insurance, the leasing of equipment, the purchase of personal property by a conditional sales agreement, or the leasing of personal property under an agreement that upon compliance with the terms of which the board shall become or has the option to become the owner of the property for no additional consideration or for a nominal consideration, the term of which may be for periods of more than 1 year, but, in no case, shall such conditional sales agreements or leases of personal property by which the board may or will become the owner of the personal property, provide for the consideration to be paid during a period of time in excess of 10 years nor shall such contracts provide for the payment of interest in excess of the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, on the unpaid balance owing; nor shall this Section prevent the making of lawful contracts for the purchase of fuel and the removal of ashes for a period from July 1 of any year to June 30 of the year following, or the making of lawful contracts for the transportation of pupils to and from school, or the entering into of employment contracts with individuals or groups of employees for any period not to exceed 4 years, or the entering into contracts with third parties for services otherwise performed by employees for any period not to exceed 5 years provided that the contracts with third parties for services provided at attendance centers shall specify that the principal of an attendance center shall have authority, to the maximum extent possible, to direct persons assigned to the attendance center pursuant to that contract, or the making of requirement contracts for not to exceed one year the terms of which may extend into the succeeding fiscal year provided, however, that such contracts contain a limitation on the amount to be expended and that such contracts shall impose no obligation on the board except pursuant to written purchase order.
    With respect to instruments for the payment of money issued under this Section either before, on, or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1989, it is and always has been the intention of the General Assembly (i) that the Omnibus Bond Acts are and always have been supplementary grants of power to issue instruments in accordance with the Omnibus Bond Acts, regardless of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts, (ii) that the provisions of this Section are not a limitation on the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts, and (iii) that instruments issued under this Section within the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts are not invalid because of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts.
(Source: P.A. 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-50) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-50)
    Sec. 34-50. Transfers between appropriations - Delay. The board may, at any time by a two-thirds vote of all the members authorize the making of transfers within any fund under its jurisdiction, of sums of money appropriated for one object or purpose to another object or purpose, which action shall be entered in its proceedings; provided that during the first half of each fiscal year such transfers shall not exceed 10% of any such fund, but no appropriation for any purpose shall be reduced below an amount sufficient to cover all obligations incurred or to be incurred against the appropriation for such purpose.
(Source: P.A. 81-1221.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-51) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-51)
    Sec. 34-51. Appropriation not to be construed as approval of board of liabilities.
    The appropriation resolution or budget, including the amounts for the payment of contract liabilities or to defray the expense of any project or purpose, shall not be construed as an approval by the board of any such liabilities or of any project or purpose mentioned, but shall be regarded only as the provisions for a fund or funds for the payment thereof when such liabilities have been found to be valid and legal obligations against the board, and when properly vouchered, audited and approved by the board, or when any project or purpose is approved and authorized by the board, as the case may be.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-52) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-52)
    Sec. 34-52. Wilful violation of budget provisions. Any member of the board, or any officer thereof or of the city or any other person holding any trust or employment under the board or city who wilfully violates any of the provisions of Sections 34-43 through 34-51 shall be guilty of a business offense and may be fined not exceeding $10,000, and shall forfeit his right to his office, trust or employment and shall be removed therefrom. Any such member, officer or person shall be liable for the amount of any loss or damage suffered by the board resulting from any act of his in violation of the terms of any of those sections, to be recovered by the board or by any taxpayer in the name and for the benefit of the board, in an appropriate civil action. Any taxpayer bringing any such action must file a bond for all costs, and shall be liable for all costs taxed against the board in such suit, and judgment shall be rendered accordingly. This Section does not bar any other remedies.
(Source: P.A. 79-1366.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-52.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-52.1)
    Sec. 34-52.1. Form of ballot and notice. Whenever any proposition to authorize or to levy an annual tax, or to increase the annual rate of tax levied by any school district, for any school purpose is submitted to the voters of such district at any election, each required notice or other publication of the election or referendum and the form of ballot shall contain, in addition to any other matters required by law:
    (a) the geographic or other common name of the school district by which that district is commonly known and referred to, as well as the number of the district;
    (b) the maximum rate at which such tax may be levied if the proposition is approved; and
    (c) if the proposition is to increase the annual rate of an existing tax levied by the school district, then in addition to the matters set forth in (a) and (b) above, the annual rate at which such existing tax currently is levied and the percentage of increase between the maximum rate at which such tax may be levied if the proposition is approved and the annual rate at which such tax currently is levied.
(Source: P.A. 85-374.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-53) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-53)
    Sec. 34-53. Tax levies; purpose; rates. For the purpose of establishing and supporting free schools for not fewer than 9 months in each year and defraying their expenses the board may levy annually, upon all taxable property of such district for educational purposes a tax for the fiscal years 1996 and each succeeding fiscal year at a rate of not to exceed the sum of (i) 3.07% (or such other rate as may be set by law independent of the rate difference described in (ii) below) and (ii) the difference between .50% and the rate per cent of taxes extended for a School Finance Authority organized under Article 34A of the School Code, for the calendar year in which the applicable fiscal year of the board begins as determined by the county clerk and certified to the board pursuant to Section 18-110 of the Property Tax Code, of the value as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue for the year in which such levy is made.
    Beginning on the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 99th General Assembly, for the purpose of making an employer contribution to the Public School Teachers' Pension and Retirement Fund of Chicago, the board may levy annually for taxable years prior to 2017, upon all taxable property located within the district, a tax at a rate not to exceed 0.383%. Beginning with the 2017 taxable year, for the purpose of making an employer contribution to the Public School Teachers' Pension and Retirement Fund of Chicago, the board may levy annually, upon all taxable property within the district, a tax at a rate not to exceed 0.567%. The proceeds from this additional tax shall be paid, as soon as possible after collection, directly to Public School Teachers' Pension and Retirement Fund of Chicago and not to the Board of Education. The rate under this paragraph is not a new rate for the purposes of the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, for the 2016 tax year only, the board shall certify the rate to the county clerk on the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 99th General Assembly, and the county clerk shall extend that rate against all taxable property located within the district as soon after receiving the certification as possible.
    Nothing in this amendatory Act of 1995 shall in any way impair or restrict the levy or extension of taxes pursuant to any tax levies for any purposes of the board lawfully made prior to the adoption of this amendatory Act of 1995.
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code and in addition to any other methods provided for increasing the tax rate the board may, by proper resolution, cause a proposition to increase the annual tax rate for educational purposes to be submitted to the voters of such district at any general or special election. The maximum rate for educational purposes shall not exceed 4.00%. The election called for such purpose shall be governed by Article 9 of this Act. If at such election a majority of the votes cast on the proposition is in favor thereof, the Board of Education may thereafter until such authority is revoked in a like manner, levy annually the tax so authorized.
    For purposes of this Article, educational purposes for fiscal years beginning in 1995 and each subsequent year shall also include, but not be limited to, in addition to those purposes authorized before this amendatory Act of 1995, constructing, acquiring, leasing (other than from the Public Building Commission of Chicago), operating, maintaining, improving, repairing, and renovating land, buildings, furnishings, and equipment for school houses and buildings, and related incidental expenses, and provision of special education, furnishing free textbooks and instructional aids and school supplies, establishing, equipping, maintaining, and operating supervised playgrounds under the control of the board, school extracurricular activities, and stadia, social center, and summer swimming pool programs open to the public in connection with any public school; making an employer contribution to the Public School Teachers' Pension and Retirement Fund as required by Section 17-129 of the Illinois Pension Code; and providing an agricultural science school, including site development and improvements, maintenance repairs, and supplies. Educational purposes also includes student transportation expenses.
    All collections of all taxes levied for fiscal years ending before 1996 under this Section or under Sections 34-53.2, 34-53.3, 34-58, 34-60, or 34-62 of this Article as in effect prior to this amendatory Act of 1995 may be used for any educational purposes as defined by this amendatory Act of 1995 and need not be used for the particular purposes for which they were levied. The levy and extension of taxes pursuant to this Section as amended by this amendatory Act of 1995 shall not constitute a new or increased tax rate within the meaning of the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law or the One-year Property Tax Extension Limitation Law.
    The rate at which taxes may be levied for the fiscal year beginning September 1, 1996, for educational purposes shall be the full rate authorized by this Section for such taxes for fiscal years ending after 1995.
(Source: P.A. 99-521, eff. 6-1-17; 100-465, eff. 8-31-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-53.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-53.1)
    Sec. 34-53.1. Supplemental tax levy. When a supplemental budget has been adopted by the board of education under Section 34-44.1 the board of education may levy supplemental taxes which shall not exceed the amount of the increase in revenues projected in the supplemental budget nor exceed the maximum rates of taxes which the board is authorized by law to levy for the fiscal year to which the increase applies for the respective purposes. With respect to any supplemental levy based on an increase in the value of taxable property in the school district, such supplemental levy shall be adopted within 60 days of the date of the final certification of the equalization rate by the Department of Revenue to the county clerk as provided in the Property Tax Code, irrespective of whether the adoption occurs within or after the close of the fiscal year to which the increase applies. The board is authorized to levy supplemental taxes pursuant to this Section.
(Source: P.A. 88-670, eff. 12-2-94.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-53.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-53.2)
    Sec. 34-53.2. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-53.3) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-53.3)
    Sec. 34-53.3. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-53.5)
    Sec. 34-53.5. Capital improvement tax levy; purpose; maximum amount.
    (a) For the purpose of providing a reliable source of revenue for capital improvement purposes, including without limitation (i) the construction and equipping of a new school building or buildings or an addition or additions to an existing school building or buildings, (ii) the purchase of school grounds on which any new school building or an addition to an existing school building is to be constructed or located, (iii) both items (i) and (ii) of this subsection (a), or (iv) the rehabilitation, renovation, and equipping of an existing school building or buildings, the board may levy, upon all taxable property of the school district, in calendar year 2003, a capital improvement tax to produce, when extended, an amount not to exceed the product attained by multiplying (1) the percentage increase, if any, in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers for all items published by the United States Department of Labor for the 12 months ending 2 months prior to the month in which the levy is adopted by (2) $142,500,000. For example, if the percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index is 2.5%, then the computation would be $142,500,000 x 0.025 = $3,562,500.
    (b) In each calendar year from 2004 through 2030, the board may levy a capital improvement tax to produce, when extended, an amount not to exceed the sum of (1) the maximum amount that could have been levied by the board in the preceding calendar year pursuant to this Section and (2) the product obtained by multiplying (A) the sum of (i) the maximum amount that could have been levied by the board in the preceding calendar year pursuant to this Section and (ii) $142,500,000 by (B) the percentage increase, if any, in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers for all items published by the United States Department of Labor for the 12 months ending 2 months prior to the month in which the levy is adopted.
    (c) In calendar year 2031, the board may levy a capital improvement tax to produce, when extended, an amount not to exceed the sum of (1) the maximum amount that could have been levied by the board in calendar year 2030 pursuant to this Section, (2) $142,500,000, and (3) the product obtained by multiplying (A) the sum of (i) the maximum amount that could have been levied by the board in calendar year 2030 pursuant to this Section and (ii) $142,500,000 by (B) the percentage increase, if any, in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers for all items published by the United States Department of Labor for the 12 months ending 2 months prior to the month in which the levy is adopted.
    (d) In calendar year 2032 and each calendar year thereafter, the board may levy a capital improvement tax to produce, when extended, an amount not to exceed the sum of (1) the maximum amount that could have been levied by the board in the preceding calendar year pursuant to this Section and (2) the product obtained by multiplying (A) the maximum amount that could have been levied by the board in the preceding calendar year pursuant to this Section by (B) the percentage increase, if any, in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers for all items published by the United States Department of Labor for the 12 months ending 2 months prior to the month in which the levy is adopted.
    (e) An initial tax levy made by the board under this Section must have the approval of the Chicago City Council, by resolution, before the levy may be extended. The board shall communicate its adoption of the initial tax levy by delivering a certified copy of the levy resolution to the Clerk of the City of Chicago. The Chicago City Council shall have 60 days after receipt, by the Clerk of the City of Chicago, of the certified resolution to approve or disapprove the levy. The failure of the Chicago City Council to take action to approve or disapprove the initial tax levy within the 60-day period shall be deemed disapproval of the initial tax levy. Upon the adoption of each subsequent levy by the board under this Section, the board must notify the Chicago City Council that the board has adopted the levy.
    (f) The board may issue bonds, in accordance with the Local Government Debt Reform Act, including Section 15 of that Act, against any revenues to be collected from the capital improvement tax in any year or years and may pledge, pursuant to Section 13 of the Local Government Debt Reform Act, those revenues as security for the payment of any such bonds.
(Source: P.A. 92-547, eff. 6-13-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-53A)
    Sec. 34-53A. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 89-15, eff. 5-30-95. Repealed by P.A. 89-698, eff. 1-14-97.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-54)
    Sec. 34-54. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 86-1477. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-54.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-54.1)
    Sec. 34-54.1. Tax levies and extensions. The annual tax rates and the several tax levies authorized to be made shall be: (i) for each fiscal year through and including the 1995-96 fiscal year, for a fiscal year commencing September 1 and ending August 31; (ii) for the 1996-97 fiscal year, for a fiscal year commencing September 1 and ending June 30; and (iii) for each subsequent fiscal year, for a fiscal year commencing July 1 and ending June 30.
    Notwithstanding any provision in this Article 34 to the contrary, by the last Tuesday in December of each calendar year, the board of education may levy upon all the taxable property of the district or city, the annual taxes required to provide the necessary revenue to defray expenditures, charges and liabilities incurred by the board for the fiscal year beginning in that calendar year. The levy may be based upon the estimated equalized assessed valuation provided the county clerk shall extend for collection only so much thereof as is permitted by law. The total amount of the levy shall be certified to the county clerk who shall extend for collection only so much thereof as is required to provide the necessary revenue to defray expenditures, charges and liabilities incurred by the board as certified by the controller of the board to the county clerk upon the value, as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue for the calendar year in which the levy was made. The county clerk shall thereafter in the succeeding calendar year extend such remaining amount of the levy as is certified by the controller of the board to the county clerk upon the value, as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue for such calendar year. In each year the county clerk shall extend taxes at a rate sufficient to produce the full amount of the 2 partial levies attributable to that tax year. Provided, however, and notwithstanding the provisions of any other law to the contrary: (a) the extension of taxes levied for fiscal years ending before 1996 for building purposes and school supervised playground outside school hours and stadia, social center and summer swimming pool purposes which the county clerk shall make against the value of all taxable property of the district or city, as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue, shall be at the respective maximum rates at which the board was authorized to levy taxes for such purposes for the fiscal year which ends in 1995; and (b) notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, in each calendar year the taxes for educational purposes shall be extended at a rate certified by the controller as referred to in this Section, which rate shall not be in excess of the maximum rate for the levy of taxes for educational purposes, occurring in the fiscal year which begins in the calendar year of the extension, (whether or not actually levied at that rate) except for calendar year 1995 in which the rate shall not be in excess of the maximum rate which would be provided for the levy of taxes for educational purposes for the fiscal year which begins in 1995 without regard to this amendatory Act of 1995. In calendar year 1995, the county clerk shall extend any special education purposes tax which was levied as provided in Section 34-53.2 in full in the calendar year following the year in which the levy of such a tax was made.
(Source: P.A. 88-511; 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-54.2) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-54.2)
    Sec. 34-54.2. Taxes levied in 1989 and 1990.
    (a) All real property taxes levied by the board in 1989 and 1990 are confirmed and validated, and are declared to be and are valid, in all respects as if they had been timely and properly levied by the city council upon the demand and direction of the Board. It shall not be a valid ground for any person in any way to object to, protest, bring any proceeding with regard to or defend against the collection of any such taxes, that the taxes were levied by the board.
    (b) The board may levy taxes against all taxable property located within the city in an amount equal to all taxes purported to be levied by the board in 1989 and in 1990, for each purpose for which taxes were purported so to be levied, to the extent those taxes shall not yet have been extended for collection at the time of the levy authorized by this paragraph (b). The taxes authorized to be levied by this paragraph (b) shall be levied by a resolution of the board selected pursuant to Public Act 86-1477. The resolution shall be adopted upon concurrence of a majority of the members of the board. The taxes levied pursuant to this paragraph (b) shall be extended for collection in 1991 and subsequent years and in amounts so that they do not exceed the maximum rates at which taxes may be extended for the various school purposes, all as shall be set forth in a certificate of the controller of the board as provided in Section 34-54.1 of this Code. Taxes levied pursuant to this paragraph (b) shall be in addition to all other taxes which have been or may be levied by or for the board, except that the extension of taxes levied pursuant to this paragraph (b), to the extent valid and legal in all respects, shall be an abatement of the same amount of taxes previously purported to be levied by the board which were to have been extended in the same year for the same purpose, it being the intention of the General Assembly that there not be extended duplicate taxes for the same year and purpose. It shall not be necessary that the board give any notice or conduct any hearings for any purpose whatsoever or to have adopted any proceedings with respect to any budget, in connection with the levy and extension of taxes pursuant to this paragraph (b). The board shall cause a certified copy of its resolution levying taxes pursuant to this paragraph (b) to be filed with the county clerk of each county in which any taxable property in the city is located within 30 days after the adoption of the resolution.
(Source: P.A. 100-201, eff. 8-18-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-55) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-55)
    Sec. 34-55. Expenditures in excess of receipts. The board shall not add to the expenditures for school purposes anything above the amount received from the State common school fund, the rental of school lands or property, funds otherwise received, and the amount of school taxes levied and to be levied for educational and for building purposes. If the board does so add to such expenditures the city shall not be liable therefor. The board is authorized to levy all taxes as provided for in this Article.
(Source: P.A. 85-1418; 86-1477.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-56) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-56)
    Sec. 34-56. Amount to cover loss and cost of collecting tax not added. In ascertaining the rate per cent that will produce the amount of any tax levied pursuant to the authority granted by Section 34-53, the county clerk shall not add any amount to cover the loss and cost of collecting the tax.
(Source: P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-57) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-57)
    Sec. 34-57. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-58) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-58)
    Sec. 34-58. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-59) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-59)
    Sec. 34-59. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-60) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-60)
    Sec. 34-60. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-61) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-61)
    Sec. 34-61. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-62) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-62)
    Sec. 34-62. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-63) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-63)
    Sec. 34-63. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 89-15, eff. 5-30-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-64) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-64)
    Sec. 34-64. Numbering warrants-Contents-Interest. Warrants issued under Sections 34-24, 34-59, and 34-63 shall be numbered consecutively in the order of their issuance and shall show upon their face that they are payable solely from the respective taxes when collected and that payment thereof will be made in the order of their issuance, beginning with the warrant having the lowest number, and shall be received by any collector of taxes in payment of taxes against which they are issued and such taxes against which the warrants are drawn shall be set apart for their payment. The warrants shall bear interest, payable out of the taxes against which they are drawn, at a rate of not to exceed 7% per annum if issued before July 1, 1971 and if issued thereafter at the rate of not to exceed 6% per annum, from the date of their issuance until paid or until notice is given by publication in a newspaper or otherwise that the money for their payment is available and that they will be paid on presentation.
(Source: P.A. 76-1966.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-65) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-65)
    Sec. 34-65. Refunding bonds authorized - Interest. Whenever any school district described in this Article has outstanding bonds which are binding and subsisting legal obligations, and the proceeds of taxes levied for the payment of the principal of and interest on such bonds have not been collected and are not available for such payments when due, the board may issue refunding bonds for an amount sufficient to pay and discharge any of the outstanding bonds with accrued interest. The refunding bonds shall bear interest at a rate of not more than the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, if issued before January 1, 1972 and not more than the maximum rate authorized by the Bond Authorization Act, as amended at the time of the making of the contract, if issued after January 1, 1972 and shall mature within 20 years from the date thereof.
    With respect to instruments for the payment of money issued under this Section either before, on, or after the effective date of Public Act 86-4 (June 6, 1989), it is and always has been the intention of the General Assembly (i) that the Omnibus Bond Acts are and always have been supplementary grants of power to issue instruments in accordance with the Omnibus Bond Acts, regardless of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts, (ii) that the provisions of this Section are not a limitation on the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts, and (iii) that instruments issued under this Section within the supplementary authority granted by the Omnibus Bond Acts are not invalid because of any provision of this Act that may appear to be or to have been more restrictive than those Acts.
(Source: P.A. 86-4; 86-930; 86-1028.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-66) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-66)
    Sec. 34-66. Resolution for refunding bonds - Name in which issued - Signatures. Whenever the board desires to issue refunding bonds under Section 34-65, it shall adopt a resolution designating the purpose and fixing the amount of the bonds proposed to be issued, the maturity thereof, the rate of interest thereon, and the amount of taxes to be levied annually for the purpose of paying the interest on and the principal of the bonds.
    Refunding bonds shall be issued in the corporate name of the school district. They shall be signed by the president and the secretary of the board.
(Source: P.A. 86-930.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-67) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-67)
    Sec. 34-67. Sale or exchange of bonds - Use of proceeds. Refunding bonds issued under Section 34-65 may be exchanged on the basis of par for par for the bonds being refunded and described in the authorizing resolution, or may be sold at not less than par under the direction of the board, and the proceeds thereof shall be received by the city treasurer, as school treasurer, and shall be kept in a separate fund to be used solely for the purpose of paying the principal and interest on the bonds so refunded. All bonds refunded shall be cancelled.
(Source: P.A. 86-930.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-68) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-68)
    Sec. 34-68. Issuance without submission to voters. The board may provide that the resolutions authorizing issuance of refunding bonds issued under Section 34-65 shall be effective without the submission thereof to the voters of the school district or city for approval.
    The validity of each refunding bond so executed shall remain unimpaired, although one or more of the signing officers have ceased to be such officer or officers before the delivery of the bond to the purchaser.
(Source: P.A. 85-1418; 86-1477.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-69) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-69)
    Sec. 34-69. Tax for payment of refunding bonds. Before or at the time of issuing refunding bonds authorized by Section 34-65 the board shall provide for the collection of a direct annual tax upon all the taxable property of the school district, sufficient to pay and discharge the principal thereof at maturity and to pay the interest thereon as it falls due. Upon the filing in the office of the county clerk of the county wherein such school district is located of a duly certified copy of any such ordinance it shall be the duty of such county clerk to extend the tax therein provided for.
(Source: P.A. 85-1418; 86-1477.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-70) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-70)
    Sec. 34-70. Tax for payment of refunded bonds-Reduction of levy. If the proceeds of the refunding bonds authorized by Section 34-65 have been used for the payment of any outstanding bonds of the board, or the refunding bonds have been exchanged for outstanding bonds, and thereafter any portion of the respective taxes levied for the purpose of paying the principal of and interest on the outstanding bonds so paid or exchanged is collected, the money so received shall be placed in the bond and interest sinking fund of the board and used for the purpose of paying the principal of and interest on the refunding bonds issued under Section 34-65 and the taxes thereafter to be extended to pay the refunding bonds shall be reduced by that amount by the county clerk upon receipt of a certified copy of a resolution which must be adopted by the board directing such reduction. A certified copy of the resolution shall be filed with the county clerk of the county, and it shall thereupon be the duty of such official to reduce and extend the tax levy in accordance with the terms of the resolution.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-71) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-71)
    Sec. 34-71. Authority cumulative. The authority granted in Sections 34-65 through 34-70, is cumulative authority for the issuance of bonds and shall not be held to repeal any laws with respect thereto.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-72)
    Sec. 34-72. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 86-1477. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-73) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-73)
    Sec. 34-73. Certain taxes additional to maximum otherwise authorized - not reducible. Each of the taxes authorized to be levied by Sections 34-33, 34-39, 34-53.2, 34-53.3, 34-54.1, 34-57, 34-58, 34-60, 34-62, and 34-69 of this Code, and by Section 17-128 of the "Illinois Pension Code" shall be in addition to and exclusive of the maximum of all other taxes which the school district is authorized by law to levy upon the aggregate valuation of all taxable property within the school district or city and the county clerk in reducing taxes under the provisions of the Property Tax Code shall not consider any of such taxes therein authorized as a part of the tax levy of the school district or city required to be included in the aggregate of all taxes to be reduced and no reduction of any tax levy made under the Property Tax Code shall diminish any amount appropriated or levied for any such tax.
(Source: P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-74) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-74)
    Sec. 34-74. Custody of school moneys. Except as provided in Article 34A and Section 34-29.2 of this Code, all moneys raised by taxation for school purposes, or received from the state common school fund, or from any other source for school purposes, shall be held by the city treasurer, ex-officio, as school treasurer, in separate funds for school purposes, subject to the order of the board upon (i) its warrants signed by its president and secretary and countersigned by the mayor and city comptroller or (ii) its checks, as defined in Section 3-104 of the Uniform Commercial Code, signed by its president, secretary, and comptroller and countersigned by the mayor and city comptroller.
(Source: P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-75) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-75)
    Sec. 34-75. Duties of city treasurer as to school moneys. The city treasurer shall, as school treasurer, secure and safely keep all school moneys and shall maintain a separate bank account for capital project funds and process only transactions related to capital projects through those accounts, subject to the control and direction of the board, provided that the amount of interest or other investment earnings in such accounts may be from time to time withdrawn by the board and any amounts so withdrawn by the board may be used for any lawful purpose. He shall, subject to the limitations in this Article, keep his books and accounts concerning such moneys in the manner prescribed by the board. His books and accounts shall always be subject to the inspection of the board, or any member thereof. He shall at the end of each month, and oftener if required, render under oath an account to the board showing the state of the school treasury at the date of the account and the balance of money in the treasury. He shall accompany such accounts with a statement of all moneys received into the school treasury, and on what account, together with all warrants redeemed and paid by him; which warrants and all vouchers held by him shall be delivered to the business manager of the board and filed with his account in the business manager's office upon every day of such settlement. He shall return all warrants paid by him stamped or marked "Paid". He shall keep a register of all warrants redeemed and paid, which shall describe such warrants and show the date, amount, number, the fund from which paid, the name of the person to whom and when paid.
(Source: P.A. 82-156.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-76) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-76)
    Sec. 34-76. Unpaid warrants for wages.
    When a warrant issued for the wages of a teacher or other employee is presented to the school treasurer and is not paid for want of funds, the school treasurer shall endorse it over his signature, "not paid for want of funds," with the date of presentation, and shall make and keep a record of such endorsement. The warrant shall thereafter bear interest at the rate of 7% per annum if issued before January 1, 1972 or at the rate of 6% per annum if issued after January 1, 1972, until the school treasurer notifies the president of the board in writing that he has funds to pay it. The school treasurer shall make and keep a record of such notices and hold the funds necessary to pay the warrant until it is presented. The warrant shall draw no interest after notice is given to the president of the board.
(Source: P.A. 76-2012.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-77) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-77)
    Sec. 34-77. Depositories. The school treasurer may be required to keep all moneys in his hands belonging to the board in such places of deposit as may be ordered by the city council but he shall not be required to deposit such moneys elsewhere than in a savings and loan association or a regularly organized bank.
    No bank or savings and loan association shall receive public funds as permitted by this Section, unless it has complied with the requirements established pursuant to Section 6 of "An Act relating to certain investments of public funds by public agencies", approved July 23, 1943, as now or hereafter amended.
(Source: P.A. 83-541.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-78) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-78)
    Sec. 34-78. Money kept separate-Unlawful use.
    The school treasurer shall keep all moneys in his hands belonging to the board separate from his own moneys, and shall not use, either directly or indirectly, the school moneys or warrants in his custody and keeping for his own use and benefit or that of any other person. If the school treasurer violates this section, the city council may immediately remove him from office and declare his office vacant.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-79) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-79)
    Sec. 34-79. Annual account of treasurer.
    The school treasurer shall annually, between the first and tenth of March 1973, between the first and tenth of March 1974, between the first and tenth of November 1974 and between the first and tenth of November of each year thereafter, file with the controller of the board a detailed account of all receipts and expenditures and of all his transactions during the preceding fiscal year. The account shall show the state of the school treasury at the close of the fiscal year. The account shall immediately be published in the proceedings of the board.
(Source: P.A. 77-2734.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-80) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-80)
    Sec. 34-80. Liability on treasurer's bond. The school treasurer shall be liable on his official bond as city treasurer for the proper performance of his duties and the conservation of all moneys held by him under this article. It is hereby made the duty of the city council in fixing the amount, the penalty and conditions of said official bond to do so in such manner as will save the board from any loss. This Section does not prevent the city council from designating a bank or savings and loan association as a depository of school moneys in the manner prescribed in the "Revised Cities and Villages Act", as amended and Section 34-77.
(Source: P.A. 83-541.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-81) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-81)
    Sec. 34-81. Interest on fund.
    Neither the treasurer nor any other officer having the custody of public school funds is entitled to retain any interest accruing thereon, but such interest shall accrue and inure to the benefit of such funds respectively, become a part thereof and be paid into the city treasury, subject to the purposes of this Act.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-82) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-82)
    Sec. 34-82. Designation of person to sign for president.
    The president of the board, with the approval of the board, may designate one or more persons who shall have authority, when directed to do so by the president, to affix the signature of the president to any bond, warrant, certificate, contract or any other written instrument, which by law is required to be signed by the president of the board. When the signature of the president of the board is so affixed to a written instrument, it shall be as binding upon the board as if signed by the president thereof. Whenever the president of the board desires to designate a person to affix the signature of the president to any bond, warrant, certificate, contract or any other written instrument, he shall send a written notice to the board containing the name of the person he has selected and a designation of the instrument or instruments such person shall have authority to sign. Attached to the notice shall be the written signature of the president of the board, executed by the person so designated, with the signature of the person so designated underneath. The notice shall be filed with the secretary and presented at the next meeting of the board for its approval and shall be printed in its proceedings.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/prec. Sec. 34-83 heading)
TEACHERS--EMPLOYMENT AND RETIREMENT

    (105 ILCS 5/34-83) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-83)
    Sec. 34-83. Board of examiners - Certificates - Examinations. A board of 3 examiners shall examine all applicants required to hold certificates to teach and the board of education shall issue gratuitously to those who pass a required test of character, scholarship and general fitness, such certificates to teach as they are found entitled to receive. No person may be granted or continue to hold a teaching certificate who has knowingly altered or misrepresented his or her teaching qualifications in order to acquire the certificate. Any other certificate held by such person may be suspended or revoked by the board of examiners, depending upon the severity of the alteration or misrepresentation. The board of examiners shall consist of the general superintendent of schools and 2 persons approved and appointed by the board of education upon the nomination of the general superintendent of schools. The board of examiners shall hold such examinations as the board of education may prescribe, upon the recommendation of the general superintendent of schools and shall prepare all necessary eligible lists, which shall be kept in the office of the general superintendent of schools and be open to public inspection. Members of the board of examiners shall hold office for a term of 2 years.
    The board of examiners created herein is abolished effective July 1, 1988. Commencing July 1, 1988, all new teachers employed by the board shall hold teaching certificates issued by the State Teacher Certification Board under Article 21. The State Board of Education in consultation with the board of examiners and the State Teacher Certification Board shall develop procedures whereby teachers currently holding valid certificates issued by the board of examiners, and all teachers employed by the board after August 1, 1985 and prior to July 1, 1988, shall no later than July 1, 1988 exchange certificates issued by the board of examiners for comparable certificates issued by the State Teacher Certification Board. On the exchange of a certificate on or before July 1, 1988, the State Teacher Certification Board shall not require any additional qualifications for the issuance of the comparable certificate. If prior to July 1, 1988 the board of examiners has issued types of teaching certificates which are not comparable to the types of certificates issued by the State Teacher Certification Board, such certificates shall continue to be valid for and shall be renewable by the holders thereof, and no additional qualifications shall be required by the State Teacher Certification Board for any such renewal; however, no individual who received a letter of continuing eligibility shall be issued an Initial or Standard Teaching Certificate, as provided in Section 21-2 of this Code, unless that individual also holds such a valid and renewable certificate.
    The State Board of Education shall report by July 1, 1986, to the Illinois General Assembly on the procedures for exchange it has developed in consultation with the board of examiners and the State Teacher Certification Board as required in this Section.
(Source: P.A. 91-102, eff. 7-12-99.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-83.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-83.1)
    Sec. 34-83.1. Residence Requirements. Residency within any school district governed by this Article, if not required at the time of employment as a qualification of employment, shall not be considered in determining the compensation of a teacher or whether to retain, promote, assign or transfer that teacher.
(Source: P.A. 82-381.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-84) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-84)
    Sec. 34-84. Appointments and promotions of teachers. Appointments and promotions of teachers shall be made for merit only, and after satisfactory service for a probationary period of 3 years with respect to probationary employees employed as full-time teachers in the public school system of the district before January 1, 1998 and 4 years with respect to probationary employees who are first employed as full-time teachers in the public school system of the district on or after January 1, 1998, during which period the board may dismiss or discharge any such probationary employee upon the recommendation, accompanied by the written reasons therefor, of the general superintendent of schools and after which period appointments of teachers shall become permanent, subject to removal for cause in the manner provided by Section 34-85.
    For a probationary-appointed teacher in full-time service who is appointed on or after July 1, 2013 and who receives ratings of "excellent" during his or her first 3 school terms of full-time service, the probationary period shall be 3 school terms of full-time service. For a probationary-appointed teacher in full-time service who is appointed on or after July 1, 2013 and who had previously entered into contractual continued service in another school district in this State or a program of a special education joint agreement in this State, as defined in Section 24-11 of this Code, the probationary period shall be 2 school terms of full-time service, provided that (i) the teacher voluntarily resigned or was honorably dismissed from the prior district or program within the 3-month period preceding his or her appointment date, (ii) the teacher's last 2 ratings in the prior district or program were at least "proficient" and were issued after the prior district's or program's PERA implementation date, as defined in Section 24-11 of this Code, and (iii) the teacher receives ratings of "excellent" during his or her first 2 school terms of full-time service.
    For a probationary-appointed teacher in full-time service who is appointed on or after July 1, 2013 and who has not entered into contractual continued service after 2 or 3 school terms of full-time service as provided in this Section, the probationary period shall be 4 school terms of full-time service, provided that the teacher receives a rating of at least "proficient" in the last school term and a rating of at least "proficient" in either the second or third school term.
    As used in this Section, "school term" means the school term established by the board pursuant to Section 10-19 of this Code, and "full-time service" means the teacher has actually worked at least 150 days during the school term. As used in this Article, "teachers" means and includes all members of the teaching force excluding the general superintendent and principals.
    There shall be no reduction in teachers because of a decrease in student membership or a change in subject requirements within the attendance center organization after the 20th day following the first day of the school year, except that: (1) this provision shall not apply to desegregation positions, special education positions, or any other positions funded by State or federal categorical funds, and (2) at attendance centers maintaining any of grades 9 through 12, there may be a second reduction in teachers on the first day of the second semester of the regular school term because of a decrease in student membership or a change in subject requirements within the attendance center organization.
    The school principal shall make the decision in selecting teachers to fill new and vacant positions consistent with Section 34-8.1.
(Source: P.A. 97-8, eff. 6-13-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-84a) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-84a)
    Sec. 34-84a. Maintenance of discipline. Subject to the limitations of all policies established or adopted under Section 14-8.05, teachers, other certificated educational employees, and any other person, whether or not a certificated employee, providing a related service for or with respect to a student shall maintain discipline in the schools, including school grounds which are owned or leased by the board and used for school purposes and activities. In all matters relating to the discipline in and conduct of the schools and the school children, they stand in the relation of parents and guardians to the pupils. This relationship shall extend to all activities connected with the school program, including all athletic and extracurricular programs, and may be exercised at any time for the safety and supervision of the pupils in the absence of their parents or guardians.
    Nothing in this Section affects the power of the board to establish rules with respect to discipline, except that the rules of the board must provide, subject to the limitations of all policies established or adopted under Section 14-8.05, that a teacher, other certificated employee, and any other person, whether or not a certificated employee, providing a related service for or with respect to a student may use reasonable force as needed to maintain safety for the other students, shall provide that a teacher may remove a student from the classroom for disruptive behavior, and must include provisions which provide due process to students.
(Source: P.A. 89-184, eff. 7-19-95.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-84a.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-84a.1)
    Sec. 34-84a.1. Principals shall report incidents of intimidation. The principal of each attendance center shall promptly notify and report to the local law enforcement authorities for inclusion in the Department of State Police's Illinois Uniform Crime Reporting Program each incident of intimidation of which he or she has knowledge and each alleged incident of intimidation which is reported to him or her, either orally or in writing, by any pupil or by any teacher or other certificated or non-certificated personnel employed at the attendance center. "Intimidation" shall have the meaning ascribed to it by Section 12-6 of the Criminal Code of 2012.
(Source: P.A. 97-1150, eff. 1-25-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-84b) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-84b)
    Sec. 34-84b. Conviction of sex or narcotics offense, first degree murder, attempted first degree murder, or Class X felony as grounds for revocation of certificate.
    (a) Whenever the holder of any certificate issued by the board of education has been convicted of any sex offense or narcotics offense as defined in this Section, the board of education shall forthwith suspend the certificate. If the conviction is reversed and the holder is acquitted of the offense in a new trial or the charges against him are dismissed, the board shall forthwith terminate the suspension of the certificate. When the conviction becomes final, the board shall forthwith revoke the certificate. "Sex offense" as used in this Section means any one or more of the following offenses: (1) any offense defined in Sections 11-6, 11-9, and 11-30, Sections 11-14 through 11-21, inclusive, and Sections 11-1.20, 11-1.30, 11-1.40, 11-1.50, 11-1.60, 12-13, 12-14, 12-14.1, 12-15 and 12-16 of the Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012; (2) any attempt to commit any of the foregoing offenses, and (3) any offense committed or attempted in any other state which, if committed or attempted in this State, would have been punishable as one or more of the foregoing offenses. "Narcotics offense" as used in this Section means any one or more of the following offenses: (1) any offense defined in the Cannabis Control Act except those defined in Sections 4(a), 4(b) and 5(a) of that Act and any offense for which the holder of any certificate is placed on probation under the provisions of Section 10 of that Act and fulfills the terms and conditions of probation as may be required by the court; (2) any offense defined in the Illinois Controlled Substances Act except any offense for which the holder of any certificate is placed on probation under the provisions of Section 410 of that Act and fulfills the terms and conditions of probation as may be required by the court; (3) any offense defined in the Methamphetamine Control and Community Protection Act except any offense for which the holder of any certificate is placed on probation under the provision of Section 70 of that Act and fulfills the terms and conditions of probation as may be required by the court; (4) any attempt to commit any of the foregoing offenses; and (5) any offense committed or attempted in any other state or against the laws of the United States which, if committed or attempted in this State, would have been punishable as one or more of the foregoing offenses.
    (b) Whenever the holder of any certificate issued by the board of education or pursuant to Article 21 or any other provisions of the School Code has been convicted of first degree murder, attempted first degree murder, or a Class X felony, the board of education or the State Superintendent of Education shall forthwith suspend the certificate. If the conviction is reversed and the holder is acquitted of that offense in a new trial or the charges that he or she committed that offense are dismissed, the suspending authority shall forthwith terminate the suspension of the certificate. When the conviction becomes final, the State Superintendent of Education shall forthwith revoke the certificate. The stated offenses of "first degree murder", "attempted first degree murder", and "Class X felony" referred to in this Section include any offense committed in another state that, if committed in this State, would have been punishable as any one of the stated offenses.
(Source: P.A. 96-1551, eff. 7-1-11; 97-1150, eff. 1-25-13.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-84.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-84.1)
    Sec. 34-84.1. Teachers employed in Department of Defense overseas dependents' schools. By mutual agreement of a teacher and the board of education, the board may, but is not required to, grant the teacher a leave of absence to accept employment in a Department of Defense overseas dependents' school. If such a leave of absence is granted, the teacher may elect, for a period not exceeding the lesser of the period for which he is so employed or 5 years, (a) to preserve his permanent status under this Act, and (b) to continue receipt, on the same basis as if he were teaching in the school system subject to the board of education, of service credit earned for requirements of promotion, incremental increases in salary, leaves of absence and other privileges based on an established period of service or employment.
    A person employed to replace a teacher making the election provided for in this Section does not acquire permanent status as a teacher under this Article.
(Source: Laws 1967, p. 1999.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-85) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-85)
    Sec. 34-85. Removal for cause; notice and hearing; suspension.
    (a) No teacher employed by the board of education shall (after serving the probationary period specified in Section 34-84) be removed except for cause. Teachers (who have completed the probationary period specified in Section 34-84 of this Code) shall be removed for cause in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Section or, at the board's option, the procedures set forth in Section 24-16.5 of this Code or such other procedures established in an agreement entered into between the board and the exclusive representative of the district's teachers under Section 34-85c of this Code for teachers (who have completed the probationary period specified in Section 34-84 of this Code) assigned to schools identified in that agreement. No principal employed by the board of education shall be removed during the term of his or her performance contract except for cause, which may include but is not limited to the principal's repeated failure to implement the school improvement plan or to comply with the provisions of the Uniform Performance Contract, including additional criteria established by the Council for inclusion in the performance contract pursuant to Section 34-2.3.
    Before service of notice of charges on account of causes that may be deemed to be remediable, the teacher or principal must be given reasonable warning in writing, stating specifically the causes that, if not removed, may result in charges; however, no such written warning is required if the causes have been the subject of a remediation plan pursuant to Article 24A of this Code or if the board and the exclusive representative of the district's teachers have entered into an agreement pursuant to Section 34-85c of this Code, pursuant to an alternative system of remediation. No written warning shall be required for conduct on the part of a teacher or principal that is cruel, immoral, negligent, or criminal or that in any way causes psychological or physical harm or injury to a student, as that conduct is deemed to be irremediable. No written warning shall be required for a material breach of the uniform principal performance contract, as that conduct is deemed to be irremediable; provided that not less than 30 days before the vote of the local school council to seek the dismissal of a principal for a material breach of a uniform principal performance contract, the local school council shall specify the nature of the alleged breach in writing and provide a copy of it to the principal.
        (1) To initiate dismissal proceedings against a
    	
teacher or principal, the general superintendent must first approve written charges and specifications against the teacher or principal. A local school council may direct the general superintendent to approve written charges against its principal on behalf of the Council upon the vote of 7 members of the Council. The general superintendent must approve those charges within 45 calendar days or provide a written reason for not approving those charges. A written notice of those charges, including specifications, shall be served upon the teacher or principal within 10 business days of the approval of the charges. Any written notice sent on or after July 1, 2012 shall also inform the teacher or principal of the right to request a hearing before a mutually selected hearing officer, with the cost of the hearing officer split equally between the teacher or principal and the board, or a hearing before a qualified hearing officer chosen by the general superintendent, with the cost of the hearing officer paid by the board. If the teacher or principal cannot be found upon diligent inquiry, such charges may be served upon him by mailing a copy thereof in a sealed envelope by prepaid certified mail, return receipt requested, to the teacher's or principal's last known address. A return receipt showing delivery to such address within 20 calendar days after the date of the approval of the charges shall constitute proof of service.
        (2) No hearing upon the charges is required unless
    	
the teacher or principal within 17 calendar days after receiving notice requests in writing of the general superintendent that a hearing be scheduled. Pending the hearing of the charges, the general superintendent or his or her designee may suspend the teacher or principal charged without pay in accordance with rules prescribed by the board, provided that if the teacher or principal charged is not dismissed based on the charges, he or she must be made whole for lost earnings, less setoffs for mitigation.
        (3) The board shall maintain a list of at least 9
    	
qualified hearing officers who will conduct hearings on charges and specifications. The list must be developed in good faith consultation with the exclusive representative of the board's teachers and professional associations that represent the board's principals. The list may be revised on July 1st of each year or earlier as needed. To be a qualified hearing officer, the person must (i) be accredited by a national arbitration organization and have had a minimum of 5 years of experience as an arbitrator in cases involving labor and employment relations matters between employers and employees or their exclusive bargaining representatives and (ii) beginning September 1, 2012, have participated in training provided or approved by the State Board of Education for teacher dismissal hearing officers so that he or she is familiar with issues generally involved in evaluative and non-evaluative dismissals.
        Within 5 business days after receiving the notice of
    	
request for a hearing, the general superintendent and the teacher or principal or their legal representatives shall alternately strike one name from the list until only one name remains. Unless waived by the teacher, the teacher or principal shall have the right to proceed first with the striking. If the teacher or principal fails to participate in the striking process, the general superintendent shall either select the hearing officer from the list developed pursuant to this paragraph (3) or select another qualified hearing officer from the master list maintained by the State Board of Education pursuant to subsection (c) of Section 24-12 of this Code.
        (4) If the notice of dismissal was sent to the
    	
teacher or principal before July 1, 2012, the fees and costs for the hearing officer shall be paid by the State Board of Education. If the notice of dismissal was sent to the teacher or principal on or after July 1, 2012, the hearing officer's fees and costs must be paid as follows in this paragraph (4). The fees and permissible costs for the hearing officer shall be determined by the State Board of Education. If the hearing officer is mutually selected by the parties through alternate striking in accordance with paragraph (3) of this subsection (a), then the board and the teacher or their legal representative shall each pay 50% of the fees and costs and any supplemental allowance to which they agree. If the hearing officer is selected by the general superintendent without the participation of the teacher or principal, then the board shall pay 100% of the hearing officer fees and costs. The hearing officer shall submit for payment a billing statement to the parties that itemizes the charges and expenses and divides them in accordance with this Section.
        (5) The teacher or the principal charged is required
    	
to answer the charges and specifications and aver affirmative matters in his or her defense, and the time for doing so must be set by the hearing officer. The State Board of Education shall adopt rules so that each party has a fair opportunity to present its case and to ensure that the dismissal proceeding is concluded in an expeditious manner. The rules shall address, without limitation, the teacher or principal's answer and affirmative defenses to the charges and specifications; a requirement that each party make mandatory disclosures without request to the other party and then update the disclosure no later than 10 calendar days prior to the commencement of the hearing, including a list of the names and addresses of persons who may be called as witnesses at the hearing, a summary of the facts or opinions each witness will testify to, and all other documents and materials, including information maintained electronically, relevant to its own as well as the other party's case (the hearing officer may exclude witnesses and exhibits not identified and shared, except those offered in rebuttal for which the party could not reasonably have anticipated prior to the hearing); pre-hearing discovery and preparation, including provision for written interrogatories and requests for production of documents, provided that discovery depositions are prohibited; the conduct of the hearing; the right of each party to be represented by counsel, the offer of evidence and witnesses and the cross-examination of witnesses; the authority of the hearing officer to issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum, provided that the hearing officer may limit the number of witnesses to be subpoenaed in behalf of each party to no more than 7; the length of post-hearing briefs; and the form, length, and content of hearing officers' reports and recommendations to the general superintendent.
        The hearing officer shall commence the hearing within
    	
75 calendar days and conclude the hearing within 120 calendar days after being selected by the parties as the hearing officer, provided that these timelines may be modified upon the showing of good cause or mutual agreement of the parties. Good cause for the purposes of this paragraph (5) shall mean the illness or otherwise unavoidable emergency of the teacher, district representative, their legal representatives, the hearing officer, or an essential witness as indicated in each party's pre-hearing submission. In a dismissal hearing in which a witness is a student or is under the age of 18, the hearing officer must make accommodations for the witness, as provided under paragraph (5.5) of this subsection. The hearing officer shall consider and give weight to all of the teacher's evaluations written pursuant to Article 24A that are relevant to the issues in the hearing. Except as otherwise provided under paragraph (5.5) of this subsection, the teacher or principal has the privilege of being present at the hearing with counsel and of cross-examining witnesses and may offer evidence and witnesses and present defenses to the charges. Each party shall have no more than 3 days to present its case, unless extended by the hearing officer to enable a party to present adequate evidence and testimony, including due to the other party's cross-examination of the party's witnesses, for good cause or by mutual agreement of the parties. The State Board of Education shall define in rules the meaning of "day" for such purposes. All testimony at the hearing shall be taken under oath administered by the hearing officer. The hearing officer shall cause a record of the proceedings to be kept and shall employ a competent reporter to take stenographic or stenotype notes of all the testimony. The costs of the reporter's attendance and services at the hearing shall be paid by the party or parties who are paying the fees and costs of the hearing officer. Either party desiring a transcript of the hearing shall pay for the cost thereof. At the close of the hearing, the hearing officer shall direct the parties to submit post-hearing briefs no later than 21 calendar days after receipt of the transcript. Either or both parties may waive submission of briefs.
        (5.5) In the case of charges involving sexual abuse
    	
or severe physical abuse of a student or a person under the age of 18, the hearing officer shall make alternative hearing procedures to protect a witness who is a student or who is under the age of 18 from being intimidated or traumatized. Alternative hearing procedures may include, but are not limited to: (i) testimony made via a telecommunication device in a location other than the hearing room and outside the physical presence of the teacher or principal and other hearing participants, (ii) testimony outside the physical presence of the teacher or principal, or (iii) non-public testimony. During a testimony described under this subsection, each party must be permitted to ask a witness who is a student or who is under 18 years of age all relevant questions and follow-up questions. All questions must exclude evidence of the witness' sexual behavior or predisposition, unless the evidence is offered to prove that someone other than the teacher subject to the dismissal hearing engaged in the charge at issue.
        (6) The hearing officer shall within 30 calendar days
    	
from the conclusion of the hearing report to the general superintendent findings of fact and a recommendation as to whether or not the teacher or principal shall be dismissed and shall give a copy of the report to both the teacher or principal and the general superintendent. The State Board of Education shall provide by rule the form of the hearing officer's report and recommendation.
        (7) The board, within 45 days of receipt of the
    	
hearing officer's findings of fact and recommendation, shall make a decision as to whether the teacher or principal shall be dismissed from its employ. The failure of the board to strictly adhere to the timeliness contained herein shall not render it without jurisdiction to dismiss the teacher or principal. In the event that the board declines to dismiss the teacher or principal after review of a hearing officer's recommendation, the board shall set the amount of back pay and benefits to award the teacher or principal, which shall include offsets for interim earnings and failure to mitigate losses. The board shall establish procedures for the teacher's or principal's submission of evidence to it regarding lost earnings, lost benefits, mitigation, and offsets. The decision of the board is final unless reviewed in accordance with paragraph (8) of this subsection (a).
        (8) The teacher may seek judicial review of the
    	
board's decision in accordance with the Administrative Review Law, which is specifically incorporated in this Section, except that the review must be initiated in the Illinois Appellate Court for the First District. In the event judicial review is instituted, any costs of preparing and filing the record of proceedings shall be paid by the party instituting the review. In the event the appellate court reverses a board decision to dismiss a teacher or principal and directs the board to pay the teacher or the principal back pay and benefits, the appellate court shall remand the matter to the board to issue an administrative decision as to the amount of back pay and benefits, which shall include a calculation of the lost earnings, lost benefits, mitigation, and offsets based on evidence submitted to the board in accordance with procedures established by the board.
        (9) If the Governor has declared a disaster due to a
    	
public health emergency pursuant to Section 7 of the Illinois Emergency Management Act, except if the parties mutually agree otherwise and the agreement is in writing, the requirements of this Section pertaining to prehearings and hearings are paused and do not begin to toll until the proclamation declaring the disaster is no longer in effect. If mutually agreed to and reduced in writing, the parties may proceed with the prehearing and hearing requirements of this Section connected to the appointment and selection of a hearing officer and those connected to commencing and concluding a hearing. Any hearing convened during a public health emergency pursuant to Section 7 of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act may be convened remotely. Any hearing officer for a hearing convened during a public health emergency pursuant to Section 7 of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act may voluntarily withdraw from the hearing and another hearing officer shall be selected or appointed pursuant to this Section.
    (b) Nothing in this Section affects the validity of removal for cause hearings commenced prior to June 13, 2011 (the effective date of Public Act 97-8).
    The changes made by Public Act 97-8 shall apply to dismissals instituted on or after September 1, 2011 or the effective date of Public Act 97-8, whichever is later. Any dismissal instituted prior to the effective date of these changes must be carried out in accordance with the requirements of this Section prior to amendment by Public Act 97-8.
(Source: P.A. 101-531, eff. 8-23-19; 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-85b)
    Sec. 34-85b. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 95-510, eff. 8-28-07. Repealed by P.A. 97-8, eff. 6-13-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-85c)
    Sec. 34-85c. Alternative procedures for teacher evaluation, remediation, and removal for cause after remediation.
    (a) Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, the board and the exclusive representative of the district's teachers are hereby authorized to enter into an agreement to establish alternative procedures for teacher evaluation, remediation, and removal for cause after remediation, including an alternative system for peer evaluation and recommendations; provided, however, that no later than September 1, 2012: (i) any alternative procedures must include provisions whereby student performance data is a significant factor in teacher evaluation and (ii) teachers are rated as "excellent", "proficient", "needs improvement" or "unsatisfactory". Pursuant exclusively to that agreement, teachers assigned to schools identified in that agreement shall be subject to an alternative performance evaluation plan and remediation procedures in lieu of the plan and procedures set forth in Article 24A of this Code and alternative removal for cause standards and procedures in lieu of the removal standards and procedures set forth in Section 34-85 of this Code. To the extent that the agreement provides a teacher with an opportunity for a hearing on removal for cause before an independent hearing officer in accordance with Section 34-85 or otherwise, the hearing officer shall be governed by the alternative performance evaluation plan, remediation procedures, and removal standards and procedures set forth in the agreement in making findings of fact and a recommendation.
    (a-5) If the Governor has declared a disaster due to a public health emergency pursuant to Section 7 of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act that suspends in-person instruction, the timelines connected to the commencement and completion of any remediation plan are paused. Except where the parties mutually agree otherwise and such agreement is in writing, any remediation plan that had been in place for 45 or more days prior to the suspension of in-person instruction shall resume when in-person instruction resumes; any remediation plan that had been in place for fewer than 45 days prior to the suspension of in-person instruction shall discontinue and a new remediation period will begin when in-person instruction resumes.
    (b) The board and the exclusive representative of the district's teachers shall submit a certified copy of an agreement as provided under subsection (a) of this Section to the State Board of Education.
(Source: P.A. 101-643, eff. 6-18-20.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-85d)
    Sec. 34-85d. Teacher evaluation; copies. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the school district shall provide all copies of teacher evaluations to the exclusive bargaining representative of the school district's teachers within 7 days after issuing the evaluations.
(Source: P.A. 100-682, eff. 1-1-19.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-87)
    Sec. 34-87. (Repealed).
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31. Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-88) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-88)
    Sec. 34-88. District and school report cards. The board shall, in accordance with Section 10-17a of the School Code, annually present and disseminate the school district and school report cards prepared by the State Superintendent of Education.
(Source: P.A. 97-671, eff. 1-24-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-128) (from Ch. 122, par. 34-128)
    Sec. 34-128. The Board shall provide free bus transportation for every child who is a child with a mental disability who is trainable, as defined in Article 14, who resides at a distance of one mile or more from any school to which he is assigned for attendance and who the State Board of Education determines in advance requires special transportation service in order to take advantage of special educational facilities.
    The board may levy, without regard to any other legally authorized tax and in addition to such taxes, an annual tax upon all the taxable property in the school district at a rate not to exceed .005% of the value, as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue, that will produce an amount not to exceed the annual cost of transportation provided in accordance with this Section. The board shall deduct from the cost of such transportation any amount reimbursed by the State under Article 14. Such levy is authorized in the year following the school year in which the transportation costs were incurred by the district.
(Source: P.A. 99-143, eff. 7-27-15.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/prec. Sec. 34-200 heading)
SCHOOL ACTION AND FACILITY MASTER PLANNING
(Source: P.A. 97-473, eff. 1-1-12; 97-474, eff. 8-22-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-200)
    Sec. 34-200. Definitions. For the purposes of Sections 34-200 through 34-235 of this Article:
    "Capital improvement plan" means a plan that identifies capital projects to be started or finished within the designated period, excluding projects funded by locally raised capital not exceeding $10,000.
    "Community area" means a geographic area of the City of Chicago defined by the chief executive officer as part of the development of the educational facilities master plan.
    "Space utilization" means the percentage achieved by dividing the school's actual enrollment by its design capacity.
    "School closing" or "school closure" means the closing of a school, the effect of which is the assignment and transfer of all students enrolled at that school to one or more designated receiving schools.
    "School consolidation" means the consolidation of 2 or more schools by closing one or more schools and reassigning the students to another school.
    "Phase-out" means the gradual cessation of enrollment in certain grades each school year until a school closes or is consolidated with another school.
    "School action" means any school closing; school consolidation; co-location; boundary change that requires reassignment of students, unless the reassignment is to a new school with an attendance area boundary and is made to relieve overcrowding; or phase-out.
(Source: P.A. 97-473, eff. 1-1-12; 97-474, eff. 8-22-11; 97-813, eff. 7-13-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-205)
    Sec. 34-205. Educational facility standards.
    (a) By January 1, 2012, the district shall publish space utilization standards on the district's website. The standards shall include the following:
        (1) the method by which design capacity is
    	
calculated, including consideration of the requirements of elementary and secondary programs, shared campuses, after school programming, the facility needs, grade and age ranges of the attending students, and use of school buildings by governmental agencies and community organizations;
        (2) the method to determine efficient use of a school
    	
building based upon educational program design capacity;
        (3) the rate of utilization; and
        (4) the standards for overcrowding and
    	
underutilization.
    (b) The chief executive officer or his or her designee shall publish a space utilization report for each school building operated by the district on the district's website by December 31 of each year.
    (c) The facility performance standards provisions are as follows:
        (1) On or before January 1, 2012, the chief executive
    	
officer shall propose minimum and optimal facility performance standards for thermal comfort, daylight, acoustics, indoor air quality, furniture ergonomics for students and staff, technology, life safety, ADA accessibility, plumbing and washroom access, environmental hazards, and walkability.
        (2) The chief executive officer shall conduct at
    	
least one public hearing and submit the proposed educational facilities standards to each local school council and to the Chicago Public Building Commission for review and comment prior to adoption.
        (3) After the chief executive officer has
    	
incorporated the input and recommendations of the public and the Chicago Public Building Commission, the chief executive officer shall issue final facility performance standards.
        (4) The chief executive officer is authorized to
    	
amend the facility performance standards following the procedures in this Section.
        (5) The final educational facility space utilization
    	
and performance standards shall be published on the district's Internet website.
(Source: P.A. 97-473, eff. 1-1-12; 97-474, eff. 8-22-11; 97-813, eff. 7-13-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-210)
    Sec. 34-210. The Educational Facility Master Plan.
    (a) In accordance with the schedule set forth in this Article, the chief executive officer or his or her designee shall prepare a 10-year educational facility master plan every 5 years, with updates 2 1/2 years after the approval of the initial 10-year plan, with the first such educational facility master plan to be approved on or before October 1, 2013.
    (b) The educational facility master plan shall provide community area level plans and individual school master plans with options for addressing the facility and space needs for each facility operated by the district over a 10-year period.
    (c) The data, information, and analysis that shall inform the educational facility master plan shall be published on the district's Internet website and shall include the following:
        (1) a description of the district's guiding
    	
educational goals and standards;
        (2) a brief description of the types of
    	
instructional programs and services delivered in each school, including specific plans for special education programs, early childhood education programs, career and technical education programs, and any other programs that are space sensitive to avoid space irregularities;
        (3) a description of the process, procedure, and
    	
timeline for community participation in the development of the plan;
        (3.5) A description of a communications and community
    	
involvement plan for each community in the City of Chicago that includes the engagement of students, school personnel, parents, and key stakeholders throughout the community and all of the following:
            (A) community action councils;
            (B) local school councils or, if not present,
        	
alternative parent and community governance for that school;
            (C) the Chicago Teachers Union; and
            (D) all current principals.
        (4) the enrollment capacity of each school and its
    	
rate of enrollment and historical and projected enrollment, and current and projected demographic information for the neighborhood surrounding the district based on census data;
        (5) a report on the assessment of individual building
    	
and site conditions;
        (6) a data table with historical and projected
    	
enrollment data by school by grade;
        (7) community analysis, including a study of current
    	
and projected demographics, land usage, transportation plans, residential housing and commercial development, private schools, plans for water and sewage service expansion or redevelopment, and institutions of higher education;
        (8) an analysis of the facility needs and
    	
requirements and a process to address critical facility capital needs of every school building, which shall be publicly available on the district's Internet website for schools and communities to have access to the information;
        (9) identification of potential sources of funding
    	
for the implementation of the Educational Facility Master Plan, including financial options through tax increment financing, property tax levies for schools, and bonds that address critical facility needs; and
        (10) any school building disposition, including a
    	
plan delineating the process through which citizen involvement is facilitated and establishing the criteria that is utilized in building disposition decisions, one of which shall be consideration of the impact of any proposed new use of a school building on the neighborhood in which the school building is located and how it may impact enrollment of schools in that community area.
    (d) On or before May 1, 2013, the chief executive officer or his or her designee shall prepare and distribute for comment a preliminary draft of the Educational Facility Master Plan. The draft plan shall be distributed to the City of Chicago, the County of Cook, the Chicago Park District, the Chicago Housing Authority, the Chicago Transit Authority, attendance centers operated by the district, and charter schools operating within the district. Each attendance center shall make the draft plan available to the local school council at the annual organizational meeting or to an alternative advisory body and to the parents, guardians, and staff of the school. The draft plan also shall be distributed to each State Senator and State Representative with a district in the City of Chicago, to the Mayor of the City of Chicago, and to each alderperson of the City.
    (e) The chief executive or his or her designee shall publish a procedure for conducting regional public hearings and submitting public comments on the draft plan and an annual capital improvement hearing that shall discuss the district's annual capital budget and that is not in conjunction with operating budget hearings.
    (f) After consideration of public input on the draft plan, the chief executive officer or his or her designee shall prepare and publish a report describing the public input gathered and the process used to incorporate public input in the development of the final plan to be recommended to the Board.
    (g) The chief executive officer shall present the final plan and report to the Board for final consideration and approval.
    (h) The final approved Educational Facility Master Plan shall be published on the district's website.
    (i) No later than July 1, 2016, and every 5 years thereafter, the chief executive officer or his or her designee shall prepare and submit for public comment a draft revised Educational Facility Master Plan following the procedures required for development of the original plan.
    (j) This proposed revised plan shall reflect the progress achieved during the first 2 1/2 years of the Educational Facility Master Plan.
    (k) On or before December 1, 2018, the Board shall adopt a policy to address under-enrolled schools. The policy must contain a list of potential interventions to address schools with declining enrollment, including, but not limited to, action by the district to: (i) create a request for proposals for joint use of the school with an intergovernmental rental or other outside entity rental, (ii) except for a charter school, cease any potential plans for school expansion that may negatively impact enrollment at the under-enrolled school, (iii) redraft attendance boundaries to maximize enrollment of additional students, or (iv) work with under-enrolled schools to identify opportunities to increase enrollment and lower the costs of occupancy through joint use agreements.
(Source: P.A. 102-15, eff. 6-17-21.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-215)
    Sec. 34-215. Capital improvement plans.
    (a) The district shall develop a capital needs review process and one-year and 5-year capital improvement plans.
    (b) By January 1, 2012, the chief executive officer or his or her designee shall establish a capital needs review process that includes a comprehensive bi-annual assessment of the capital needs at each facility owned, leased, or operated by the district. The review process shall include development of an assessment form to be used by attendance centers to provide a school-based capital, maintenance, utility, and repair needs assessment report and recommendations aligned with the educational program and goals of the attendance center.
    (c) Beginning with fiscal year 2013 and for each year thereafter, the chief executive officer shall publish a proposed one-year capital improvement plan at least 60 days prior to the end of the prior fiscal year. The proposed one-year capital improvement plan shall be posted on the district's Internet website and shall be subject to public review and comment and at least 3 public hearings. The one-year capital improvement plan shall include the following information for all capital projects for which funds are to be appropriated:
        (1) description of the scope of the project;
        (2) justification for the project;
        (3) status of the project, including, if appropriate,
    	
percentage funded, percentage complete, and approved start and end dates;
        (4) original approved cost and current approved cost
    	
for each project;
        (5) the impact of the project on the district's
    	
operating budget;
        (6) the name of each school and facility affected by
    	
a project;
        (7) all funding sources for the project;
        (8) any relationship of the project to the needs
    	
assessment submitted by the attendance center;
        (9) any relationship to the district's 10-year
    	
Educational Facilities Master Plan;
        (10) a description of the scope of work to be done,
    	
schedule of achieved and projected major milestones, and an explanation for any delay in meeting projected milestones; and
        (11) a detailed summary of all modernization, new
    	
construction, or other capital improvements, and a process for making recommendations for modernization of existing school facilities, new school facility construction, and other school facility capital improvements planned for the next fiscal year.
    (d) The chief executive officer shall present a final proposed one-year capital improvement plan to the Board for consideration.
    (e) The Board shall adopt a final one-year capital improvement plan no more than 45 days after adopting the annual budget.
    (f) Beginning with fiscal year 2013, the chief executive officer shall publish a proposed 5-year capital improvement plan with the proposed one-year capital improvement plan. The 5-year capital improvement plan shall include proposed capital improvements for the next 4 years and, to the extent practicable, the same information for each proposed project that is required for the one-year capital improvement plan.
    (g) The 5-year capital improvement plan shall be assessed annually. An annual report shall be published explaining the differences between projected capital projects in the 5-year capital improvement plan and the capital projects authorized in the proposed one-year capital improvement plan for the following fiscal year. The 5-year plan shall be published on the district's Internet website and distributed to all principals.
(Source: P.A. 100-965, eff. 8-19-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-220)
    Sec. 34-220. Financial transparency.
    (a) For fiscal year 2012, the chief executive officer shall provide the Board with an annual capital expenditure report within 90 days after the end of the fiscal year. The report shall be published on the district's Internet website.
    (b) For fiscal year 2013 and thereafter, the chief executive officer shall provide the Board with an annual capital expenditure report within 90 days after the end of the fiscal year. The report shall be published on the district's Internet website. The annual capital expenditure report shall include the following:
        (1) expenditures on all facilities in which students
    	
enrolled in the district receive instruction for all capital projects on which funds were expended in that fiscal year, even if the project was not initiated or completed in the fiscal year;
        (2) identification of capital projects that aligned
    	
with the school-based facility needs assessment and recommendations of school principals or were the result of other public input;
        (3) the levels of appropriation actually provided to
    	
the district for capital projects in the fiscal year by the city, the State, and the federal government, with a comparison of the level of such funding against funding levels for the prior 5 years; and
        (4) a summary comparison of annual capital expenses
    	
and the corresponding one-year capital improvement plan.
    (c) A list of all property owned by or leased to the Board shall be published on the district's Internet website by January 1, 2012, and shall be updated annually. For each property listed, the most recent facility standards review and any capital improvement projects that are pending or planned or have been completed in the 2-year period prior to publication shall be outlined.
    (d) All lease agreements in which the Board is a lessor or lessee shall be published on the district's Internet website for the duration of the lease. Temporary facility use, right of entry, and other temporary license agreements not exceeding one year in duration are not subject to this requirement.
    (e) The district shall publish on the district's Internet website a summary of the lease agreements in which the Board is a lessor or lessee, including the following:
        (1) a description of the leasehold;
        (2) the full legal name of the parties to the
    	
agreement;
        (3) the term of the agreement;
        (4) the rent amount; and
        (5) the party responsible for maintenance, capital
    	
improvements, utilities, and other expenses.
(Source: P.A. 97-473, eff. 1-1-12; 97-474, eff. 8-22-11.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-225)
    Sec. 34-225. School transition plans.
    (a) If the Board approves a school action, the chief executive officer or his or her designee shall work collaboratively with local school educators and families of students attending a school that is the subject of a school action to ensure successful integration of affected students into new learning environments.
    (b) The chief executive officer or his or her designee shall prepare and implement a school transition plan to support students attending a school that is the subject of a school action that accomplishes the goals of this Section. The chief executive must identify and commit specific resources for implementation of the school transition plan for a minimum of the full first academic year after the board approves a school action.
    (c) The school transition plan shall include the following:
        (1) services to support the academic, social, and
    	
emotional needs of students; supports for students with disabilities, homeless students, and English language learners; and support to address security and safety issues;
        (2) options to enroll in higher performing schools;
        (3) informational briefings regarding the choice of
    	
schools that include all pertinent information to enable the parent or guardian and child to make an informed choice, including the option to visit the schools of choice prior to making a decision;
        (4) the provision of appropriate transportation where
    	
practicable;
        (5) the departments that are responsible for the
    	
oversight;
        (6) specific programs to be offered; and
        (7) support to implement plans at receiving schools,
    	
specifying the funding source.
    (d) When implementing a school action, the Board must make reasonable and demonstrated efforts to ensure that:
        (1) affected students receive a comparable level of
    	
social support services provided by Chicago Public Schools that were available at the previous school, provided that the need for such social support services continue to exist; and
        (2) class sizes of any receiving school do not exceed
    	
those established under the Chicago Public Schools policy regarding class size, subject to principal discretion.
(Source: P.A. 100-965, eff. 8-19-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-230)
    Sec. 34-230. School action public meetings and hearings.
    (a) By October 1 of each year, the chief executive officer shall prepare and publish guidelines for school actions. The guidelines shall outline the academic and non-academic criteria for a school action. These guidelines shall be created with the involvement of local school councils, parents, educators, and community organizations. These guidelines, and each subsequent revision, shall be subject to a public comment period of at least 21 days before their approval.
    (b) The chief executive officer shall announce all proposed school actions to be taken at the close of the current academic year consistent with the guidelines by December 1 of each year.
    (c) On or before December 1 of each year, the chief executive officer shall publish notice of the proposed school actions.
        (1) Notice of the proposal for a school action shall
    	
include a written statement of the basis for the school action, an explanation of how the school action meets the criteria set forth in the guidelines, and a draft School Transition Plan identifying the items required in Section 34-225 of this Code for all schools affected by the school action. The notice shall state the date, time, and place of the hearing or meeting. For a school closure only, 8 months after notice is given, the chief executive officer must publish on the district's website a full financial report on the closure that includes an analysis of the closure's costs and benefits to the district.
        (2) The chief executive officer or his or her
    	
designee shall provide notice to the principal, staff, local school council, and parents or guardians of any school that is subject to the proposed school action.
        (3) The chief executive officer shall provide written
    	
notice of any proposed school action to the State Senator, State Representative, and alderperson for the school or schools that are subject to the proposed school action.
        (4) The chief executive officer shall publish notice
    	
of proposed school actions on the district's Internet website.
        (5) The chief executive officer shall provide notice
    	
of proposed school actions at least 30 calendar days in advance of a public hearing or meeting. The notice shall state the date, time, and place of the hearing or meeting. No Board decision regarding a proposed school action may take place less than 60 days after the announcement of the proposed school action.
    (d) The chief executive officer shall publish a brief summary of the proposed school actions and the date, time, and place of the hearings or meetings in a newspaper of general circulation.
    (e) The chief executive officer shall designate at least 3 opportunities to elicit public comment at a hearing or meeting on a proposed school action and shall do the following:
        (1) Convene at least one public hearing at the
    	
centrally located office of the Board.
        (2) Convene at least 2 additional public hearings or
    	
meetings at a location convenient to the school community subject to the proposed school action.
    (f) Public hearings shall be conducted by a qualified independent hearing officer chosen from a list of independent hearing officers. The general counsel shall compile and publish a list of independent hearing officers by November 1 of each school year. The independent hearing officer shall have the following qualifications:
        (1) he or she must be a licensed attorney eligible to
    	
practice law in Illinois;
        (2) he or she must not be an employee of the Board;
    	
and
        (3) he or she must not have represented the Board,
    	
its employees or any labor organization representing its employees, any local school council, or any charter or contract school in any capacity within the last year.
    The independent hearing officer shall issue a written report that summarizes the hearing and determines whether the chief executive officer complied with the requirements of this Section and the guidelines.
    The chief executive officer shall publish the report on the district's Internet website within 5 calendar days after receiving the report and at least 15 days prior to any Board action being taken.
    (g) Public meetings shall be conducted by a representative of the chief executive officer. A summary of the public meeting shall be published on the district's Internet website within 5 calendar days after the meeting.
    (h) If the chief executive officer proposes a school action without following the mandates set forth in this Section, the proposed school action shall not be approved by the Board during the school year in which the school action was proposed.
(Source: P.A. 101-133, eff. 7-26-19; 102-15, eff. 6-17-21.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-232)
    Sec. 34-232. Proposed school action announcement and notice; 2012-2013 school year. The following apply for school actions proposed during the 2012-2013 school year:
        (1) On or before March 31, 2013, the chief executive
    	
officer shall announce all proposed school actions to be taken at the close of the current academic year consistent with the guidelines published under Section 34-230 of this Code.
        (2) On or before March 31, 2013, the chief executive
    	
officer shall publish notice of the proposed school actions.
        (3) The chief executive officer shall provide notice
    	
of proposed school actions at least 15 calendar days in advance of a public hearing or meeting.
    All other provisions of Section 34-230 of this Code that do not conflict with this Section must be followed when proposing school actions.
(Source: P.A. 97-1133, eff. 11-30-12.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34-235)
    Sec. 34-235. Emergencies. Nothing in Sections 34-200 through 34-235 of this Code prevents the district from taking emergency action to protect the health and safety of students and staff in an attendance center. In the event of an emergency that requires the district to close all or part of a school facility, including compliance with a directive of a duly authorized public safety agency, the chief executive officer or his or her designees are authorized to take all steps necessary to protect the safety of students and staff, including relocation of the attendance center to another location or closing the attendance center. In such cases, the chief executive officer shall provide written notice of the basis for the emergency action within 3 days after declaring the emergency and shall publish the steps that have been taken or will be taken to address the emergency within 10 days after declaring the emergency. The notice shall be posted on the district's website and provided to the principal, the local school council, and the State Senator, the State Representative, and the alderperson of the school that is the subject of the emergency action. The notice shall explain why the district could not comply with the provisions in Sections 34-200 through 34-235 of this Code.
(Source: P.A. 102-15, eff. 6-17-21.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 34A heading)
ARTICLE 34A
SCHOOL FINANCE AUTHORITY

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-101) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-101)
    Sec. 34A-101. Short title. This Article shall be known and may be cited as the "School Finance Authority Act."
(Source: P.A. 81-1221.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-102) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-102)
    Sec. 34A-102. Findings and purpose.
    (a) The General Assembly finds:
        (i) A fundamental goal of the people of the State, as
    	
expressed in Section 1 of Article X of the Illinois Constitution, is the educational development of all persons to the limits of their capacities. When a board of education faces financial difficulties, continued operation of the public school system is threatened.
        (ii) A sound financial structure is essential to the
    	
continued operation of any school system. It is vital to commercial, educational and cultural interests that the public schools remain in operation. To achieve that goal, public school systems must have effective access to the private market to borrow short and long term funds.
        (iii) To promote the financial integrity of boards of
    	
education of cities having a population exceeding 500,000, it is necessary to provide for the creation of school finance authorities with the powers necessary to promote sound financial management and to assure the continued operation of the public schools.
    (b) It is the purpose of this Article to provide a secure financial basis for the continued operation of the public schools. In addition, it is the further purpose of this Article to facilitate implementation of school reform in the continued operation of the public schools in accordance with the provisions of this amendatory Act of 1991. The intention of the General Assembly, in enacting this legislation, is to establish procedures, provide powers and impose restrictions to assure the financial and educational integrity of the public schools while leaving principal responsibility for the educational policies of the public schools to the boards of education within the State, consistent with the requirements for satisfying the public policy and purpose herein set forth.
(Source: P.A. 85-1418; 86-1477.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-103) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-103)
    Sec. 34A-103. Definitions. As used in this Article:
    (a) "Authority" means the "(Name of City) School Finance Authority";
    (b) "Board" means any board of education to which this Article is applicable;
    (c) "Budget" means the budget of the Board as defined in Section 34-43 of this Act, as from time to time in effect;
    (d) "Chairman" means the chairman of the Authority appointed pursuant to paragraph (c) of Section 34A-301 of this Article;
    (e) "City" means the city wherein the school district of such Board is located;
    (f) "Financial Plan" means the financial plan of the Board to be developed pursuant to Section 34A-403 of this Article, as from time to time in effect;
    (g) "Fiscal Year" means the fiscal year of the Board;
    (h) "Governor" means the Governor of the State of Illinois;
    (i) "School year" means the school year of the Board;
    (j) "Approved System-Wide Educational Reform Goals and Objectives Plan" means the system-wide educational reform goals and objectives plan that has been accepted and approved by the Authority;
    (k) "Investment Obligations" means any of the following which at the time of investment are legal investments under the laws of the State for the money proposed to be invested therein:
        (i) Direct obligations of, or obligations the
    	
principal of and interest on which are unconditionally guaranteed by, the United States of America;
        (ii) Bonds, debentures or notes or other evidence of
    	
indebtedness issued or guaranteed by any of the following agencies: Bank for Cooperatives; Federal Intermediate Credit Banks; Federal Land Banks; Federal Home Loan Banks; the Federal National Mortgage Association; the United States Postal Service; the Government National Mortgage Association; the Federal Financing National Mortgage Association; the Federal Financing Bank; or any other agency or instrumentality of the United States of America now existing or hereafter created;
        (iii) New Housing Authority Bonds issued by public
    	
agencies or municipalities and fully secured as to the payment of both principal and interest by a pledge of annual contributions under an Annual Contributions Contract or Contracts with the United States of America, or Project Notes issued by public agencies or municipalities and fully secured as to the payment of both principal and interest by a requisition or payment agreement with the United States of America;
        (iv) Direct and general obligations of, or
    	
obligations guaranteed by, the State, to the payment of the principal of and interest on which the full faith and credit of the State is pledged;
        (v) Negotiable or non-negotiable time deposits
    	
evidenced by certificates of deposit issued by banks, trust companies or national banking associations (which may include the trustee) which are members of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and savings and loan associations which are members of the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation, provided that such time deposits in any such bank, trust company, national banking association or savings and loan association are continuously secured by obligations described in clauses (i), (ii), (iii), or (iv) of this definition, provided further that such obligations at all times have a market value at least equal to the maturity value of the deposits so secured, including accrued interest; and
        (vi) Repurchase agreements with banks (which may
    	
include the trustee) described in clause (v) of this definition and government bond dealers reporting to, trading with, and recognized as primary dealers by a Federal Reserve Bank, the underlying securities of which are obligations described in clauses (i) or (ii) of this definition, provided that the underlying securities are required to be continuously maintained at a market value not less than the amount so invested;
    (l) "Mayor" means the Mayor of the City;
    (m) "Obligations" means bonds and notes of the Authority;
    (n) "State" means the State of Illinois.
(Source: P.A. 85-1418; 86-1477.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-104) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-104)
    Sec. 34A-104. Establishment of Authority. For each school district organized under Article 34 there is established a body both corporate and politic and a unit of local government to be known as the "(Name of City) School Finance Authority" which, in such name, shall exercise all authority vested in such Authority by this Article.
(Source: P.A. 81-1221.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-201) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-201)
    Sec. 34A-201. General powers. The purposes of the Authority shall be to exercise financial control over the Board, and to furnish financial assistance so that the Board can provide public education within the Board's jurisdiction while permitting the Board to meet its obligations to its creditors and the holders of its notes and bonds. Except as expressly limited by this Article, the Authority shall have all powers necessary to meet its responsibilities and to carry out its purposes and the purposes of this Article, including, but not limited to, the following powers:
    (a) to sue and be sued;
    (b) to provide for its organization and internal management and, subject to agreements with or for the benefit of holders of its Obligations, to make rules and regulations governing the use of its property and facilities;
    (c) to make and execute contracts, leases, subleases and all other instruments or agreements necessary or convenient for the exercise of the powers and functions granted by this Article;
    (d) to purchase real or personal property necessary or convenient for its purposes; to execute and deliver deeds for real property held in its own name; to mortgage, pledge or otherwise grant security interests in such properties; and to sell, lease, or otherwise dispose of such of its property as, in the judgment of the Authority, is no longer necessary for its purposes;
    (e) to appoint officers, agents, and employees of the Authority, define their duties and qualifications and fix their compensation and employee benefits;
    (f) to lend or otherwise transfer to the Board such sums of money as are not required for other purposes;
    (g) to borrow money and to issue Obligations pursuant to this Article, to fund, refund or advance refund the same, to provide for the rights of the holders of its Obligations, and to repay any advances;
    (h) subject to the provisions of any contract with or for the benefit of the holders of its Obligations, to purchase or redeem its Obligations or to purchase the notes, bonds or obligations of the Board or the notes, bonds or obligations of the City;
    (i) to procure insurance against any loss in such amounts and from such insurers as it deems desirable;
    (j) to engage the services of consultants for rendering professional and technical assistance and advice on matters within the Authority's power;
    (k) to contract for and to accept any gifts, grants or loans of funds or property or financial or other aid in any form from the federal government, state government, unit of local government, school district or any agency or instrumentality thereof, or from any other private or public source, and to comply with the terms and conditions thereof;
    (l) as security for the payment of the principal of and interest on its Obligations and for the performance of any agreements made in connection therewith, to grant a security interest or lien upon all or any part of its property or revenues;
    (m) to pay the expenses of its operations; and
    (n) to do any and all things necessary or convenient to carry out its purposes and exercise the powers given to the Authority by this Article.
(Source: P.A. 81-1221.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-201.1)
    Sec. 34A-201.1. (Repealed).
(Source: P.A. 89-15, eff. 5-30-95. Repealed by P.A. 89-698, eff. 1-14-97.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-201a) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-201a)
    Sec. 34A-201a. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 88-511.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-202) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-202)
    Sec. 34A-202. Deposits and Investments. (a) The Authority shall have the power to establish checking and whatever other banking or savings and loan association accounts it may deem appropriate for conducting its affairs.
    (b) Subject to the provisions of any contract with or for the benefit of the holders of its Obligations, the Authority may invest any funds not required for immediate use or disbursement, whether pursuant to Section 34A-201 of this Article or otherwise, only in Investment Obligations.
    No bank or savings and loan association shall receive public funds as permitted by this Section, unless it has complied with the requirements established pursuant to Section 6 of "An Act relating to certain investments of public funds by public agencies", approved July 23, 1943, as now or hereafter amended.
(Source: P.A. 83-541.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-301) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-301)
    Sec. 34A-301. Board of Directors. The governing body of the Authority shall be a board consisting of 5 Directors appointed as follows:
    (a) Two Directors appointed by the Governor, with the approval of the Mayor.
    (b) Two Directors appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of the Governor.
    (c) One Director appointed jointly by the Governor and the Mayor, who shall serve as Chairman.
    (d) The Governor and the Mayor shall certify their respective appointments and approvals to the Secretary of State.
(Source: P.A. 81-1221.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-302) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-302)
    Sec. 34A-302. Terms, vacancies and removal. Of the initial Directors appointed by the Governor, with the approval of the Mayor, one each shall be selected for terms expiring on January 31, 1981 and January 31, 1982. Of the initial Directors appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Governor, one each shall be selected for terms expiring on January 31, 1981 and January 31, 1982. The initial Chairman shall be selected for a term expiring January 31, 1983. Thereafter, each Director shall hold office for a term of 3 years, and until his successor has been appointed as provided in Section 34A-301. Any vacancy which shall arise, shall be filled as provided in Section 34A-301. Any Director appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve until the expiration of his predecessor's term, and until his successor has been appointed as provided in Section 34A-301. A vacancy shall occur upon resignation, death, conviction of a felony, or removal from office of a Director. Directors shall be eligible for reappointment. Any Director may be removed for incompetence, malfeasance or neglect of duty, at the instance of the occupant of the office entitled to appoint that Director, or in the case of the Chairman at the instance of the occupant of each office so entitled.
(Source: P.A. 81-1221.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-303) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-303)
    Sec. 34A-303. Chairman and other officers. The Chairman shall preside at meetings of the Directors. The Directors may establish such offices and appoint such officers for the Authority as they may deem appropriate.
(Source: P.A. 81-1221.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-304) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-304)
    Sec. 34A-304. Assistance by state agencies, units of local government or school districts. The Board shall render such services to, and permit the use of its facilities and resources by, the Authority at no charge as may be requested by the Authority. Any state agency, unit of local government, or school district may, within its respective function, render such services to the Authority as may be requested by the Authority. Upon request of the Authority any such agency, unit of local government or school district is hereby authorized and empowered to transfer to the Authority such officers and employees as the Authority may deem necessary in carrying out its functions and duties. Officers and employees so transferred shall not lose or forfeit their employment status or rights.
(Source: P.A. 85-1418; 86-1477.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-305) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-305)
    Sec. 34A-305. Compensation. The Directors shall serve without compensation, but each Director shall be entitled to reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official duties as a Director.
(Source: P.A. 81-1221.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-306) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-306)
    Sec. 34A-306. Meetings and records.
    (a) The Governor shall call the first meeting of the Authority. Thereafter, the Directors shall prescribe the times and places for their meetings and the manner in which regular and special meetings may be called. The Directors shall comply in all respects with "An Act in relation to meetings", approved July 11, 1957, as now or hereafter amended. The Authority shall be an Agency to which the Local Records Act, as amended, applies.
    (b) A majority of the Directors holding office shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business. The affirmative votes of at least 3 Directors shall be necessary for adopting any rule or regulation, and for any other action required by this Article to be taken by resolution, directive or ordinance.
    (c) The Authority and the State Superintendent of Education shall cooperate with each other in the exercise of their respective powers under The School Code. There shall be at least one annual meeting between the Authority and the State Superintendent of Education in order to facilitate cooperation and communication.
(Source: P.A. 85-1418; 86-1477.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-401) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-401)
    Sec. 34A-401. Approval of Financial Plan and Budget. In carrying out the purposes of this Article and pursuant to Sections 34A-402 through 34A-411, as hereinafter provided, the Authority shall have the power to approve or to reject the Financial Plans, Budgets and contracts of the Board; provided, however, that the Authority shall have no power to impair any existing contract or obligation of the Board; and provided further, that with respect to any multi-year employment contract or collective bargaining agreement authorized or entered into pursuant to Section 34-49 or the Illinois Educational Labor Relations Act, as now or hereafter amended, the Authority's power to approve or reject the same shall be limited to the first year of such contract or agreement as provided in Section 34A-405. Except as provided in Section 34A-403 with regard to revenue estimates, the Authority shall have no power to amend or reject in part any Financial Plan, Budget or contract presented to the Authority for its approval.
(Source: P.A. 84-1057.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-401.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-401.1)
    Sec. 34A-401.1. Limitation. Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law to the contrary, the Authority shall have no power to reject the Financial Plans, Budgets and Contracts of the Board for the failure of the Board to keep reserves in excess of $5,000,000.
(Source: P.A. 83-1130.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-402) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-402)
    Sec. 34A-402. Balanced budget. The Board's budget for its fiscal year ending in 1982 and for each subsequent fiscal year shall be balanced in accordance with an accounting system and procedure to be prescribed by the Authority, with substantial progress toward balancing the budget to be achieved in each of the preceding fiscal years; provided, however, that (1) for the fiscal year of the Board ending in 1992, the aggregate amount of the reserved fund balances required to be maintained by the Board under its budget for that fiscal year as last balanced by the Board and approved by the Authority prior to the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1992 in accordance with the accounting system and procedure prescribed by the Authority is hereby reduced by $13,266,200, (2) the $13,266,200 released from reserved fund balance requirements in fiscal year 1992 by this amendatory Act of 1992 shall be available to the Board for appropriation by it for any lawful school purpose during its fiscal year ending in 1992, and (3) the Authority shall not require the $13,266,200 released from reserved fund balance requirements in fiscal year 1992 by this amendatory Act of 1992 to be restored by the Board under any regular, supplemental or amended budget adopted for any fiscal year ending in 1992 or thereafter.
    For the fiscal year of the Board ending in 1994, the aggregate amount of the reserved fund balances required to be maintained by the Board under its budget for that fiscal year in accordance with the accounting system and procedure prescribed by the Authority as of the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1993 is hereby reduced by $22,000,000. The $22,000,000 released from reserved fund balance requirements in fiscal year 1994 by this amendatory Act of 1993 shall be available to the Board for appropriation by it for any lawful school purpose during its fiscal year ending in 1994. The Authority shall not require the $22,000,000 released from reserved fund balance requirements in fiscal year 1994 by this amendatory Act of 1993 to be restored by the Board under any regular, supplemental or amended budget adopted for any fiscal year ending in 1994 or thereafter. This reduction in the required reserved fund balance is in addition to the reduction made by Public Act 87-838.
    For the fiscal year of the Board ending in 1994, the aggregate amount of the reserved fund balances required to be maintained by the Board under its budget for that fiscal year in accordance with the accounting system and procedure prescribed by the Authority as of the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1993 is hereby reduced to $100,000,000. The reserved fund balances required to be maintained in each subsequent fiscal year shall not exceed $100,000,000.
(Source: P.A. 87-838; 88-89; 88-511.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-403) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-403)
    Sec. 34A-403. Financial Plans. The Board shall develop, adopt and submit to the Authority on or before March 1, 1980, for approval by the Authority, an initial Financial Plan with respect to the remaining portion of the Fiscal Year ending in 1980 and for the two succeeding Fiscal Years. The Board shall develop and adopt subsequent Financial Plans in accordance with this Section. Beginning with the Fiscal Year beginning in 1993, and every second year thereafter, the Board shall adopt a Financial Plan covering a period of 2 fiscal years. After adoption by the Board, the Board shall submit each plan to the Authority for its approval not later than 30 days prior to the commencement of the first Fiscal Year to which the Financial Plan relates, except that the Financial Plan to be developed for the Fiscal Years beginning in 1993 and 1994 shall be submitted to the Authority within 90 days of the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1993. The Authority shall approve or reject the Financial Plan within 15 days of its receipt of the Financial Plan from the Board. No Financial Plan shall have force or effect without approval of the Authority. Each Financial Plan shall be developed, submitted, approved and monitored in accordance with the following procedures:
    (a) The Board shall determine and submit to the Authority, at a time and in a manner prescribed by the Authority, estimates of revenues available to the Board during the period for which the Financial Plan is to be in effect. The Authority shall approve, reject or amend the revenue estimates. In the event the Board fails, for any reason, to submit to the Authority estimates of revenue as required by this paragraph, the Authority may prepare such estimates. The Financial Plan submitted by the Board shall be based upon revenue estimates approved or prepared by the Authority. As soon as practicable following the establishment of the Authority, the President of the Board shall, at the request of the Chairman of the Authority, make available to the Chairman of the Authority copies of the audited financial statements and of the books and records of account of the Board for the preceding 5 fiscal years of the Board.
    (b) Each Financial Plan for each Fiscal Year or part thereof to which it relates, shall contain (i) a description of revenues and expenditures, provision for debt service, cash resources and uses, and capital improvements, each in such manner and detail as the Authority shall prescribe, (ii) a description of the means by which the Budget will be brought into balance in accordance with Section 34A-402 of this Article, and (iii) such other matters that the Authority, in its discretion, requires. The initial Financial Plan shall also include a description of the means by which any outstanding short-term indebtedness shall be paid or refunded by the Board. The Authority may prescribe any reasonable time, standards, procedures or forms consistent with this Section for preparation and submission of the Financial Plan.
    (c) The Authority shall approve the initial and each subsequent Financial Plan if, in its judgment, the plan is complete, is reasonably capable of being achieved, and meets the requirement set forth in Section 34A-402 of this Article. Otherwise, the Authority shall reject the Financial Plan. In the event of rejection, the Authority may prescribe a procedure and standards for revision of the Financial Plan by the Board.
    (d) The Board shall report to the Authority, at such times and in such manner as the Authority may direct, concerning the Board's compliance with each Financial Plan. The Authority may review the Board's operations, obtain budgetary data and financial statements, require the Board to produce reports, and have access to any other information in the possession of the Board that it deems relevant. The Authority may issue recommendations or directives within its powers to the Board to assure compliance with the Financial Plan. The Board shall produce such budgetary data, financial statements, reports and other information and comply with such directives.
    (e) After approval of each Financial Plan, the Board shall regularly reexamine the revenue and expenditure estimates on which it was based and revise them as necessary. The Board shall promptly notify the Authority of any material change in the revenue or expenditure estimates in the Financial Plan. The Board may submit to the Authority, or the Authority may require the Board to submit, modified Financial Plans based upon revised revenue or expenditure estimates or for any other good reason. The Authority shall approve or reject each modified Financial Plan pursuant to paragraph (c) of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 88-511.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-403.1)
    Sec. 34A-403.1. Fiscal year 1994 contracts. Notwithstanding any provision of this Article to the contrary, the failure of a Board to have a Financial Plan approved by the School Finance Authority within 90 days after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1993 shall not impair the Board's power to enter into any contract or other obligation or the Authority's powers and responsibilities under Sections 34A-404, 34A-405, and 34A-405.2 or in any other way affect the operations of the Board.
(Source: P.A. 92-651, eff. 7-11-02.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-404) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-404)
    Sec. 34A-404. Budgets. The Board shall develop and adopt and submit to the Authority on or before February 1, 1980, for approval by the Authority, a revised Budget for the remaining portion of the Fiscal Year ending in 1980 and, thereafter, an annual Budget for each Fiscal Year. After adoption by the Board, the Board shall submit each Budget to the Authority for its approval not later than 30 days prior to the commencement of the Fiscal Year to which the Budget relates. The Authority shall approve or reject the Budget within 15 days of its receipt from the Board. No Budget shall have force or effect without approval of the Authority. Each Budget shall be developed, submitted, approved and monitored in accordance with the following procedures:
        (a) Each Budget submitted by the Board shall be based
    	
upon revenue estimates approved or prepared by the Authority, as provided in paragraph (a) of Section 34A-403 of this Article.
        (b) Each Budget shall contain such information and
    	
detail as may be prescribed by the Authority. The Authority may also prescribe any reasonable time, standards, procedures or forms for preparation and submission of the Budget. Any deficit for the Fiscal Year ending in 1981 and for any Fiscal Year thereafter shall be included as a current expense item for the succeeding Fiscal Year.
        (c)(1) The Authority shall approve each Budget if, in
    	
its judgment, the Budget is complete, is reasonably capable of being achieved, will meet the requirement set forth in Section 34A-402 of this Article, and will be consistent with the Financial Plan in effect. Otherwise, the Authority shall reject the Budget. In the event of rejection, the Authority may prescribe a procedure and standards for revision of the Budget by the Board.
        (2) For any Fiscal Year, the Authority may approve a
    	
provisional budget that, in its judgment, will satisfy the standards of subdivision (c)(1) of this Section if, notwithstanding the provisions of the Illinois Educational Labor Relations Act or any other law to the contrary, the amount appropriated therein for all spending for operations shall not at any time, on an annualized basis, exceed an Expenditure Limitation established by the Authority. The Authority may establish and enforce, including by exercise of its powers under Section 34A-409(b), such monitoring and control measures as it deems necessary to assure that the commitments, obligations, expenditures, and cash disbursements of the Board continue to conform on an ongoing basis with any Expenditure Limitation. No commitment, contract, or other obligation of the Board in excess of the Expenditure Limitation shall be legally binding, and any member of the Board or any local school council, or officer, employee or agent thereof, who violates the provisions of this Section shall be subject to the provisions of Sections 34-52 and 34A-608. An Expenditure Limitation established by the Authority shall remain in effect for that Fiscal Year or until revoked by the Authority.
        (d) The Board shall report to the Authority at such
    	
times and in such manner as the Authority may direct, concerning the Board's compliance with each Budget. The Authority may review the Board's operations, obtain budgetary data and financial statements, require the Board to produce reports, and have access to any other information in the possession of the Board that the Authority deems relevant. The Authority may issue recommendations or directives within its powers to the Board to assure compliance with the Budget. The Board shall produce such budgetary data, financial statements, reports and other information and comply with such directives.
        (e) After approval of each Budget, the Board shall
    	
promptly notify the Authority of any material change in the revenue or expenditure estimates in the Budget. The Board may submit to the Authority, or the Authority may require the Board to submit, a supplemental Budget. The Authority shall approve or reject each supplemental Budget pursuant to paragraph (c) of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 100-201, eff. 8-18-17.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-405) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-405)
    Sec. 34A-405. Contracts. (a) No contract or other obligation shall be entered into by the Board unless it is consistent with the Financial Plan and Budget in effect. No multi-year employment contract or collective bargaining agreement authorized or entered into pursuant to Section 34-49 or the Illinois Educational Labor Relations Act, as now or hereafter amended, shall, with respect to any terms and provisions thereof which are operative after expiration of the first year of any such contract or agreement, be deemed inconsistent with any Financial Plan and Budget at any time in effect; provided, however, that any terms and provisions of a contract or agreement which would increase expenditures for salaries, benefits or other forms of compensation after the expiration of the first year of such contract or agreement shall be contingent upon the attainment of sufficient available revenues, considering all necessary expenditures, to support such increases.
    (b) The Authority may adopt, and from time to time amend, regulations identifying categories and types of contracts and other obligations that shall be subject to approval by the Authority and the procedure for submitting contracts for approval. Each contract or other obligation that is entered into by the Board and requires approval by the Authority shall contain a provision stating that it shall not become legally binding on the Board unless and until it has received the approval of the Authority. No contract or other obligation that requires the approval of the Authority shall be legally binding on the Board unless and until it has received such approval. The Authority shall not, either by regulation or in practice, withhold approval of any multi-year employment contract or collective bargaining agreement authorized or entered into pursuant to Section 34-49 or the Illinois Educational Labor Relations Act, as now or hereafter amended, if, in the judgment of the Authority, the terms and provisions operative during the first year of such contract or agreement are consistent with the Budget and Financial Plan in effect for that period; provided, however, that any terms and provisions of a contract or agreement which would increase expenditures for salaries, benefits or other forms of compensation after the expiration of the first year of such contract or agreement shall be contingent upon the attainment of sufficient available revenues, considering all necessary expenditures, to support such increases.
    (c) The Board shall submit to the Authority a copy of any contract or other obligation for which the approval of the Authority is required, along with a cost analysis and such other information as the Authority may require. The Authority may prescribe any reasonable time, standards, procedures or forms for submission of the contract or other obligation.
    (d) The Authority shall approve the contract or obligation if, in its judgment, the information required to be submitted is complete and the contract or other obligation is consistent with the Budget and Financial Plan in effect. Otherwise, the Authority shall reject the contract or other obligation; provided, however, that any multi-year employment contract or collective bargaining agreement authorized or entered into pursuant to Section 34-49 or the Illinois Educational Labor Relations Act, as now or hereafter amended, shall be approved by the Authority if in its judgment the terms and provisions operative during the first year of such contract or agreement are consistent with the Budget and Financial Plan in effect for that period; provided, however, that any terms and provisions of a contract or agreement which would increase expenditures for salaries, benefits or other forms of compensation after the expiration of the first year of such contract or agreement shall be contingent upon the attainment of sufficient available revenues, considering all necessary expenditures, to support such increases. Contracts or other obligations not rejected within 30 days after submission to the Authority shall be considered approved, provided, however, that the Authority shall have an additional 30 days to approve or reject the contract or other obligation if it so advises the Board within the initial 30 day period.
(Source: P.A. 84-1057.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-405.1)
    Sec. 34A-405.1. Interim operations. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, for the period September 1 through September 12, 1993, the following provisions apply:
        (1) The Board of Education shall not be subject to
    	
the provisions of Section 34A-406.
        (2) Neither the Board, the general superintendent,
    	
nor any other officer or employee of the Board, nor any local school council, may hire any person as an employee or officer of the Board in any position.
        (3) The Board of Education shall not be subject to
    	
the provisions of Section 14 of the Illinois Educational Labor Relations Act for any actions taken under item (2) of this Section.
        (4) The Board shall adopt an interim appropriation
    	
authorizing the expenditure of funds consistent with the provisions of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 88-473.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-405.2)
    Sec. 34A-405.2. Staffing levels.
    (a) No hiring or appointment of any person in any position by the Board, the general superintendent, any other officer or employee of the Board, or any local school council shall be made or entered into unless it is consistent with the Financial Plan and Budget in effect and the staffing plan approved by the Authority under this Section. The hiring or appointment of any person shall not be binding on the Board unless and until it is in compliance with this Section.
    (b) The Board shall submit to the Authority for approval by the Authority a staffing plan for the upcoming school year at the same time as the submission of the Budget, except that the staffing plan for the fiscal year ending in 1994 shall be submitted to the Authority within 90 days after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1993. The staffing plan shall be accompanied by a cost analysis and such other information as the Authority may require. The Authority may adopt, and from time to time amend, regulations to implement this Section and may prescribe standards, procedures, and forms for submission of the staffing plan.
    (c) The Authority shall approve the staffing plan if, in its judgment, the information required to be submitted is complete and the staffing plan is consistent with the Budget and Financial Plan in effect. Otherwise, the Authority shall reject the staffing plan; in the event of rejection, the Authority shall prescribe a procedure and standards for revision of the staffing plan. The Authority shall act on the staffing plan at the same time as the approval of the Budget, except that the staffing plan for the fiscal year ending in 1994 shall be acted upon at the same time as approval of the Financial Plan for that fiscal year.
    (d) The Board shall report to the Authority, at such times and in such manner as the Authority may direct, concerning the Board's compliance with each staffing plan. The Authority may review the Board's operations, obtaining budgetary data and financial statements, may require the Board to produce reports, and shall have access to any other information in the possession of the Board that it deems relevant. The Authority may issue recommendations or directives within its powers to the Board to assure compliance with the staffing plan. The Board shall produce such budgetary data, financial statements, reports, and other information and shall comply with such directives.
    (e) After approval of each staffing plan, the Board shall regularly reexamine the estimates on which it was based and revise them as necessary. The Board shall promptly notify the Authority of any material change in the estimates in the staffing plan. The Board may submit to the Authority, or the Authority may require the Board to submit, modifications to the staffing plan based upon revised revenue or expenditure estimates or for any other good reason. The Authority shall approve or reject each modified staffing plan pursuant to subsection (c) of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 88-511.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-406) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-406)
    Sec. 34A-406. Expenditures. The Board shall meet its debt service obligations as they become due. No other expenditure shall be made by the Board unless it is consistent with the Financial Plan and Budget or a provisional budget provided for in Section 34A-404(c)(2), in each case as in effect.
(Source: P.A. 88-511.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-406.1) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-406.1)
    Sec. 34A-406.1. During the 1984-85 school year only, the number of education fund positions for both teacher-certificated and career service personnel employed by the Chicago Board of Education shall not exceed the previous year's budgeted positions, as certified by the Chicago School Finance Authority.
(Source: P.A. 83-1131.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-406.2)
    Sec. 34A-406.2. Interim Operations for Fiscal Year 1994 Pending Budget Adoption and Approval. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, for the fiscal year of the Board ending in 1994 only, during the period of 30 days after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1993, the Board of Education is not subject to Sec. 34A-406 and shall adopt an interim appropriation authorizing the expenditure of funds consistent with the provisions of this Section and of this amendatory Act of 1993. If the Board fails to timely meet and satisfy items (1) through (3) of this Section, no funds may be spent or disbursed and no obligations, commitments, or liabilities incurred for any part of the 30-day period after the failure occurs.
        (1) Notwithstanding any provision of Section 34-46 to
    	
the contrary, within 10 days after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1993, the Board shall prepare in tentative form a Budget for the fiscal year ending in 1994 and shall make at least 5 copies available for public inspection in the office of the Secretary of the Board and file 5 copies with the Authority.
        (2) Notwithstanding any provision of Section 34-46 to
    	
the contrary, not less than 2 days before its final action on the Budget, the Board shall have a public hearing on the filed tentative Fiscal Year 1994 Budget. Public notice of the hearing shall be given once at least 2 days before the hearing by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the City.
        (3) Notwithstanding any provision of Section 34-43,
    	
34-46, or 34A-404 to the contrary, within 15 days after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1993, the Board shall adopt and submit to the Authority for approval or rejection the Budget for the fiscal year of the Board ending in 1994. The Authority shall approve or reject that Budget in accordance with Section 34A-404 within 15 days of its receipt from the Board but not more than 30 days after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1993. This item (3) does not apply to any revision, amendment, or supplement to the Budget for the fiscal year of the Board ending in 1994 if the revision, amendment, or supplement is adopted by the Board more than 30 days after, or is received by the Authority more than 20 days after, the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1993.
(Source: P.A. 88-511.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-407) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-407)
    Sec. 34A-407. Approval of chief financial officer. The Board shall appoint a chief financial officer subject to the approval of the Authority. Either the Authority or the Board shall have the power to remove the chief financial officer. The chief financial officer shall have the responsibility for preparing and supervising the Budget and Financial Plan of the Board and overseeing expenditures of the Board. The chief financial officer shall report to the Board. The chief financial officer may be granted the authority by the Board to hire a specific number of employees to assist in meeting immediate responsibilities. Conditions of employment for such personnel shall not be subject to the provisions of Section 34-85.
(Source: P.A. 82-485.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-408) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-408)
    Sec. 34A-408. Financial and managerial audits.
    (a) The Authority may examine the business records and audit the accounts of the Board or require that the Board examine its business records and audit its accounts at such time and in such manner as the Authority may prescribe. The Board shall appoint a certified public accountant annually, approved by the Authority, to audit its financial statements.
    (b) The Authority shall initiate and direct financial and managerial assessments and similar analyses of the operations of the Chicago Board of Education, as may be required by this Section or as may, in the judgment of the Authority, assure sound and efficient financial management of the Board.
    (c) On or before April 1, 1994, the Authority shall assure completion of assessments and analyses that:
        (1) Provide for a review of the managerial and
    	
financial efficiencies and improvements that can be achieved in the operation of the special education programs of the Board.
        (2) Analyze the potential cost savings and
    	
efficiencies that the Board can achieve through the consolidation of attendance centers and the operations of buildings.
    Upon the completion of these required assessments, the Authority shall make recommendations to the Board regarding improvements and changes that derive from these assessments, which the Board should implement.
    In conjunction with its budgetary submission to the Authority for the fiscal year that ends in 1995, the Board shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Authority that the recommendations requested by the Authority have been implemented in whole or in part or, in the alternative, are not capable of being implemented. In consideration of whether to approve or reject the budget for the fiscal year that ends in 1995, the Authority shall adjudge whether the Board has fully considered and responsibly proposed implementation of the Authority's recommendations.
    (d) On or before April 1, 1995, the Authority shall adopt and submit a report to the General Assembly, the Governor, and the Chicago Board of Education that reflects a comprehensive assessment of the financial status of the Chicago Board of Education. The report shall include an expenditure analysis of all special education programs provided by the Board, which shall include the number of programs available and student participation, the dollar amount spent on each program, the program location, the availability of transportation for students participating in the programs, and related expenditure recommendations. In addition, the report shall also include a review of all attendance centers for efficiency purposes, which shall include the total number of attendance centers in use, their capacities, and the number of students currently enrolled in the attendance centers, and the attendance center long range capital needs (repair and maintenance) based upon current and estimated future enrollments. A study shall also be included on teacher/student ratios.
    (e) The Authority shall initiate and direct a management audit of the Board at least once every 2 years. The audit shall review the personnel, organization, contracts, leases, and physical properties of the Board to determine whether the Board is managing and utilizing its resources in an economical and efficient manner. The audit shall determine the causes of any inefficiencies or uneconomical practices, including inadequacies in internal and administrative procedures, organizational structure, uses of resources, utilization of real property, allocation of personnel, purchasing policies, and equipment.
(Source: P.A. 88-511.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-409) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-409)
    Sec. 34A-409. Cash accounts and bank accounts. (a) The Authority shall require the Board or any officer of the Board, including the Board's treasurer or any person acting as the Board's official or ex officio treasurer, to establish and maintain separate cash accounts and separate bank accounts in accordance with such rules, standards and procedures as the Authority may prescribe.
    (b) The Authority shall have the power to assume exclusive administration of the cash accounts and bank accounts of the Board, to establish and maintain whatever new cash accounts and bank accounts it may deem appropriate, and to withdraw funds from such accounts for the lawful expenditures of the Board.
(Source: P.A. 81-1221.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-410) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-410)
    Sec. 34A-410. Financial, management and budgetary structure. Upon direction of the Authority, the Board shall reorganize the financial accounts, management and Budgetary systems of the Board in whatever manner the Authority deems appropriate to achieve greater financial responsibility and to reduce financial inefficiency. Except as provided in Sections 34A-501 through 34A-512 of this Act, the Authority shall not have the power to affect the taxing authority or to consolidate or reduce the restricted debt service funds of the Board.
(Source: P.A. 81-1221.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-411) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-411)
    Sec. 34A-411. Termination and reinstatement of Authority's power under this Article.
    (a) The powers and responsibilities granted to or imposed upon the Authority and the Board under Sections 34A-401 through 34A-410 of this Article shall not be exercised after the Authority has certified to the Governor and the Mayor that the Board has completed 6 successive Fiscal Years of balanced Budgets pursuant to the accounting and other principles prescribed by the Authority. Notwithstanding the foregoing sentence, Sections 34A-402, 34A-404, 34A-405, and 34A-408 shall continue in full force and effect after such certification of the completion of 6 successive Fiscal Years of balanced Budgets.
    (b) Upon determination by the Authority and certification of the Authority to the Governor and the Mayor that the Board has failed to adopt a balanced Budget by August 15th immediately preceding the commencement of each Fiscal Year or failed to achieve a balanced Budget for two successive Fiscal Years, subsequent to a time in which the powers and responsibilities of the Authority and the Board are not exercised pursuant to paragraph (a) of this Section, the Authority and Board shall resume the exercise of their respective powers and responsibilities pursuant to each Section of this Article.
    (c) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this Section or any other provision of law to the contrary, the powers and responsibilities granted to or imposed upon the Authority and the Board under Sections 34A-401 through 34A-410 and Section 34A-606 are suspended until December 31, 2010.
(Source: P.A. 93-488, eff. 8-8-03.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-412) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-412)
    Sec. 34A-412. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 88-511.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-413) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-413)
    Sec. 34A-413. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 88-511.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-414) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-414)
    Sec. 34A-414. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 88-511.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-415) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-415)
    Sec. 34A-415. (Repealed).
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 88-511.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-501) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-501)
    Sec. 34A-501. Power to issue Bonds.
    (a) The Authority may incur indebtedness by the issuance of its negotiable full faith and credit general obligation bonds (the "Bonds") in an amount not to exceed at any time the sum of $695,000,000 (excluding Bonds to be issued to refund outstanding Bonds) for the purpose of providing the Board with moneys for ordinary and necessary expenditures for educational purposes, maintenance of school facilities, and other operational needs of the Board; payment of outstanding debt obligations of the Board and of the City, the proceeds of which were used to provide financing for the Board; providing or increasing a working cash fund as provided by paragraph (d) of this Section 34A-501; providing the Board with moneys for school construction and rehabilitation purposes as provided by paragraph (e) of this Section; payment of fees for arrangements as provided by paragraph (c) of Section 34A-502; payment of interest on Bonds; establishment of reserves to secure Bonds; the payment of costs of issuance of Bonds; payment of principal of or interest or redemption premium on any Bonds or notes of the Authority; and all other expenditures of the Authority incidental to and necessary or convenient for carrying out its corporate purposes and powers, and in an additional amount not to exceed at any time the sum of $427,000,000 (excluding Bonds to be issued to refund outstanding Bonds) for the purpose of providing the Board with moneys for ordinary and necessary expenditures for educational purposes, maintenance of school facilities, and other operational needs of the Board; payment of fees for arrangements as provided by paragraph (c) of Section 34A-502; payment in connection with agreements or contracts entered into as provided for in Section 7 of the Bond Authorization Act; payment of interest on Bonds; establishment of reserves to secure Bonds; the payment of costs of issuance of Bonds; payment of principal of or interest or redemption premium on any Bonds or notes of the Authority; and all other expenditures of the Authority incidental to and necessary or convenient for carrying out its corporate purposes and powers. No more than $40,000,000 of proceeds of Bonds of the Authority shall be deposited in a working cash fund as provided by paragraph (d) of this Section 34A-501. No more than $95,000,000 of proceeds of Bonds of the Authority shall be provided to the Board for school construction and rehabilitation purposes; provided that not less than $32,000,000 nor more than $37,000,000 of such proceeds shall be used by the Board for constructing new school buildings or providing additions to school buildings.
    (b) The Authority may from time to time (i) issue Bonds to refund any outstanding Bonds or notes of the Authority whether the Bonds or notes to be refunded have or have not matured or become redeemable and (ii) issue Bonds partly to refund Bonds or notes then outstanding and partly for any other purpose hereinabove set forth.
    (c) Bonds issued in accordance with paragraph (a) of this Section may be issued in excess of any statutory limitation as to debt, and may be issued without referendum.
    (d) The Authority may create a working cash fund to provide working cash for the Board. Amounts in the working cash fund shall be used by the Authority to make loans from time to time to the Board to enable the Board to cover anticipated cash flow deficiencies which it may experience within the fiscal year of the Board in which the loan is made, all as and to the extent determined by the Authority. The loans shall be made in such amounts and upon such terms as the Board and the Authority shall agree. The Authority shall not under any circumstance be obligated to make any such loan. No interest need be charged on any such loan. The Board may pledge and assign to the repayment of such loans and may apply to that repayment any particular receipts of the Board which have not been pledged to the payment of any of the Board's bonds, notes, tax anticipation warrants or state aid anticipation certificates. Each loan shall be required to be repaid in full by the Board within the fiscal year of the Board in which the loan was made and, in any event, within 11 months from the date on which it was made. Interest and other investment earnings on the working cash fund shall be deposited in and shall be part of that fund. Whenever the Authority shall determine that all or part of the working cash fund is no longer needed for making loans to the Board as provided in this paragraph, the Authority shall reduce the amount of the fund so that the amount in the fund does not exceed the amount which the Authority determines is necessary for use for making future loans to the Board as provided in this paragraph. Upon any such reduction in the amount of the working cash fund and upon its abolition, all amounts in excess of the amounts to remain in the fund shall be deposited in the debt service fund established by the Authority for the Bonds for use for paying principal of Bonds at their maturity or on earlier redemption dates, redemption premium and any interest accruing on those Bonds, all as the Authority shall determine and direct.
    (e) For purposes of this Section, "school construction and rehabilitation purposes" means constructing new school buildings and rehabilitating and accomplishing the deferred maintenance existing as of August 31, 1984, of school buildings, including, without limitation, repairing, modernizing, providing additions to and facilities in, altering and reconstructing school buildings and equipment.
    Any interest or other investment earnings on proceeds of Bonds issued for the purpose of providing the Board with moneys for school construction and rehabilitation purposes shall be applied as provided in the resolution authorizing such Bonds, which resolution shall require those earnings to be used for the same purpose as the proceeds of those Bonds or for the payment of principal of or interest or redemption premium on any Bonds, either at maturity or an earlier redemption date. Application by the Authority of any proceeds of Bonds issued for the purpose of providing the Board with moneys for school construction and rehabilitation purposes, or interest or other investment earnings thereon, shall be in the sole judgment and discretion of the Authority, but no such moneys shall be so provided unless the Authority shall have found and determined, in its sole judgment and discretion, that such moneys are to be used for those purposes and not for providing the Board with moneys for its ordinary and necessary expenditures for educational purposes, maintenance of school facilities or other operational needs. The Authority may, in making its findings and determinations, rely upon information provided by or on behalf of the Board. The Authority may from time to time make and amend regulations and issue directives with respect to the use and application of such moneys.
    The Authority may, at any time, in its sole judgment and discretion, deposit unexpended proceeds of Bonds issued for the purpose of providing the Board with moneys for school construction and rehabilitation purposes or interest or other investment earnings thereon solely in a debt service fund for any Bonds and shall apply such moneys to the payment of principal of or interest or redemption premium on Bonds, at maturity or an earlier redemption date. In the resolution authorizing Bonds, the Authority may make commitments or covenants to holders of Bonds with respect to such use of such unexpended proceeds and interest or other investment earnings.
(Source: P.A. 88-511.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-501.1)
    Sec. 34A-501.1. Additional bond authority. Subject to the limitation in additional amount authorized by this amendatory Act of 1993 in Section 34A-501, the Authority shall incur indebtedness by the issuance of its Bonds on or after July 1, 1993 in principal amounts sufficient to provide the Board from the proceeds of the Bonds the sum of $175,000,000 during the Fiscal Year beginning in 1993, and the sum of $203,000,000 during the Fiscal Year beginning in 1994, in each year for ordinary and necessary expenditures for educational purposes, maintenance of school facilities, and other operational needs of the Board. All sums provided to the Board from proceeds of Bonds issued on or after July 1, 1993 shall be treated as revenues of the Board in that fiscal year for all purposes.
(Source: P.A. 88-511.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-502) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-502)
    Sec. 34A-502. Terms of Bonds.
    (a) Whenever the Authority desires or is required to issue Bonds as provided in this Article, it shall adopt a resolution designating the amount of the Bonds to be issued, the purposes for which the proceeds of the Bonds are to be used and the manner in which such proceeds shall be held pending the application thereof. The Bonds shall be issued in the corporate name of the Authority, shall bear such date or dates, and shall mature at such time or times not exceeding 30 years from their date as such resolution may provide; provided, however, that Bonds issued on or after July 1, 1993 shall mature on or before June 1, 2009. The Bonds may be issued as serial bonds payable in installments or as term bonds with sinking fund installments or as a combination thereof as the Authority may determine in such resolution. The Bonds shall be in such denominations of $1,000 or integral multiples thereof. The Bonds shall be in such form, either coupon or registered, carry such registration privileges, be executed in such manner, be payable at such place or places and be subject to such terms of redemption at such redemption prices, including premium, as such resolution may provide. The Bonds shall be sold by the Authority at public sale. The Bonds shall be sold to the highest and best bidders upon sealed bids. The Authority shall, from time to time as Bonds are to be sold, advertise in at least 2 daily newspapers, one of which is published in the City of Springfield and one in the City of Chicago, for proposals to purchase Bonds. Each of such advertisements for proposals shall be published at least ten days prior to the date of the opening of the bids. The Authority may reserve the right to reject any and all bids.
    (b) Bonds issued prior to December 31, 1980 shall bear interest at such rate or rates and at such price or prices as the Authority may approve in the resolution authorizing the issuance of Bonds. Bonds issued after December 31, 1980 shall bear interest at a rate or rates not to exceed the maximum annual rate provided for in Section 2 of "An Act to authorize public corporations to issue bonds, other evidences of indebtedness and tax anticipation warrants subject to interest rate limitations set forth therein", approved May 26, 1970, as amended, and if issued at such maximum annual rate shall be sold for not less than par and accrued interest. If any of the Bonds are issued to bear interest at a rate of less than such maximum annual rate the minimum price at which they may be sold shall be such that the interest cost to the Authority on the proceeds of the Bonds shall not exceed such maximum annual rate computed to stated maturity according to standard tables of bond values.
    (c) In connection with the issuance of its Bonds, the Authority may enter into arrangements to provide additional security and liquidity for the Bonds. These may include, without limitation, municipal bond insurance, letters of credit, lines of credit by which the Authority may borrow funds to pay or redeem its Bonds and purchase or remarketing arrangements for assuring the ability of owners of the Authority's Bonds to sell or to have redeemed their Bonds. The Authority may enter into contracts and may agree to pay fees to persons providing such arrangements, including from Bond proceeds but only under circumstances in which the total interest paid or to be paid on the Bonds, together with the fees for the arrangements (being treated as if interest), would not, taken together, cause the Bonds to bear interest, calculated to their absolute maturity, at a rate in excess of the maximum rate allowed by law.
    The resolution of the Authority authorizing the issuance of its Bonds may provide that interest rates may vary from time to time depending upon criteria established by the Authority, which may include, without limitation, a variation in interest rates as may be necessary to cause Bonds to be remarketable from time to time at a price equal to their principal amount, and may provide for appointment of a national banking association, bank, trust company, investment banker or other financial institution to serve as a remarketing agent in that connection. The resolution of the Authority authorizing the issuance of its Bonds may provide that alternative interest rates or provisions will apply during such times as the Bonds are held by a person providing a letter of credit or other credit enhancement arrangement for those Bonds.
(Source: P.A. 88-511.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-503) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-503)
    Sec. 34A-503. Tax levy.
    (a) Before or at the time of issuing any Bonds, the Authority shall provide by resolution for the levy and collection of a direct annual tax upon all the taxable property located within the school district without limit as to rate or amount sufficient to pay and discharge the principal thereof at maturity or on sinking fund installment dates and to pay the interest thereon as it falls due. The taxes as levied shall also include such additional amounts to the extent that the collections in the prior years were insufficient to pay and discharge such principal thereof at maturity, such sinking fund installments, if any, and interest thereon as it fell due and the amount so collected shall be placed in the debt service reserve fund. Such tax shall be in addition to and exclusive of the maximum of all taxes which the Authority, the Board or the City Council of the City is now, or may hereafter be, authorized by law to levy for any and all school purposes. Any such resolution shall be in force upon its adoption.
    (b) Such levy shall be for the sole benefit of the holders of the Bonds and the holders of the Bonds shall have a security interest in, and lien upon, all rights, claims and interests of the Authority arising pursuant to such levy and all present and future proceeds of such levy until principal of and sinking fund installments and interest on the Bonds are paid in full. All proceeds from such levy shall be deposited by each county collector directly in the debt service funds established pursuant to Section 34A-504 hereof and shall be applied solely for the payment of principal of and sinking fund installments and interest on the Bonds and shall not be used for any other purpose.
    A levy with respect to Bonds issued prior to July 1, 1993 (or to refund or continue the refunding of Bonds issued prior to July 1, 1993) shall be for the sole benefit of holders of Bonds issued prior to July 1, 1993 (or to refund or continue the refunding of Bonds issued prior to July 1, 1993). A levy with respect to Bonds issued on or after July 1, 1993 (other than to refund or to continue the refunding of Bonds issued prior to July 1, 1993) shall be for the sole benefit of owners of Bonds issued on or after July 1, 1993 (other than to refund or to continue the refunding of Bonds issued prior to July 1, 1993). Proceeds of taxes levied under this Section shall be deposited in the debt service fund relating to the Bonds with respect to which the taxes were levied.
    (c) Upon the filing in the office of the county clerk of each county wherein the Board is located of a duly certified copy of any such ordinance, it shall be the duty of each such county clerk to extend the tax therein provided for, including an amount determined by the Authority to cover loss and cost of collection and also deferred collections thereof and abatements in the amount of such taxes as extended on the collectors' books. The tax shall be separate and apart from all other taxes of the Authority, the Board and the City and shall be separately identified by the collectors.
(Source: P.A. 88-511.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-504) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-504)
    Sec. 34A-504. Debt service fund.
    (a) The Authority shall establish a debt service fund for the Bonds to be maintained by a corporate trustee (which may be any trust company or bank having the power of a trust company within the State) separate and segregated from all other funds and accounts of the Authority and the Board. All moneys on deposit in the debt service fund shall be held in trust in such debt service fund for the benefit of holders of the Bonds, shall be applied solely for the payment of principal of and sinking fund installment, redemption premium, if any, and interest on the Bonds and shall not be used for any other purpose. The holders of the Bonds shall have a security interest in and lien upon all such moneys.
    (b) The Authority shall, by its resolution authorizing Bonds to be issued on or after July 1, 1993 (other than to refund or to continue the refunding of Bonds issued prior to July 1, 1993), establish a debt service fund which shall be separate from any such fund for Bonds issued prior to July 1, 1993 (including Bonds issued to refund or to continue the refunding of those prior Bonds). Such a separate debt service fund shall secure only Bonds issued on or after July 1, 1993 (other than Bonds to refund or to continue the refunding of Bonds issued prior to July 1, 1993). The debt service fund established with respect to Bonds issued prior to July 1, 1993 (or to refund or to continue the refunding of Bonds issued prior to July 1, 1993) shall not secure Bonds issued on or after July 1, 1993 (other than Bonds issued to refund or to continue the refunding of Bonds issued prior to July 1, 1993).
(Source: P.A. 88-511.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-505) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-505)
    Sec. 34A-505. Debt service reserve fund.
    (a) The Authority may create and establish a debt service reserve fund to be maintained by a corporate trustee (which may be any trust company or bank having the power of a trust company within the State) separate and segregated from all other funds and accounts of the Authority. The Authority may pay into such debt service reserve fund:
        (i) any proceeds from the sale of Bonds to the extent
    	
provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance thereof; and
        (ii) any other moneys which may be available to the
    	
Authority for the purpose of the fund.
    (b) The amount to be accumulated in the debt service reserve fund shall be determined by the Authority but shall not exceed the maximum amount of interest, principal and sinking fund installments due in any succeeding calendar year.
    (c) All moneys on deposit in such debt service reserve fund shall be held in trust for the benefit of holders of the Bonds, shall be applied solely for the payment of principal of and sinking fund installments and interest on the Bonds to the extent not paid from the debt service fund and shall not be used for any other purpose.
    (d) Any moneys in the debt service reserve fund in excess of the amount determined by the Authority pursuant to a resolution authorizing the issuance of Bonds may be withdrawn by the Authority and used for any of its lawful purposes.
    (e) In computing the amount of the debt service reserve fund, investments shall be valued as the Authority shall provide in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the Bonds.
    (f) The Authority may by its resolution authorizing Bonds to be issued on or after July 1, 1993 (other than to refund or to continue the refunding of Bonds issued prior to July 1, 1993) create and establish such a debt service reserve fund, which shall be separate from any such fund for Bonds issued prior to July 1, 1993 (including Bonds issued to refund or to continue the refunding of those prior Bonds). Such a separate debt service reserve fund shall secure only Bonds issued on or after July 1, 1993 (other than to refund or to continue the refunding of Bonds issued prior to July 1, 1993). The debt service reserve fund established with respect to Bonds issued prior to July 1, 1993 (or to refund or to continue the refunding of Bonds issued prior to July 1, 1993) shall not secure Bonds issued on or after July 1, 1993 (other than Bonds issued to refund or to continue the refunding of Bonds issued prior to July 1, 1993).
(Source: P.A. 88-511.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-506) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-506)
    Sec. 34A-506. Bond Anticipation Notes. (a) After the issuance of Bonds shall have been authorized, the Authority shall have power to issue from time to time, pursuant to a resolution or resolutions of the Authority, its negotiable Bond Anticipation Notes in anticipation of the issuance of Bonds.
    (b) Bond Anticipation Notes shall mature not later than 2 years after the date of issuance, may be made redeemable prior to their maturity and may be sold in such manner, in such denominations, at such price or prices, and shall bear interest at such rate or rates not to exceed the maximum annual rate in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (b)of Section 34A-502 hereof, as a resolution authorizing the issuance of the Bond Anticipation Notes may provide.
    (c) The Bond Anticipation Notes may be made payable as to both principal and interest from the proceeds of Bonds. The Authority may provide for payment of interest on the Bond Anticipation Notes from direct annual taxes upon all the taxable property located within the school district which are hereby authorized to be levied annually for such purpose without limit as to rate or amount sufficient to pay such interest as it falls due, in the manner, subject to the security interest and lien and with the effect provided in Section 34A-503 hereof.
    (d) The Authority is authorized to issue renewal notes in the event it is unable to issue Bonds to pay outstanding Bond Anticipation Notes on terms the Authority deems reasonable.
    (e) A debt service fund shall be established in the manner provided in Section 34A-504 by the Authority for such Bond Anticipation Notes and the proceeds of any tax levy made pursuant to this Section shall be deposited therein upon receipt.
(Source: P.A. 81-1221.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-507) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-507)
    Sec. 34A-507. Resolution vesting powers in trustee. The resolution authorizing issuance of the Bonds shall vest in a trustee such rights, powers and duties in trust as the Authority may determine and may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the holders of the Bonds and limiting such rights and remedies, as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the Authority in relation to the exercise of its corporate powers and the custody, safeguarding and application of all moneys. Such resolution shall provide for the manner in which moneys in the various funds and accounts of the Authority may be invested in Investment Obligations and the disposition of the earnings on such investments.
(Source: P.A. 81-1221.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-508) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-508)
    Sec. 34A-508. Property of Authority exempt from taxation. The property of the Authority shall be exempt from taxation.
(Source: P.A. 81-1221.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-509) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-509)
    Sec. 34A-509. Discharge of Bonds. (a) If the Authority shall pay or cause to be paid to the holders of all Bonds and coupons, if any, then outstanding, the principal of, redemption price, if any, and interest to become due thereon, at the times and in the manner stipulated therein and in the resolution authorizing the issuance of Bonds, then the covenants, agreements and other obligations of the Authority to the Bondholders shall be discharged and satisfied.
    (b) Bonds or coupons or interest installments for the payment or redemption of which moneys shall have been set aside and shall be held in trust by the trustee provided for in Section 34A-507 hereof or any paying agent for the Bonds (through deposit by the Authority of funds for such payment or redemption or otherwise) at the maturity or redemption date thereof shall be deemed to have been paid within the meaning and, with the effect expressed in paragraph (a) above. All outstanding Bonds of any series and all coupons, if any, appertaining to such Bonds shall, prior to the maturity or redemption date thereof, be deemed to have been paid within the meaning and with the effect expressed in such paragraph (a) above if (i) there shall have been deposited with such trustee or paying agent either moneys in an amount which shall be sufficient, or direct obligations of the United States of America the principal of and the interest on which, when due, will provide moneys which, together with the moneys, if any, deposited with such trustee or paying agent at the same time, shall be sufficient to pay, when due, the principal of, sinking fund installment or redemption price, if applicable, and interest due and to become due on said Bonds on and prior to the redemption date, sinking fund installment date, or maturity date thereof, as the case may be, and (ii) the Authority shall have given such trustee or paying agent in form satisfactory to it irrevocable instructions to publish a notice to the effect and in accordance with the procedures provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the Bonds. Neither direct obligations of the United States of America nor moneys deposited with such trustee or paying agent nor principal or interest payments on any such securities shall be withdrawn or used for any purpose other than, and shall be held in trust for, the payment of the principal or redemption price, if applicable, and interest on said Bonds.
(Source: P.A. 81-1221.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-510) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-510)
    Sec. 34A-510. Pledge of the State. The State of Illinois pledges to and agrees with the holders of Bonds that the State will not limit or alter the rights and powers vested in the Authority by this Act with respect to Sections 34A-501 through 34A-512 hereof so as to impair the terms of any contract made by the Authority with such holders or in any way impair the rights and remedies of such holders until the Bonds, together with interest thereon, with interest on any unpaid installments of interest, and all costs and expenses in connection with any action or proceedings by or on behalf of such holders, are fully met and discharged or provisions made for their payment. The Authority is authorized to include such pledge and agreement of the State in any resolution or contract with the holders of Bonds.
(Source: P.A. 81-1221.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-511) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-511)
    Sec. 34A-511. Statutory lien. Any pledge, assignment, lien or security interest for the benefit of the holders of Bonds or Bond Anticipation Notes, if any, created pursuant to this Act shall be valid and binding from the time the Bonds are issued, without any physical delivery or further act, and shall be valid and binding as against, and prior to any claims of, all other parties having claims of any kind in tort, contract or otherwise against the State, the Authority, the Board or the City, or any other person, irrespective of whether such other parties have notice thereof.
(Source: P.A. 81-1221.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-512) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-512)
    Sec. 34A-512. Complete authority. This Act, without reference to any other statute, shall be deemed full and complete authority for the issuance of the Bonds and the Bond Anticipation Notes as hereinabove provided.
(Source: P.A. 81-1221.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-601) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-601)
    Sec. 34A-601. Hearings. To the extent feasible, the Authority shall provide for and encourage participation by the public in the development and review of financial and educational policy. The Authority shall hold public hearings as it may deem appropriate to the performance of any of its functions. The Authority may designate one or more of its Directors or may appoint one or more hearing officers to preside over any hearing. The Authority shall hold public hearings as it may deem appropriate to the performance of any of its functions. The Authority shall have the power in connection with any such hearing to issue subpoenas to require attendance of witnesses and the production of documents, and may apply to any circuit court in the State to require compliance with such subpoenas. Upon the request of the Authority, the Board shall provide the facilities for and pay the expense of any hearing conducted by the Authority.
(Source: P.A. 85-1418; 86-1477.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-602) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-602)
    Sec. 34A-602. Limitations of actions after abolition; indemnification. (a) Abolition of the Authority pursuant to Section 34A-605 shall bar any remedy available against the Authority, its Directors, employees, or agents, for any right or claim existing, or any liability incurred, prior to such abolition unless the action or other proceeding thereon is commenced prior to the expiration of 2 years after the date of such abolition.
    (b) The Authority may indemnify any Director, officer, employee, or agent who was or is a party, or is threatened to be made a party to any threatened, pending or completed action, suit or proceeding, whether civil, criminal, administrative or investigative by reason of the fact that he was a Director, officer, employee or agent of the Authority, against expenses (including attorneys' fees), judgments, fines and amounts paid in settlement actually and reasonably incurred by him in connection with such action, suit or proceeding, if he acted in good faith and in a manner he reasonably believed to be in, or not opposed to the best interests of the Authority and, with respect to any criminal action or proceeding, had no reasonable cause to believe his conduct was unlawful. The termination of any action, suit or proceeding by judgment, order, settlement, conviction, or upon a plea of nolo contendere or its equivalent, shall not, of itself, create a presumption that the person did not act in good faith in a manner which he reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the best interest of the Authority, and, with respect to any criminal action or proceeding, had reasonable cause to believe that his conduct was unlawful.
    To the extent that a Director, officer, employee or agent of the Authority has been successful, on the merits or otherwise, in the defense of any such action, suit or proceeding referred to in this subsection or in defense of any claim, issue or matter therein, he shall be indemnified against expenses (including attorney's fees) actually and reasonably incurred by him in connection therewith. Any such indemnification shall be made by the Authority only as authorized in the specific case, upon a determination that indemnification of the Director, officer, employee or agent is proper in the circumstances because he has met the applicable standard of conduct. Such determination shall be made: (1) by the Board of Directors by a majority vote of a quorum consisting of Directors who are not parties to such action, suit or proceeding, or (2) if such a quorum is not obtainable, or, even if obtainable, a quorum of disinterested Directors so directs, by independent legal counsel in a written opinion.
    Reasonable expenses incurred in defending an action, suit or proceeding shall be paid by the Authority in advance of the final disposition of such action, suit or proceeding, as authorized by the Board of Directors in the specific case, upon receipt of an undertaking by or on behalf of the Director, officer, employee or agent to repay such amount, unless it shall ultimately be determined that he is entitled to be indemnified by the Authority as authorized in this Section.
    Any Director, officer, employee or agent against whom any action, suit or proceeding is brought may employ his or her own attorney to appear on his or her behalf.
    The right to indemnification accorded by this Section shall not limit any other right to indemnification to which the Director, officer, employee or agent may be entitled. Any rights hereunder shall inure to the benefit of the heirs, executors and administrators of any Director, officer, employee or agent of the Authority.
    The Authority may purchase and maintain insurance on behalf of any person who is or was a Director, officer, employee or agent of the Authority against any liability asserted against him and incurred by him in any such capacity, or arising out of his status as such, whether or not the Authority would have the power to indemnify him against such liability under the provisions of this Section.
(Source: P.A. 82-97.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-603) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-603)
    Sec. 34A-603. State, City or Board not liable on Obligations. Obligations issued under the provisions of this Article shall not be deemed to constitute a debt or liability of the State, the City or the Board or of any political subdivision thereof other than the Authority or a pledge of the full faith and credit of the State, the City or the Board or of any such political subdivision other than the Authority, but shall be payable solely from the funds and revenues herein provided therefor. The issuance of Obligations under the provisions of this Article shall not directly or indirectly or contingently obligate the State, the City or the Board or any political subdivision thereof other than the Authority to levy any form of taxation therefor or to make any appropriation for their payment. Nothing in this Section contained shall prevent or be construed to prevent the Authority from pledging its full faith and credit to the payment of obligations authorized pursuant to this Article. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to authorize the Authority to create a debt of the State, the City or the Board within the meaning of the Constitution or Statutes of Illinois and all Obligations issued by the Authority pursuant to the provisions of this Article are payable and shall state that they are payable solely from the funds and revenues pledged for their payment in accordance with the resolution authorizing their issuance or in any trust indenture or mortgage or deed of trust executed as security therefor. The State, the City or the Board shall not in any event be liable for the payment of the principal of or interest on any Obligations of the Authority or for the performance of any pledge, mortgage, obligation or agreement of any kind whatsoever which may be undertaken by the Authority. No breach of any such pledge, mortgage, obligation or agreement may impose any liability upon the State, the City or the Board or any charge upon their general credit or against their taxing power.
(Source: P.A. 81-1221.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-604) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-604)
    Sec. 34A-604. Abolition of Authority. The Authority shall be abolished one year after all its Obligations have been fully paid and discharged or otherwise provided for. Upon the abolition of the Authority, all of its rights and property shall pass to and be vested in the Board.
(Source: P.A. 96-705, eff. 1-1-10.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-605) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-605)
    Sec. 34A-605. Obligations as legal investments. The Obligations are hereby made securities in which all public officers and bodies of this State and all political subdivisions of the State and other persons carrying on an insurance business, all banks, bankers, trust companies, saving banks and savings associations, including savings and loan associations, building and loan associations, investment companies and other persons carrying on a banking business, all credit unions, pension funds, administrators, and guardians who are now or may hereafter be authorized to invest in bonds or in other obligations of the State, may properly and legally invest funds, including capital, in their control or belonging to them. The Obligations are also hereby made securities which may be deposited with and may be received by all public officers and bodies of the State and all political subdivisions of the State and public corporations for any purpose for which the deposit of bonds or other obligations of the State is now or may hereafter be authorized.
(Source: P.A. 81-1221.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-606) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-606)
    Sec. 34A-606. Reports.
    (a) The Directors, upon taking office and annually thereafter, shall prepare and submit to the Governor, Mayor, General Assembly, and City Council a report which shall include the audited financial statement for the preceding Fiscal Year of the Board, an approved Financial Plan or a statement of reasons for the failure to adopt such a Financial Plan, a statement of the major steps necessary to accomplish the objectives of the Financial Plan, and a request for any legislation necessary to achieve the objectives of the Financial Plan.
    (b) Annual reports shall be submitted on or before May 1 of each year.
    (c) The requirement for reporting to the General Assembly shall be satisfied by filing copies of the report with the Board, the Governor, the Mayor and as required by Section 3.1 of the General Assembly Organization Act, and filing such additional copies with the State Government Report Distribution Center for the General Assembly as is required under paragraph (t) of Section 7 of the State Library Act.
    (d) Each annual report required to be submitted through May 1, 1995, shall also include: (i) a description of the activities of the Authority; (ii) an analysis of the educational performance of the Board for the preceding school year; (iii) an Approved System-Wide Educational Reform Goals and Objectives Plan or a statement of reasons for the failure to adopt such an Approved System-Wide Educational Reform Goals and Objectives Plan; (iv) a statement of the major steps necessary to accomplish the goals of the Approved System-Wide Educational Reform Goals and Objectives Plan; (v) a commentary with respect to those Board policies and rules and those provisions of The School Code and collective bargaining agreements between the Board and its employees which, in the opinion of the Authority, are obstacles and a hindrance to fulfillment of any Approved System-Wide Educational Reform Goals and Objectives Plan; and (vi) a request for any legislative action necessary to achieve the goals of the Approved System-Wide Educational Reform Goals and Objectives Plan.
(Source: P.A. 100-1148, eff. 12-10-18.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-607) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-607)
    Sec. 34A-607. Audit of Authority. The Authority shall be subject to audit in the manner now or hereafter provided for the audit of State funds and accounts. A copy of the audit report shall be submitted to the Auditor General, the Governor, the Speaker and Minority Leader of the House of Representatives and the President and Minority Leader of the Senate.
(Source: P.A. 81-1221.)

    (105 ILCS 5/34A-608) (from Ch. 122, par. 34A-608)
    Sec. 34A-608. Sanctions.
    (a) No member, officer, employee, or agent of the Board shall commit the Board to any contract or other obligation or incur any liability on behalf of the Board for any purpose if the amount of such contract, obligation or liability is in excess of the amount authorized for that purpose then available under the Financial Plan and Budget then in effect.
    (b) No member, officer, employee, or agent of the Board shall commit the Board to any contract or other obligation on behalf of the Board for the payment of money for any purpose required to be approved by the Authority unless such contract or other obligation has been approved by the Authority.
    (c) No member, officer, employee, or agent of the Board shall take any action in violation of any valid order of the Authority or shall fail or refuse to take any action required by any such order or shall prepare, present, or certify any information (including any projections or estimates) or report for the Authority or any of its agents that is false or misleading, or, upon learning that any such information is false or misleading, shall fail promptly to advise the Authority or its agents.
    (d) In addition to any penalty or liability under any other law, any member, officer, employee, or agent of the Board who shall violate subsections (a), (b), or (c) of this Section shall be subject to appropriate administrative discipline, including, if warranted, suspension from duty without pay, removal from office, or termination of employment.
(Source: P.A. 85-1418; 86-1477.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 34B heading)
ARTICLE 34B
BRIDGE NOTE STATUTE
(Repealed)
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 35 heading)
ARTICLE 35. BUILDINGS--SCHOOL BUILDING COMMISSION
(Repealed)
(Source: Repealed by P.A. 94-1105, eff. 6-1-07.)


 
    (105 ILCS 5/Art. 36 heading)
ARTICLE 36. REPEAL - SAVING

    (105 ILCS 5/36-1) (from Ch. 122, par. 36-1)
    Sec. 36-1. Repeal - Saving Clause.
    The following acts are repealed:
    "An Act providing for a system of free schools and for transportation of all school children, and further providing for the establishment of junior colleges with or without tuition charges," approved May 1, 1945, as amended;
    "An Act authorizing school districts to levy a tax to pay rental for use and occupancy of school buildings owned by the State of Illinois," approved July 6, 1957;
    "An Act to provide for the acquisition, construction, rental and disposition of buildings used for school purposes," approved June 21, 1957;
    "An Act to provide scholarships in institutions of higher learning for qualified residents of the State, to create the State Scholarship Commission and define its powers and duties, to provide for the administration of a State scholarship program, and to make appropriations for such purposes," approved June 21, 1957;
    "An Act in relation to driver education courses in the public schools and to make appropriations in connection therewith," approved July 9, 1957.
    Such repeal shall not affect or impair any of the following: suits pending or rights existing at the time this act takes effect; any grant or conveyance made or right acquired or cause of action now existing under any such act; the validity of any bonds or other obligations issued or sold and constituting valid obligations of the issuing authority at the time this act takes effect; the validity of any contract; the validity of any tax levied under any law in effect prior to the effective date of this Act; any offense committed, act done, penalty, punishment or forfeiture incurred, or any claim, right, power or remedy accrued under any law in effect prior to the effective date of this Act; nor shall the repeal herein of any curative or validating act affect the corporate existence or powers of any school district lawfully validated thereby.
(Source: Laws 1961, p. 31.)