PUBLIC HEALTH
(410 ILCS 53/) Suicide Prevention, Education, and Treatment Act.
    (410 ILCS 53/1)
    Sec. 1. Short title. This Act may be cited as the Suicide Prevention, Education, and Treatment Act.
(Source: P.A. 93-907, eff. 8-11-04.)

    (410 ILCS 53/5)
    Sec. 5. Legislative findings. The General Assembly makes the following findings:
        (1) 1,474 Illinoisans lost their lives to suicide in
    	
2017. During 2016, suicide was the eleventh leading cause of death in Illinois, causing more deaths than homicide, motor vehicle accidents, accidental falls, and numerous prevalent diseases, including liver disease, hypertension, influenza/pneumonia, Parkinson's disease, and HIV. Suicide was the third leading cause of death of ages 15 to 34 and the fourth leading cause of death of ages 35 to 54. Those living outside of urban areas are particularly at risk for suicide, with a rate that is 50% higher than those living in urban areas.
        (2) For every person who dies by suicide, more than
    	
30 others attempt suicide.
        (3) Each suicide attempt and death impacts countless
    	
other individuals. Family members, friends, co-workers, and others in the community all suffer the long-lasting consequences of suicidal behaviors.
        (4) Suicide attempts and deaths by suicide have an
    	
economic impact on Illinois. The National Center for Injury Prevention and Control estimates that in 2010 each suicide death in Illinois resulted in $1,181,549 in medical costs and work loss costs. It also estimated that each hospitalization for self-harm resulted in $31,019 in medical costs and work loss costs and each emergency room visit for self-harm resulted in $4,546 in medical costs and work loss costs.
        (5) In 2004, the Illinois General Assembly passed the
    	
Suicide Prevention, Education, and Treatment Act (Public Act 93-907), which required the Illinois Department of Public Health to establish the Illinois Suicide Prevention Strategic Planning Committee to develop the Illinois Suicide Prevention Strategic Plan. That law required the use of the 2002 United States Surgeon General's National Suicide Prevention Strategy as a model for the Plan. Public Act 95-109 changed the name of the committee to the Illinois Suicide Prevention Alliance. The Illinois Suicide Prevention Strategic Plan was submitted in 2007 and updated in 2018.
        (6) In 2004, there were 1,028 suicide deaths in
    	
Illinois, which the Centers for Disease Control reports was an age-adjusted rate of 8.11 deaths per 100,000. The Centers for Disease Control reports that the 1,474 suicide deaths in 2017 result in an age-adjusted rate of 11.19 deaths per 100,000. Thus, since the enactment of Public Act 93-907, the rate of suicides in Illinois has risen by 38%.
        (7) Since the enactment of Public Act 93-907, there
    	
have been numerous developments in suicide prevention, including the issuance of the 2012 National Strategy for Suicide Prevention by the United States Surgeon General and the National Action Alliance for Suicide Prevention containing new strategies and recommended activities for local governmental bodies.
        (8) Despite the obvious impact of suicide on Illinois
    	
citizens, Illinois has devoted minimal resources to its prevention. There is no full-time coordinator or director of suicide prevention activities in the State. Moreover, the Suicide Prevention Strategic Plan is still modeled on the now obsolete 2002 National Suicide Prevention Strategy.
        (9) It is necessary to revise the Suicide Prevention
    	
Strategic Plan to reflect the most current National Suicide Prevention Strategy as well as current research and experience into the prevention of suicide.
        (10) One of the goals adopted in the 2012 National
    	
Strategy for Suicide Prevention is to promote suicide prevention as a core component of health care services so there is an active engagement of health and social services, as well as the coordination of care across multiple settings, thereby ensuring continuity of care and promoting patient safety.
        (11) Integrating suicide prevention into behavioral
    	
and physical health care services can save lives. National data indicate that: over 30% of individuals are receiving mental health care at the time of their deaths by suicide; 45% have seen their primary care physicians within one month of their deaths; and 25% of those who die of suicide visited an emergency department in the year prior to their deaths.
        (12) The Zero Suicide model is a part of the National
    	
Strategy for Suicide Prevention, a priority of the National Action Alliance for Suicide Prevention, and a project of the Suicide Prevention Resource Center that implements the goal of making suicide prevention a core component of health care services.
        (13) The Zero Suicide model is built on the
    	
foundational belief and aspirational goal that suicide deaths of individuals who are under the care of our health care systems are preventable with the adoption of comprehensive training, patient engagement, transition, and quality improvement.
        (14) Health care systems, including mental and
    	
behavioral health systems and hospitals, that have implemented the Zero Suicide model have noted significant reductions in suicide deaths for patients within their care.
        (15) The Suicide Prevention Resource Center
    	
facilitates adoption of the Zero Suicide model by providing comprehensive information, resources, and tools for its implementation.
(Source: P.A. 101-331, eff. 8-9-19.)

    (410 ILCS 53/10)
    Sec. 10. Definitions. For the purpose of this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:
    "Alliance" means the Illinois Suicide Prevention Alliance.
    "Department" means the Department of Public Health.
    "Plan" means the Illinois Suicide Prevention Strategic Plan set forth in Section 15.
(Source: P.A. 95-109, eff. 1-1-08.)

    (410 ILCS 53/13)
    Sec. 13. Duration; report. The Department, in consultation with the Illinois Suicide Prevention Alliance, must submit an annual report to the Governor and General Assembly on the effectiveness of the activities and programs undertaken under the Plan that includes any recommendations for modification to Illinois law to enhance the effectiveness of the Plan.
(Source: P.A. 101-331, eff. 8-9-19.)

    (410 ILCS 53/15)
    Sec. 15. Suicide Prevention Alliance.
    (a) The Alliance is created as the official grassroots creator, planner, monitor, and advocate for the Illinois Suicide Prevention Strategic Plan. No later than one year after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 101st General Assembly, the Alliance shall review, finalize, and submit to the Governor and the General Assembly the 2020 Illinois Suicide Prevention Strategic Plan and appropriate processes and outcome objectives for 10 overriding recommendations and a timeline for reaching these objectives.
    (b) The Plan shall include:
        (1) recommendations from the most current National
    	
Suicide Prevention Strategy;
        (2) current research and experience into the
    	
prevention of suicide;
        (3) measures to encourage and assist health care
    	
systems and primary care providers to include suicide prevention as a core component of their services, including, but not limited to, implementing the Zero Suicide model; and
        (4) additional elements as determined appropriate by
    	
the Alliance.
    The Alliance shall review the statutorily prescribed missions of major State mental health, health, aging, and school mental health programs and recommend, as necessary and appropriate, statutory changes to include suicide prevention in the missions and procedures of those programs. The Alliance shall prepare a report of that review, including its recommendations, and shall submit the report to the Department for inclusion in its annual report to the Governor and the General Assembly.
    (c) The Director of Public Health shall appoint the members of the Alliance. The membership of the Alliance shall include, without limitation, representatives of statewide organizations and other agencies that focus on the prevention of suicide and the improvement of mental health treatment or that provide suicide prevention or survivor support services. Other disciplines that shall be considered for membership on the Alliance include law enforcement, first responders, faith-based community leaders, universities, and survivors of suicide (families and friends who have lost persons to suicide) as well as consumers of services of these agencies and organizations.
    (d) The Alliance shall meet at least 4 times a year, and more as deemed necessary, in various sites statewide in order to foster as much participation as possible. The Alliance, a steering committee, and core members of the full committee shall monitor and guide the definition and direction of the goals of the full Alliance, shall review and approve productions of the plan, and shall meet before the full Alliance meetings.
(Source: P.A. 101-331, eff. 8-9-19.)

    (410 ILCS 53/20)
    Sec. 20. General awareness and screening program.
    (a) The Department shall provide technical assistance for the work of the Alliance and the production of the Plan and shall distribute general information and screening tools for suicide prevention to the general public through local public health departments throughout the State. These materials shall be distributed to agencies, schools, hospitals, churches, places of employment, and all related professional caregivers to educate all citizens about warning signs and interventions that all persons can do to stop the suicidal cycle.
    (b) This program shall include, without limitation, all of the following:
        (1) Educational programs about warning signs and how
    	
to help suicidal individuals.
        (2) Educational presentations about suicide risk and
    	
how to help at-risk people in special populations and with bilingual support to special cultures.
        (3) The designation of an annual suicide awareness
    	
week or month to include a public awareness campaign on suicide.
        (4) An annual statewide suicide prevention conference.
        (5) An Illinois Suicide Prevention Speaker's Bureau.
        (6) A program to educate the media regarding the
    	
guidelines developed by the American Association for Suicidology for coverage of suicides and to encourage media cooperation in adopting these guidelines in reporting suicides.
        (7) Increased training opportunities for volunteers,
    	
professionals, and other caregivers to develop specific skills for assessing suicide risk and intervening to prevent suicide.
(Source: P.A. 101-331, eff. 8-9-19.)

    (410 ILCS 53/25)
    Sec. 25. Additional duties of the Alliance. The Alliance shall:
        (1) Act as an advisor and lead consultant on the
    	
design, implementation, and evaluation of all programs outlined in this Act.
        (2) Establish interagency policy and procedures among
    	
appropriate agencies for the collaboration and coordination needed to implement the programs outlined in this Act.
        (3) Design, review, select, and monitor proposals for
    	
the implementation of these activities in agencies throughout the State.
(Source: P.A. 95-109, eff. 1-1-08.)

    (410 ILCS 53/30)
    Sec. 30. Suicide prevention pilot programs.
    (a) The Department shall establish, when funds are appropriated, programs, including, but not limited to, pilot and demonstration programs, that are consistent with the Plan.
    (b) The funds appropriated for purposes of this Section shall be allocated by the Department on a competitive, grant-submission basis, which shall include consideration of different rates of risk of suicide based on age, ethnicity, gender, prevalence of mental health disorders, different rates of suicide based on geographic areas in Illinois, and the services and curriculum offered to fit these needs by the applying agency.
(Source: P.A. 101-331, eff. 8-9-19.)

    (410 ILCS 53/99)
    (This Act was approved by the Governor on August 11, 2004, so the actual effective date of this Act is August 11, 2004)
    Sec. 99. Effective date. This Act takes effect July 1, 2004.
(Source: P.A. 93-907, eff. 8-11-04.)